Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  In  1919,  the  U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines  (USBM)  initiated  the  first
respirator certification program. Several months later, on January 15, 1920, this federal
body certified the first respirator. To recognize the important milestones of the past 100
years, this webpage documents a general historical overview of respiratory protection
research  and  the  evolution  of  the  certification  program  as  undertaken  by  the  U.S.
federal government. Pliny the Elder, photo courtesy of Shutterstock               Around the
world,  scientific  minds  recognized  the  need  for  respiratory  protection  long  before  the
U.S. Bureau of Mines. The history of respiratory protection traces back as far as Pliny
the  Elder  (23-79  AD),  a  Roman  philosopher  and  naturalist,  who  made  use  of  loose
animal bladder skins to filter dust from being inhaled while crushing cinnabar, which is
a toxic, mercuric sulfide mineral used at the time for pigmentation in decorations. Many
centuries later, Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) recommended the use of wet cloths over
the mouth and nose as a form of protection against inhaling harmful agents (Spelce et
al., “History,” 2018; Cohen and Birkner, 2012). Further scientific inquiry and discovery
led  to  the  use  of  early  atmosphere-supplying  respirators.  While  ancient  divers  used
hoses and tubes for supplied air, seventeenth century scientists added bellows to these
devices as a way of providing positive pressure breathing. Although science has made
advancements  over  time,  the  need  for  proper  respiratory  protection  became
increasingly  apparent.  In  the  1700s,  Bernadino  Ramazzini,  known  as  the  father  of
occupational medicine, described the inadequacy of respiratory protection against the
hazards  of  arsenic,  gypsum,  lime,  tobacco,  and  silica  (Spelce  et  al.,  “History,”  2018;
Cohen  and  Birkner,  2012).  While  these  scientific  discoveries  and  advancements  to
respiratory protection were pivotal, the most important date for respiratory protection
was still to come. Nealy Smoke Mask from The National Fireman's Journal December 8,
1877  The  18th  and  19th  centuries  achieved  the  development  of  what  we  would
recognize  today  as  respirators,  far  surpassing  the  use  of  animal  bladders  and  wet
cloths. In 1827, the Scottish botanist Robert Brown discovered the phenomenon known
as the Brownian movement – the theory that collisions of rapidly moving gas molecules
causes  the  random  bouncing  motion  of  extremely  small  particles.  Understanding  the
behavior of small particles, the properties of filter media and their interactions led to
the first particulate respirator. In the mid-1800s, German scientists conducted studies
with industrial dust and bacteria and their relationship with respiratory health. In 1877,
the English invented and patented the Nealy Smoke Mask. The Nealy Smoke Mask used
a series of water-saturated sponges and a bag of water attached to a neck strap. The
wearer could squeeze the bag of water to re-saturate the sponges to filter out some of
the smoke. (Coffey, 2016; Cohen and Birkner, 2012; Kloos, 1963). On July 1, 1910, the
U.S. Department of the Interior established the United States Bureau of Mines (USBM).
The USBM worked to address the high fatality rate of mineworkers. In 1919, the USBM
initiated  the  first  respirator  certification  program  in  the  United  States.  In  1920,  MSA
Safety  Company  manufactured  the  Gibbs  respirator.  This  closed-circuit  self-contained
breathing apparatus (SCBA) operated on compressed oxygen and a soda lime scrubber
to  remove  carbon  dioxide.  (Spelce  et  al.,  2017).  According  to  MSA  Safety  Company,
industries, fire departments, and health departments were the first to utilize the Gibbs
Breathing  Apparatus  (WebApps.MSANet.com).  The  U.S.  Navy  requested  a  respirator
comparable to those used for emergency escape purposes for mineworkers, leading to
the  invention  of  the  Gibbs  breathing  apparatus,  named  for  United  States  Bureau  of
Mines engineer and inventor W.E. Gibbs. Gibbs also created a respirator specifically for
aviators (Spelce, et al., 2017). World War I presented a new kind of threat to soldiers –
chemical  warfare  gases,  such  as  chlorine,  phosgene,  and  mustard  gas.  The  U.S.  War
Department asked the USBM to develop gas mask standards. Military equipment at the
time  did  not  account  for  protective  masks  or  respirators.  Combat  equipment  did  not
include respirators until World War II (Caretti, 2018). As a result, chemical warfare in
WWI  accounted  for  1.3  million  casualties  and  approximately  90,000  fatalities.  This
amounted to about 30% of all casualties during the war (Fitzgerald, 2008). World War I
respiratory protection, photo courtesy of Shutterstock Additionally, WWI troops from all
over  the  world  helped  a  new  influenza  virus  spread.  The  lack  of  vaccines  and
respiratory protection contributed to high fatalities from the flu virus. The U.S. reported
the  first  flu  symptoms  in  March  1918.  In  October  of  1918  alone,  the  flu  virus  killed
195,000 Americans resulting in the San Francisco Board of Health recommending the
use of masks in public spaces. The pandemic flu began to decline in early 1919. The flu
caused  approximately  50  million  deaths  across  the  world,  including  675,000  in  the
United  States  (“1918  Pandemic,”  2018).  The  spread  of  the  pandemic  flu  at  this  time
displayed  the  need  of  additional  respiratory  protection  and  research  needed  in
healthcare settings. While the flu pandemic exhibited a need for healthcare respiratory
protection, researchers at the time still largely focused on the respiratory protection of
mining. On March 5, 1919, the USBM produced Schedule 13, “Procedure for Establishing
a List of Permissible Self-Contained Oxygen Breathing Apparatus.” Schedule 13 set the
first  set  of  regulations  for  human  testing  of  protection  of  self-contained  breath
apparatus  respirators  and  certification  thereof  (Kyriazi,  1999).  Finally,  on  January  15,
1920 the USBM certified the first respirator, the Gibbs breathing apparatus. (Spelce et
al.,  “History,”  2018;  Cohen  and  Birkner,  2012).  The  Gibbs  breathing  apparatus,
originally  designed  for  mine  work,  became  the  first  approved  respirator  for  industrial
work.  (Spelce,  et  al.,  2017).  Gibb’s  Breathing  Apparatus  During  World  War  I,  the  U.S.
government  sought  improvements  for  respiratory  protection  across  several  industries
as well as the military. The passing of the Overman Act of May 20, 1918 by President
Wilson gave authority for the Army to lead the research efforts in respiratory protection
in  order  to  engage  in  chemical  warfare  and  defense.  However,  this  delegation  of
research power was short-lived, and the USBM regained the primary task of mine safety
research. (Spelce, et al., 2017). The USBM developed Schedule 14 shortly after for the
certification  of  military-use  gas  masks.  Over  time,  the  USBM  altered  Schedule  14,
“Procedure  for  Establishing  a  List  of  Permissible  Gas  Masks,”  several  times.  Initial
modifications to it included acknowledgement of the 1941 USBM “Facepiece Tightness
Test”  which  tested  the  detectable  leakages  and  freedom  of  movement  of  the  user
(Spelce, et al., “History” (Cont.), 2018). Because of the horrific casualties of WWI from
chemical  warfare,  armed  forces  on  both  sides  of  the  battlefield  refrained  from  using
chemical agents during WWII. Both sides shared the paranoia that the enemy had more
harmful chemical warfare agents (Chauhan, 2008). As the world entered World War II,
the  U.S.  Navy’s  use  of  asbestos  increased  for  insulation  purposes  for  pipes  in  naval
vessels. It was not until 1939 that a Medical Officer for the U.S. Navy recognized the
need for crew to wear respirators when cutting and wetting amosite and other asbestos
containing insulation. Later, as the U.S. entered World War II, Fleischer et al. released a
study  acknowledging  the  dangers  and  risks  of  dust  exposures  in  asbestos  insulation
manufacturing. However, even after the publication of the Fleischer et al. study in 1946,
the U.S. Navy continued to use asbestos with the additional warning that “exposure to
asbestos  dust  is  a  hazard  which  cannot  be  overlooked  in  maintaining  an  effective
occupational-hygiene  program.”  The  Navy  continued  to  recommend  confinement  of
pipe  covering  operations,  and  the  use  of  respirators  and  ventilation  (Barlow  et  al.,
2017).  1930s  Mask,  photo  courtesy  of  Caretti  In  the  early  1930s,  the  Hawk’s  Nest
Tunnel disaster occurred in West Virginia. The estimated death toll, one of the worst in
American  industrial  history,  ranges  from  roughly  700-1,000  deaths  of  the  3,000  who
worked  underground.  The  tragedy  of  this  disaster  expedited  the  publication  of  the
USBM’s  first  approval  of  dust/fume/mist  respirator  approval  standards  in  30  CFR  Part
14,  Schedule  21  (USBM  1934).  “The  USBM  had  already  developed  standards  for  and
approved oxygen breathing apparatus (1919), gas mask respirators (1919), and hose
mask respirators (1927). By 1937, the Bureau expanded its schedule for testing hose
masks  to  include  a  variety  of  supplied-air  respirators  including  Type  CE  abrasive
blasting  respirator”  (Spelce,  et  al.,  2019).  Schedule  21  describes  several  types  of
respirators, including Type A, B, C, combinations of A-C, and D (Spelce, et al., 2019).
The original Schedule 21 from 1934 included the following requirements: Revisions to
Schedule 21 expanded in 1955 under 30 CFR 14 to include the approval respirators with
single use filters and reusable filters. Among these, there are two classes of respirators,
including  approval  for  protection  against  Pneumoconiosis  and  approval  against  dust
that  were  not  more  toxic  than  lead.  These  approvals  expanded  to  also  included
protection against lead fumes, silica, and chromic acid mists (Spelce, et al., 2019). The
USBM  began  to  set  stricter  regulations  on  respirators  during  WWII.  It  established
“certain  basic  requirements  applicable  to  all  types  of  respiratory  equipment.  These
requirements are as follows: (1) They must give adequate protection; (2) they must be
reasonably  comfortable  and  physically  convenient  to  wear;  (3)  they  must  provide  an
acceptable period of protection; and (4) they must be constructed of durable materials.
(IC  7130,  August  1940,  page  5)”  (Spelce  et  al.,  2018;  D’Alessandro,  2018).  The
regulation  of  respiratory  protection  permitted  the  standardization  of  higher  quality
respiratory protection. After WWII and the use of chemical gas in warfare, researchers
continued  their  work  on  improving  respiratory  protection  for  soldiers.  The  events  of
World War II and the boom of industry on the home front exhibited a need for improved
respiratory  protection  in  industry.  Americans  on  the  home  front  went  to  work  on  the
production  lines  to  aid  the  war  effort,  ushering  in  a  booming  era  of  industry  and
manufacturing. However, those workers inhaled high amounts of asbestos due to poorly
regulated  working  conditions.  Early  accounts  from  turn  of  the  century  industrial
hygienists documented the dangers of airborne asbestos in working environments, but
it was not until the mid-1950s that prolonged exposure to asbestos caused widespread
concern. Research efforts still did not fully serve this need until even later, in the 1960s
and 1970s. “With the introduction of the membrane filter sampling method in the late
1960s  and  early  1970s,  asbestos  sampling  and  exposure  assessment  capabilities
advanced to a degree which allowed industrial hygienists to more precisely characterize
the exposure–response relationship” (Barlow et al., 2017). Non-combatant mask, circa
1940, photo courtesy of Caretti Researchers performed tests on respirators to measure
protection, but their levels of protection were unregulated. There was not yet a system
in  place  to  set  a  threshold  standard  of  protection  nor  any  regulatory  body  in  the
manufacturing  of  respirators.  The  respirators  used  in  different  settings,  such  as  in
construction or commercial farming, lacked regulation to ensure necessary protection
against the airborne hazards in these types of settings. Further, Schedule 21B in 1965
expanded.  These  changes  include  (1)  extend  certification  of  approval  to  respirators
designed  to  protect  against  dusts,  fumes,  and  mists  that  are  significantly  more  toxic
than lead; (2) permit certification of combinations of dispersoid-filter and other types of
respirators;  (3)  revise  current  tests  to  realize  accuracy  and  speed  of  testing;  and  (4)
revise  the  fees  for  inspection  and  testing  (USBM,  1964)  (Spelce,  et  al.,  2019).  This
provided  further  regulation  and  protection  for  industrial  workers’  respiratory  health.
“The use of respirators continued unregulated until the Federal Coal Mine Health and
Safety Act was enacted in 1969, resulting in regulations governing the certification and
use of respirators in the mining industry. The Occupational Safety and Health Act, which
established the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), was promulgated in 1970” (Cohen
and Birkner, 2012). According to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, “The
Congress finds that personal injuries and illnesses arising out of work situations impose
a substantial burden upon, and are a hindrance to, interstate commerce in terms of lost
production, wage loss, medical expenses, and disability compensation payments” (91st
Congress, 1970). Further, the OSH Act of 1970 acknowledges a need for regulation in
the safety and health of working citizens to preserve “human resources.” The document
sets standards for work places to maintain as well as formulate a regulatory body to
oversee  the  adherence  to  these  standards.  The  OSH  Act  not  only  sets  standards  to
protect workers from physical injury and disease, but also acknowledges the necessity
to protect workers from psychological harm in the workplace, such as anxiety linked to
physical  injury  risk  at  work.  The  OSH  Act  also  established  the  National  Institute  for
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH)  as  a  research  body  focused  on  the  health,
safety,  and  empowerment  of  workers  to  create  safe  and  healthy  workplaces  (NIOSH,
“About”). OSHA and NIOSH continue to be important organizations that assist in safety
recommendation and regulation in the workplace, in the area of respiratory protection
as  well  as  other  areas  of  personal  protective  equipment.  “Congress  created  the
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  in  1970,  and  gave  it  the
responsibility for promulgating standards to protect the health and safety of American
workers. On February 9, 1979, 29 CFR 1910.134 gained recognition as applicable to the
construction  industry  (44  FR  8577).  Until  the  adoption  of  these  standards  by  OSHA,
most  guidance  on  respiratory  protective  devices  use  in  hazardous  environments  was
advisory rather than mandatory” (Department of Labor, 1998). OSHA reprinted, without
change  of  text,  29  CFR  Part  1926  with  the  General  Industry  Occupational  Safety  and
Health Standards in 29 CFR part 1910. This has since become a set of OSHA regulations
(“Editorial Note,” 1978). In 1994, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC)  released  a  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  entitled  “Guidelines  for
Preventing  the  Transmission  of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  in  Health-Care  Facilities,
1994.” This document revises the 1990 tuberculosis (TB) guidelines in response to an
outbreak  in  1991  and  studies  from  1985  that  show  a  multi-drug  resistance  to  the
bacterium  that  causes  TB.  These  guidelines  emphasize  importance  of  healthcare
professionals’  proper  use  of  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE),  specifically
respiratory protection. Areas of emphasis for respiratory protection include ventilation,
donning,  use,  and  doffing.  Finally,  the  guidelines  address  the  need  to  maintain  a  full
respiratory  protection  program  within  healthcare  settings,  ensuring  all  healthcare
workers train in proper PPE use. This is of particular importance for healthcare workers
that move from department to department, such as therapists, dieticians, maintenance,
interns, etc. As respiratory protection became mandatory, the importance of a tight and
proper respirator fit increased. In 1995, OSHA revised the certification regulations for fit
testing.  This  led  to  further  research  in  1996  regarding  exposure  in  the  workplace,
causing  researchers  to  use  simulated  workplace  protection  factors  and  exposure
simulations (Cohen and Birkner, 2012; Department of Labor, 1998). “On 10 July 1995,
the respirator certification regulation, 30 CFR 11, was replaced by 42 CFR 84 (NIOSH,
1995). The primary regulatory changes introduced by 42 CFR 84 are associated with a
new approval concept, performance requirements for particulate respirator filters, and
instrumentation technology. 42 CFR 84 updated filter requirements and tests to provide
an  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  filter  based  upon  its  efficiency  to  remove
particulates  of  the  most  penetrating  size  from  the  ambient  air  regardless  of  the
particulate composition and toxicity (NIOSH, 1994). The approval philosophy for filters
changed from minimum requirements considered safe to breathe for various types of
dust/fume/mist  respirators  to  acceptable  filter  efficiency  levels  against  laboratory
generated aerosols with particles of the most penetrating size” (Spelce, et al., 2019).
The OSHA respiratory protection standard, 29 CFR 1910.134, published on January 8,
1998,  replaced  the  agency’s  original  standard  promulgated  in  1972.  The  rule
standardized  regulations  for  respirator  use  in  all  industries,  including  maritime,
construction,  and  general  industry.  However,  this  did  not  include  updates  for  the
respiratory  protection  of  the  healthcare  industry,  which  at  this  time  still  functioned
under  29  CFR  1910.134  regulations.  While  this  new  development  did  not  include  the
use  of  respirators  in  the  healthcare  setting,  it  did  effectively  progress  industry,
manufacturing, and construction towards a more healthy and safe work environment.
The necessity for respiratory protection in the healthcare setting came to the forefront
of  concern  with  the  outbreak  of  tuberculosis  in  the  1990s.  According  to  the  TB
Respiratory  Protection  Program  in  Health  Care  Facilities:  Administrator’s  Guide,  “The
use  of  respirators  in  the  health  care  setting  is  a  relatively  new  but  important  step
forward  in  the  efforts  to  prevent  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  (TB).  Air-purifying
respirators  provide  a  barrier  to  prevent  health  care  workers  from  inhaling
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The level of protection a respirator provides is determined
by the efficiency of the filter material and how well the facepiece fits or seals to the
health care worker’s face. A number of studies have shown that surgical masks will not
provide  adequate  protection  in  filtering  out  the  TB  organism.  Additionally,  surgical
masks  are  not  respirators  and  therefore,  are  not  NIOSH-certified  and  do  not  satisfy
OSHA requirements for respiratory protection”(1999). In 2001, Congress requested the
creation of a division within NIOSH to focus on the improvement and research of PPE
and  personal  protective  technologies  (PPT).  This  division,  the  National  Personal
Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  conducts  scientific  research,  develops
guidance and authoritative recommendations, disseminates information, and responds
to  requests  for  workplace  health  hazard  evaluations.  The  focus  for  respiratory
protection research shifted drastically in the early 2000s when national tragedy struck.
On  September  11,  2001,  terrorist  attacks  in  New  York  City,  Shanksville,  PA,  and
Washington  D.C.  led  to  first  responders  in  these  cities,  as  well  as  nationally,  to  jump
into action. The employees of NIOSH NPPTL also mobilized. According to NIOSH NPPTL
employee  Robert  Stein,  “If  anyone  ever  doubted  the  potential  for  impact  on  a  vast
scale,  those  doubts  should  have  been  firmly  dispelled  the  morning  of  September  11,
2001. I was sitting at my desk that was in building 02 at the time when I got a phone
call  from  one  of  my  colleagues  who  was  off  site  that  day.   He  said,  “They  are  flying
planes into the World Trade Center.” I had already heard the news that an airplane had
hit one of the World Trade Center towers, but his was the first voice to identify and call
it out as an intentional act. Things started to develop rapidly after that. The personnel
at the newly formed lab gathered to develop response plans. Response planning quickly
evolved  into  planning  for  communication  contingencies  as  we  got  word  that
government  sites  would  be  evacuated.  Obedient  to  the  directions  to  leave  the  work
site, several of us mustered at the nearby home of one of our colleagues to finish up
with  our  what-if’s  and  how-to-get-in-touch-with’s.  It  was  an  eerie  ride  home,  very
confusing  to  the  senses  travelling  under  the  beautiful  blue  skies  of  a  perfect  late
summer  day,  but  with  such  serious  and  unknown  threats  seemingly  looming
everywhere.  Even  while  there  was  still  a  ban  on  commercial  flights,  NPPTL  sent  two
individuals to the World Trade Center site to help with respiratory protection issues as
they were occurring.  Not only were they able to provide immediate assistance at the
World  Trade  Center  site,  but  the  first-hand  experience  they  gained  observing  the
difficulties encountered trying to provide respiratory protection to such a large number
of  first  responders,  recovery  workers,  law  enforcement  personnel,  and  other  workers
involved in the response helped to shape technical and policy decisions for months and
years  afterwards.  The  entire  lab  dedicated  long  hours  in  order  to  complete  new
statements  of  standard  for  respirator  types  with  protections  appropriate  to  protect
first-responders  involved  in  terrorist  incidents,  and  then  approve  respirators  so  those
new standards would actually result in providing appropriate respiratory protection for
those workers.” Following the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the PPE used by
first responders became a top priority for NIOSH, as it emphasized the PPE needed to
protect those risking their own lives in order to save lives. In the weeks after September
11,  the  New  York  City  Fire  Department’s  Bureau  of  Health  Services  (FDNY-BHS)  and
NIOSH  launched  a  collaborative  study.  This  study  researched  the  effectiveness  of
personal  protective  equipment,  including  respiratory  protection,  and  the  occupational
hazards  and  exposures  of  these  first  responders.  The  results  indicated  that  many
firefighters  did  not  use  adequate  respiratory  protection  during  the  first  week  of  the
rescue/recovery  operation  (MMWR,  2002).  First  Responders  using  inconsistent
respiratory  protection  practices,  photo  courtesy  of  Shutterstock  A  study  researched
seven first responders to the attacks in New York on September 11 and their exposure
to the dust at Ground Zero on September 11 or September 12. All were non-smokers or
had only smoked in their distant past. The results of the study showed that all seven
first responders developed some form of lung disease after their exposure to the dust
at Ground Zero (Wu, et al., 2010). Research suggests the rate of respiratory illness was
so high due to a lack in use of respiratory protection. According to firsthand accounts by
P.J.  Lioy  and  M.  Gochfeld  in  their  2002  article  “Lessons  Learned  on  Environmental,
Occupational, and Residential Exposures from the Attack on the World Trade Center,”
an alarmingly low number of individuals were using respiratory protection in the field at
Ground Zero, and many that had respiratory protection were not wearing it (Crane et
al., 2012). The work to improve respiratory protection and subsequent guidance on use
of  respiratory  protection  has  continued  well  after  2001.  In  2005,  NIOSH  released  its
“Interim Guidance on the Use of Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN)
Full  Facepiece,  Air-Purifying  Respirators/Gas  Masks  Certified  under  42  CFR  Part  84.”
According to NIOSH NPPTL employee, Jeff Peterson, “I would certainly say that one of
the biggest accomplishments in the field of respiratory protection is the development of
the voluntary NIOSH CBRN requirements.” The CBRN requirements answered the need
of emergency responders to maintain knowledge of PPE in a time of increased global
terrorism. This interim guidance document provided guidelines for the selection and use
of  NIOSH-approved  full  facepiece,  tight  fitting,  non-powered,  air-purifying  respirators
(APR)  for  protection  against  quantified  CBRN  agents.  Following  September  of  2001,
NIOSH  and  The  RAND  Corporation  developed  multiple  volume  reports  dedicated  to
protecting emergency responders (Szalajda, 2008). NIOSH also developed three CBRN
standards. The first requires that self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) meet CBRN
protection standards because it “is used where the respiratory threat level is unknown
or  known  to  be  immediately  dangerous  to  life  and  health  (IDLH)”  (Szalajda,  2008).
Secondly, NIOSH developed a standard for a full-facepiece, air-purifying respirator. “The
CBRN  APR  full-facepiece  respirator  is  widely  used  by  multiple  responder  groups.  It
provides a lower level of protection than the SCBA and its use is generally allowed once
conditions are understood and exposures are determined to be at levels below those
considered  to  be  IDLH”  (Szalajda,  2008).  The  third  priority  was  that  air-purifying  and
self-contained escape respirators meet CBRN standards. This enabled a more general
workforce, rather than those solely focused on first responders, to use PPE safely in a
CBRN  terrorist  incident.  As  addressed  by  Deputy  Director  Jon  Szalajda,  NIOSH  NPPTL
“continues  to  develop  criteria  for  additional  types  of  respirators  in  response  to
responders’  needs  for  appropriate  respiratory  protection  against  the  anticipated
hazards  faced  in  performing  rescue  and  recovery  operations  resulting  from  viable
terrorist threats, as well as HAZMAT incidents” (Szalajda, 2008). Nurse demonstrating
the donning of PPE worn by healthcare providers when treating an Ebola patient in a
medical  intensive  care  unit  (ICU),  photo  courtesy  of  the  CDC  In  2015,  the  American
National  Standard  Institute  (ANSI)  standard  Z88.2  updated  the  standard  practice  for
respiratory  protection.  The  Z88  Committee  established  the  standard  in  1969,  with
revisions  in  1989  and  1992.  The  Z88.2  standard  “sets  forth  minimally  accepted
practices  for  occupational  respirator  use;  provides  information  and  guidance  on  the
proper  selection,  use  and  maintenance  of  respirators,  and  contains  requirements  for
establishing,  implementing  and  evaluating  respirator  programs.  The  standard  covers
the  use  of  respirators  to  protect  persons  against  the  inhalation  of  harmful  air
contaminants
 and
 against
 oxygen-deficient
 atmospheres
 in
 the
 workplace”
(ANZ88.2-2015,  1.1).  From  2014-2016,  a  global  epidemic  of  the  Ebola  virus  disease
spread  to  the  United  States.  During  this  time,  proper  PPE  use  in  healthcare  settings
became a paramount concern, as the highly contagious virus spreads from contact with
blood and other bodily fluids. Because of the virus’ highly contagious nature, the CDC
recommended  the  use  of  a  NIOSH-approved  N95  respirator,  or  higher  level  of
particulate filtration, or a powered air-purifying (PAPR) when caring for a Person Under
Investigation (PUI) for the Ebola virus disease or a person with a confirmed case of the
virus. Further, the CDC released guidelines for the disposal, cleaning, and disinfection
based  on  the  type  of  respirator  worn  by  a  healthcare  worker  when  treating  an  Ebola
patient. (Frequently Asked Questions, Ebola, 2018). In 2019, “NIOSH NPPTL continues to
provide national and world leadership in respirator approval, research, and standards
development to support the workers who rely on respiratory protection,” states NPPTL
Director,  Dr.  Maryann  D’Alessandro.  Such  research  includes  understanding  respirator
comfort,  fit,  and  usability;  stockpiling  of  respirators;  and  rapid  respiratory  protection
training in healthcare settings. One hundred years have passed since the first approved
respirator. NPPTL continues to provide respiratory protection research to best serve the
workers  and  public  that  relies  on  them.  “1918  Pandemic  Influenza  Historic  Timeline.”
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and
Respiratory
 Diseases,
 2018,
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/1918-commemoration/pandemic-timeline-
1918.htm “About NIOSH” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health, 2018, https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/about/default.html
“About  NPPTL”  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  National  Institute  for
Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  2018.  https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/about.html
American  National  Standard  Institute.  “American  National  Standard  Practices  for
Respiratory  Protection.”  ANSI/ASSE  Z88.2-2015.  Barlow,  Christy  A.,  et  al.  “History  of
Knowledge  and  Evolution  of  Occupational  Health  and  Regulatory  Aspects  of  Asbestos
Exposure Science: 1900-1975”. Critical Reviews in Toxicology, 2017, vol. 47, no. 4, pp.
286-316.  Caretti,  David.  “U.S.  Army  Research,  Development  and  Engineering
Command:  100  Years  of  U.S.  Military  Masks.”  ISRP,  Denver,  CO,  September  2018.
Chauhan, S., D, C. R., Faruqi, S., Singh, K. K., Varma, S., Singh, M., & Karthik, V. (2008).
“Chemical warfare agents”. Environmental Toxicology & Pharmacology, 26(2), 113–122.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2008.03.003  Coffey,  Christopher.  “The  Science  Behind
Respirator Fit Testing in the Workplace: Past.” National Personal Protective Technology
Laboratory.  N95  Day.  September  6,  2016.  Cohen,  Howard  J.  and  Jeffrey  S.  Birkner.
“Respiratory Protection.” Clinics in Chest Medicine, vol. 33, no. 4, 2012, pp. 783-793.
Crane,  Michael  A.,  et  al.  “Health  Effects  of  the  World  Trade  Center  9/11  Disaster:  An
Overview.”  Fire  Technology,  vol.  49,  pp.  813-825,  2013.  Department  of  Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Parts 1910 and 1926, [Docket
No.
 H-049].
 Respiratory
 Protection.
https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/federalregister/1998-01-08  “Editorial  Note.”  44  FR
8577,  Feb.  9,  1979;  44  FR  20940,  Apr.  6,  1979.  EHS  Today  Staff.  “Complying  with
OSHA’s
 Respiratory
 Protection
 Standard”.
 EHS
 Today,
 March
 1,
 2000,
https://www.ehstoday.com/news/ehs_imp_33056  Fitzgerald,  G.  J.  (2008).  Chemical
Warfare and Medical Response During World War I. American Journal of Public Health,
98(4), 611–625. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.11930 “Frequently Asked Questions
for  Guidance  on  Personal  Protective  Equipment  to  Be  Used  by  Healthcare  Workers
During  Management  of  Patients  with  Confirmed  Ebola  or  Persons  Under  Investigation
(PUI)  for  Ebola  Who  are  Clinically  Unstable  or  have  Bleeding,  Vomiting  or  Diarrhea  in
U.S. Hospitals, Including Procedures for Donning and Doffing.” US Department of Health
and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National
 Institute
 for
 Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health,
 August
 2018.
https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/ppe/faq.html  “Guidelines  for  Preventing
the  Transmission  of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  in  Health-Care  Facilities,  1994”.  CDC
MMWR,  vol.  43,  no.  RR-13,  October  28,  1994.  Kloos,  Edwin  J.  “History  of  Respiratory
Protection
 in
 the
 Fire
 Service.”
 Fire
 Engineering,
 July
 1,
 1963.
https://www.fireengineering.com/articles/print/volume-116/issue-7/features/history-of-re
spiratory-protection-in-the-fire-service.html Kyriazi, Nicholas. “Proposal for Certification
Tests and Standards for Closed-Circuit Breathing Apparatus,” Information Circular 9449,
U.S.
 Department
 of
 Health
 and
 Human
 Services,
 CDC,
 NIOSH.
 1999.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/UserFiles/works/pdfs/ic9449.pdf
 Maryann
 M.
D’Alessandro,  Ph.D.  “An  Exemplary  Approach  to  Applying  the  PPE  Conformity
Assessment Framework.” National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health National
Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory.  19th  ISRP  International  Conference.
September  17,  2018.  Denver,  Colorado.  NIOSH  [2018].  CBRN  respiratory  protection
handbook. By Janssen L, Johnson AT, Johnson JS, Mansdorf SZ, Medici OR, Metzler RW,
Rehak TR, Szalajda JV. Pittsburgh, PA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and
 Health,
 DHHS
 (NIOSH)
 Publication
 No.
 2018-166,
https://doi.org/10.26616/NIOSHPUB2018166. NIOSH NPPTL. NIOSH Interim Guidance on
the  Use  of  Chemical,  Biological,  Radiological  and  Nuclear  (CBRN)  Full  Facepiece,
Air-Purifying
 Respirators/Gas
 Masks
 Certified
 Under
 42
 CFR
 Part
 84,
 2005.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/guidancedocs/interapr070805.html
 Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, Pub. L. No. 91-596, 84 STAT. 1590. (2004). “Protecting
Lives
 for
 100
 Years.”
 MSA:
 The
 Safety
 Company,
 n.d.,
https://webapps.msanet.com/landingpages/msa100/timeline/timeline.html#
 Spelce,
David,  Timothy  R.  Rehak,  Richard  W.  Metzler,  and  James  S.  Johnson.  “History  of  U.S.
Respirator Approval.” Journal of the International Society for Respiratory Protection, vol.
35, no. 1, 2018, pp. 35-46. Spelce, David, Timothy R. Rehak, Richard W. Metzler, and
James  S.  Johnson.  “History  of  U.S.  Respirator  Approval  (Continued)  –  Gas  Masks,
Suppled-Air  Respirators,  and  Chemical  Cartridge  Respirators.”  Journal  of  the
International Society for Respiratory Protection, vol. 35, no. 2, 2018, pp. 86-97. Spelce,
David, Timothy R. Rehak, Richard W. Metzler, and James S. Johnson. “History of the U.S.
Respirator  Approval  (Continued)  Particulate  Respirators.”  Journal  of  the  International
Society for Respiratory Protection, vol. TBA, no. TBA. 2019. Spelce, David, Timothy R.
Rehak,  Richard  W.  Metzler,  and  James  S.  Johnson.  “Pre-World  War  I  Firefighter
Respirators  and  the  U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines  Involvement  in  WWI.”  Journal  of  the
International  Society  for  Respiratory  Protection,  vol.  34,  no.  2,  2017,  pp.  128-135.
Szalajda,
 Jonathan.
 “Respiratory
 Protection
 for
 Terrorist
 Threats
 and
 Other
Emergencies.”
 NIOSH
 Science
 Blog.
 September
 9,
 2009,
https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2009/09/09/respiratory/
 TB
 Respiratory
Protection Program in Health Care Facilities: Administrator’s Guide. US Department of
Health  and  Human  Services,  Public  Health  Service,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  September  1999.
“Use of Respiratory Protection Among First Responders at the World Trade Center Site –
New  York  City,  September  2001.”  CDC  MMWR,  vol.  51,  Special  Issue,  September  11,
2002,  pp.  6-8.  Wu,  Maoxin,  et  al.  “Case  Report:  Lung  Disease  in  World  Trade  Center
Responders  Exposed  to  Dust  and  Smoke:  Carbon  Nanotubes  Found  in  the  Lungs  of
World  Trade  Center  Patients  and  Dust  Samples,”  Environmental  Health  Perspectives,
vol. 119, no. 4, pp. 499-504, 2010.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/Respiratory-Protection-history.html
