Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. SUGGESTED CITATION:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1993 Sexually
transmitted diseases treatment guidelines. MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-14):
{inclusive page numbers}.  CIO Responsible for this publication:
National Center for Prevention Services,  Division of Sexually Transmitted Diseases and
HIV Prevention  Summary  These guidelines for the treatment of patients with sexually
transmitted diseases (STDs) were developed by staff members of CDC
after consultation with a group of invited experts who met in
Atlanta on January 19-21, 1993. Included are new recommendations
for single-dose oral therapy for gonococcal infections, chlamydial
infections, and chancroid; new regimens for the treatment of
bacterial vaginosis (BV) and outpatient management of pelvic
inflammatory disease (PID); a new patient-applied medication for
treatment of genital warts; and a revised approach to the
management of victims of sexual assault. This report includes new
sections on subclinical human papillomavirus (HPV) infections and
cervical cancer screening for women who attend STD clinics or who
have a history of STDs. These recommendations also include expanded
sections on the management of patients with asymptomatic human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; vulvovaginal candidiasis
(VVC); STDs among patients coinfected with HIV; and STDs among
infants,  children,  and  pregnant  women.   INTRODUCTION   Physicians  and  other
health-care providers have a critical
role in the effort to prevent and treat sexually transmitted
diseases (STDs). These recommendations for the treatment of STDs
are intended to assist with that effort. They were developed by CDC
staff  members  in  consultation  with  a  group  of  invited  experts.   This  report  was
produced through a multi-stage process.
Beginning in the spring of 1992, CDC personnel systematically
reviewed literature on each of the major STDs, focusing on data and
reports that have become available since the 1989 STD Treatment
Guidelines were published. Background papers were written and
tables of evidence constructed summarizing the type of study (e.g.,
randomized controlled trial, case series), the study population and
setting, the treatments or other interventions, outcome measures
assessed, reported findings, and weaknesses and biases in study
design and analysis. For these reviews and tables, published
abstracts and peer- reviewed journal articles were considered. CDC
personnel then developed a draft document based on those reviews.  In January 1993,
invited consultants assembled in Atlanta for
a 3-day meeting. CDC personnel presented the key questions on STD
treatment suggested from their literature reviews and presented the
data available to answer those questions. Where relevant, the
questions focused on four principal outcomes of STD therapy: a)
microbiologic cure, b) alleviation of signs and symptoms, c)
prevention of sequelae, and d) prevention of transmission. The
consultants then assessed whether the questions identified were the
appropriate ones, ranked them in order of priority, and attempted
to arrive at answers using the available evidence. In addition, the
consultants evaluated the quality of evidence supporting the
answers based on the number and types of studies and the quality of
those studies.  In several areas, the process diverged from that described
above. The section on STD/HIV prevention guidelines was reviewed
for comment by experts who had not been present at the January
meeting, as well as by additional experts on STD/HIV prevention at
CDC. The recommendations for STD screening during pregnancy were
developed after CDC staff reviewed the published recommendations of
other expert groups that were convened by CDC and other
organizations. The sections on HIV infection and early intervention
and hepatitis B virus (HBV) also are principally a compilation of
recommendations developed by other experts and are provided in this
report for the convenience of those who use this document.  Throughout this document
the evidence used as the basis for
specific recommendations is briefly discussed. More comprehensive,
annotated discussions of such evidence will appear in background
papers  that  will  be  submitted  for  publication  in  1994.   These  recommendations  were
developed in consultation with
experts whose experience is primarily with the treatment of
patients in public STD clinics. These recommendations also should
be applicable to other patient-care settings, including family
planning clinics, private doctor's offices, and other primary-care
facilities. When using these guidelines, consideration should be
given to the disease prevalence and to other characteristics of the
practice setting. These recommendations should not be construed as
standards or as inflexible rules, but as a source of clinical
guidance within the United States.  These recommendations focus on the treatment and
counseling of
individual patients and do not address other community services and
interventions that also play important roles in STD/HIV prevention.
Clinical and laboratory diagnoses are described when such
information is related to therapy. For a more comprehensive
discussion of diagnosis, refer to CDC's STD Clinical Practice
Guidelines,  1991  (1).   STD/HIV  PREVENTION  GUIDELINES   Prevention  and  control  of
STDs is based on four major
concepts: first, education of those at risk on the means for
reducing the risk for transmission; second, detection of
asymptomatically infected individuals and of persons who are
symptomatic but unlikely to seek diagnostic and treatment services;
third, effective diagnosis and treatment of those who are infected;
fourth, evaluation, treatment, and counseling of sex partners of
persons who have an STD. Although this document deals largely with
secondary prevention, namely clinical aspects of STD control,
primary prevention of STDs is based on changing the sexual
behaviors that place patients at risk.  Physicians and other health-care providers have
an important
role in the prevention of STDs. In addition to interrupting
transmission by treating persons who have bacterial and parasitic
STDs, clinicians have the opportunity to provide patient education
and counseling and to participate in identifying and treating
infected  sex  partners.   Prevention  Methods   Condoms   When  used  consistently  and
correctly, condoms are very
effective in preventing a variety of STDs, including HIV infection.
Multiple cohort studies, including those of serodiscordant couples,
have demonstrated a strong protective effect of condom use against
HIV infection. Condoms are regulated as medical devices and subject
to random sampling and testing by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). Each latex condom manufactured in the United States is
tested electronically for holes before packaging. Condom breakage
rates during use are low in the United States ( less than or equal
to 2 per 100 condoms tested). Condom failure usually results from
inconsistent or incorrect use rather than condom breakage.  Patients should be advised
that condoms must be used
consistently and correctly to be effective in preventing STDs.
Patients should also be instructed in the correct use of condoms.
The following recommendations ensure the proper use of condoms:  
    Use a new condom with each act of intercourse.  
    Carefully handle the condom to avoid damaging it with
    fingernails, teeth, or other sharp objects.  
    Put the condom on after the penis is erect and before any
    genital contact with the partner.  
    Ensure that no air is trapped in the tip of the condom.  
    Ensure that there is adequate lubrication during intercourse,
    possibly requiring the use of exogenous lubricants.  
    Use only water-based lubricants (e.g., K-Y JellyTM or
    glycerine) with latex condoms (oil-based lubricants {e.g.,
    petroleum jelly, shortening, mineral oil, massage oils, body
    lotions, or cooking oil} that can weaken latex should never be
    used).  
    Hold the condom firmly against the base of the penis during
    withdrawal, and withdraw while the penis is still erect to prevent
    slippage.  Condoms and Spermicides  The effectiveness of spermicides in preventing
HIV
transmission is unknown. No data exist to indicate that condoms
lubricated with spermicides are more effective than other
lubricated condoms in protecting against the transmission of HIV
infection and other STDs. Therefore, latex condoms with or without
spermicides are recommended.  Female Condoms  Laboratory studies indicate that the
female condom
(RealityTM) -- a lubricated polyurethane sheath with a ring on each
end that is inserted into the vagina--is an effective mechanical
barrier to viruses, including HIV. Aside from a small study of
trichomoniasis, no clinical studies have been completed to evaluate
protection from HIV infection or other STDs. However, an evaluation
of the female condom's effectiveness in pregnancy prevention was
conducted during a 6-month period for 147 women in the United
States. The estimated 12-month failure rate for pregnancy
prevention  among  the  147  women  was  26%.   Vaginal  Spermicides,  Sponges,
Diaphragms  As demonstrated in several cohort studies, vaginal spermicides
(i.e., film, gel, suppositories; contraceptive foam has not been
studied) used alone without condoms reduce the risk for cervical
gonorrhea and chlamydia, but protection against HIV infection has
not been established in human studies. The vaginal contraceptive
sponge protects against cervical gonorrhea and chlamydia, but
increases the risk for candidiasis as evidenced by cohort studies.
Diaphragm use has been demonstrated to protect against cervical
gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomoniasis, but only in case-control
and cross-sectional studies; no cohort studies have been performed.
Gonorrhea and chlamydia among women usually involve the cervix as
a portal of entry, whereas other STD pathogens (including HIV) may
infect women through the vagina or vulva, as well as the cervix.
Protection of women against HIV infection should not be assumed
from the use of vaginal spermicides, vaginal sponges, or
diaphragms. The role of spermicides, sponges, and diaphragms for
preventing STDs among men has not been studied.  Nonbarrier Contraception, Surgical
Sterilization, Hysterectomy  Women who are not at risk for pregnancy may incorrectly
perceive themselves to be at no risk for STDs, including HIV
infection. Nonbarrier contraceptive methods offer no protection
against HIV or other STDs. Women using hormonal contraception (oral
contraceptives, NorplantTM, Depo-ProveraTM), who have been
surgically sterilized or who have had hysterectomies should be
counseled regarding the use of condoms and the risk for STDs,
including HIV infection.  Prevention Messages  Preventing the spread of STDs requires
that persons at risk
for transmitting or acquiring infections change their behaviors.
When risks have been identified, the health-care provider has an
opportunity to deliver prevention messages. Counseling skills are
essential to the effective delivery of prevention messages (i.e.,
respect, compassion, and a nonjudgmental attitude). Techniques that
can be effective in developing rapport with the patient include
using open-ended questions, using language that the patient
understands, and reassuring the patient that treatment will be
provided regardless of considerations such as ability to pay,
citizenship or immigration status, language spoken, or lifestyle.  Prevention messages
should be tailored to the patient, with
consideration given to his or her specific risks. Messages should
include a description of measures, such as the following, that the
person  can  take  to  avoid  acquiring  or  transmitting  STDs:   The  most  effective  way  to
prevent sexual transmission of HIV
infection and other STDs is to avoid sexual intercourse with an
infected partner.  
    If a person chooses to have sexual intercourse with a partner
    whose infection status is unknown or who is infected with HIV or
    other STDs, men should use a new latex condom with each act of
    intercourse.  
    When a male condom cannot be used, couples should consider
    using a female condom.  Injection Drug Users  Prevention messages appropriate for
injection drug users are
the following:  
    Enroll or continue in a drug treatment program.  
    Do not, under any circumstances, use injection equipment
    (needles, syringes) that has been used by another person.  
    Persons who continue to use injection equipment that has been
    used by other persons should first clean the equipment with bleach
    and water. (Disinfecting with bleach does not sterilize the
    equipment and does not guarantee that HIV is inactivated. However,
    thoroughly and consistently cleaning injection equipment with
    bleach should reduce the rate of HIV transmission when equipment is
    shared.)  HIV Prevention Counseling  Knowledge of one's HIV status and appropriate
counseling are
thought to play an important role in initiating behavior change.
Counseling associated with HIV testing has two main components:
pretest  and  posttest  counseling.   During  pretest  counseling,  the  clinician  should
conduct a
personalized risk assessment, explain the meaning of positive and
negative test results, ask for informed consent for the HIV test,
and help the person to develop a realistic, personalized risk
reduction plan.  During posttest counseling, the clinician should inform the
patient of the results, review the meaning of the results, and
reinforce prevention messages. If the patient is HIV positive,
posttest counseling should include referral for follow-up medical
services and for social and psychological services, if needed. HIV-
seronegative persons at continuing risk for HIV infection also may
benefit from referral for additional counseling and prevention
services.  HIV counseling is considered to be an important HIV-prevention
strategy, although its efficacy in reducing risk behavior is still
under evaluation. By ensuring that counseling is empathic and
"client-centered," clinicians will be able to develop a realistic
appraisal of the person's risk and help him or her to develop a
specific and realistic HIV-prevention plan (2).  Partner Notification and Management of
Sex Partners  Patients with STDs should ensure that their sex partners,
including those without symptoms, are referred for evaluation.
Providers should be prepared to assist in that effort. In most
circumstances, partners of patients with STDs should be examined.
When a diagnosis of a treatable STD is considered likely,
appropriate antibiotics should be administered even though there
may be no clinical signs of infection and before laboratory test
results are available. In most states, the local or state health
department can assist in notifying the partners of patients with
selected STDs, especially HIV, syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia.  Breaking the chain
of transmission is crucial to STD control.
For treatable STDs, further transmission and reinfection can be
prevented by referral of sex partners for diagnosis, treatment, and
counseling. The following two strategies are used for partner
notification: a) patient referral (index patients notify their
partners), and b) provider referral (partners named by infected
patients are notified and counseled by health department staff).
When a physician refers an infected person to a local or state
health department, trained professionals may interview the patient
to obtain names and locating information about all of his or her
sex partners. Every health department protects the privacy of
patients in partner notification activities. Because of the
advantage of confidentiality, many patients prefer that public
health officials notify partners.  If a patient with HIV infection refuses to notify partners
while continuing to place them at risk, the physician has an
ethical and legal responsibility to inform persons that they are at
risk of HIV infection. This duty-to-warn may be most applicable to
primary care physicians, who often have knowledge about a patient's
social and familial relationships. The decision to invoke the
duty-to-warn measure should be a last resort -- applicable only in
cases in which all efforts to persuade the patient to disclose
positive  test  results  to  those  who  need  to  know  have  failed.   Although  compelling
ethical, theoretical, and public health
reasons exist to undertake partner notification, the efficacy of
partner notification as an STD prevention strategy is under
evaluation,  and  its  effectiveness  may  be  disease-specific.   Clinical  guidelines  for  sex
partner management and
recommendations for partner notification for specific STDs are
included  for  each  STD  addressed  in  this  report.   Reporting  and  Confidentiality   The
accurate identification and timely reporting of STDs form
an integral part of successful disease control. Reporting assists
local health authorities in identifying sex partners who may be
infected. Reporting also is important for assessing morbidity
trends. STD/HIV and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) cases
should be reported in accordance with local statutory requirements
and in a timely manner.  Syphilis, gonorrhea, and AIDS are reportable diseases in every
state. The requirements for reporting other STDs and asymptomatic
HIV infection differ from state to state, and clinicians should be
familiar  with  local  STD  reporting  requirements.   Reporting  may  be  provider-  and/or
laboratory-based. Clinicians
who are unsure of local reporting requirements should seek advice
from local health departments or state STD programs.  STD and HIV reports are held in
strictest confidence and in
many jurisdictions are protected by statute from subpoena. Further,
before any follow-up of a positive STD test is conducted by program
representatives, these persons consult with the patient's
health-care  provider  to  verify  the  diagnosis  and  treatment.   SPECIAL  POPULATIONS  
Pregnant Women  Intrauterine or perinatally transmitted STDs can have fatal or
severely debilitating effects on a fetus. Pregnant women and their
sex partners should be questioned about STDs and should be
counseled about the possibility of neonatal infections.  Recommended Screening Tests 
The following screening tests are recommended for pregnant
women:  
    A serologic test for syphilis  All women should be screened serologically for syphilis
during
the early stages of pregnancy. In populations in which utilization
of prenatal care is not optimal, rapid plasma reagin (RPR)-card
test screening and treatment, if that test is reactive, should be
performed at the time a pregnancy is diagnosed. For patients at
high risk, screening should be repeated in the third trimester and
again at delivery. (Some states mandate screening all women at
delivery.) No infant should be discharged from the hospital without
the syphilis serologic status of its mother having been determined
at least once during pregnancy and, preferably, again at delivery.
Any woman who delivers a stillborn infant after 20 weeks gestation
should be tested for syphilis.  
    A serologic test for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)  
    A test for Neisseria gonorrhoeae  
    A test for Chlamydia trachomatis
    Pregnant women at increased risk ( less than 25 years of age,
    or with a new or more than one partner) should be tested and
    treated, if necessary, during the third trimester to prevent
    maternal postnatal complications and chlamydial infection among
    infants. Screening during the first trimester might permit
    prevention of adverse effects of chlamydia during pregnancy.
    However, the evidence for adverse effects during pregnancy is
    minimal. If screening is performed only during the first trimester,
    a longer period exists for acquiring infection before delivery.  
    A test for HIV infection
    Patients with risk factors for HIV or with a high-risk sex
    partner should be tested for HIV infection. Some authorities
    recommend offering HIV tests to all pregnant women, particularly in
    areas of high HIV seroprevalence. Appropriate counseling should be
    provided, and informed consent for HIV testing should be obtained.  Other Issues
Other STD-related issues to be considered are as follows:  
    Pregnant women with primary genital herpes, HBV, primary
    cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, group B streptococcal infection,
    and women who have syphilis and who are allergic to penicillin may
    need to be referred to an expert for management.  
    In the absence of lesions during the third trimester, routine
    serial cultures for herpes simplex virus (HSV) are not indicated
    for women with a history of recurrent genital herpes. However,
    obtaining cultures from such women at the time of delivery may be
    useful in guiding neonatal management. "Prophylactic" caesarean
    section is not indicated for women who do not have active genital
    lesions at the time of delivery.  
    The presence of genital warts is not considered an indication
    for caesarean section.  For a more detailed discussion of these issues, as well as for
infections not transmitted sexually, refer to Guidelines for
Perinatal Care (3).  NOTE: The sources for these guidelines for screening of
pregnant women include Guide to Clinical Preventive Services (4),
Guidelines for Perinatal Care (3), and Recommendations for the
Prevention and Management of Chlamydia trachomatis Infections, 1993
(5). These sources are not entirely consistent in their
recommendations. The Guide to Clinical Preventive Services
recommends routine testing for gonorrhea at the first prenatal
visit, with repeat testing for those at increased risk, and
selective screening for chlamydia at the first prenatal visit. The
Guidelines for Perinatal Care does not specifically recommend
screening for either gonorrhea or chlamydia, but recommends
screening for STDs in the third trimester for women at risk. The
Recommendations for the Prevention and Management of Chlamydia
trachomatis Infections, 1993 recommend screening for chlamydia
during the third trimester for all pregnant women less than 25
years of age or for any woman with a new sex partner or multiple
partners. Recommendations to screen pregnant women for STDs are
based on disease severity and sequelae, prevalence in the
population, costs, medical/legal considerations (including state
laws), and other factors. The screening recommendations in this
report are more comprehensive (i.e., if followed, more women will
be screened for more STDs than would be screened by following other
recommendations) and are compatible with other CDC guidelines.
Physicians should select a screening strategy compatible with their
practice population and setting.  Adolescents  Health-care providers who provide care
for patients with
sexually transmitted infections should be aware of several issues
that relate specifically to adolescents. The rates of many STDs are
highest among adolescents; e.g., the rate of gonorrhea is highest
among persons 15-19 years of age. Clinic-based studies have
demonstrated that the prevalence of chlamydial infections, and
possibly of HPV infections, also is highest among adolescents.  All adolescents in the
United States can consent to the
confidential diagnosis and treatment of STDs. Medical care for
these conditions can be provided to adolescents without parental
consent or knowledge. Furthermore, in many states adolescents can
consent to HIV counseling and testing.  The style and content of counseling and health
education
should be adapted for adolescents. Discussions should be
appropriate for the patient's developmental level and should
identify risky behaviors, such as sex and drug use behaviors. Care
and counseling should be direct and nonjudgmental.  Children  Management of children
with STDs requires close cooperation
between the clinician, laboratory, and child-protection
authorities. Investigations, when indicated, should be initiated
promptly. Some diseases, such as gonorrhea, syphilis, and
chlamydia, if acquired after the neonatal period, are almost 100%
indicative of sexual contact. For other diseases, such as HPV
infection and vaginitis, the association with sexual contact is not
as clear (see Sexual Assault and STDs).  Persons with HIV Infection  The management of
patients infected with HIV and patients
infected with both HIV and other STDs presents complex clinical and
behavioral issues. For that reason, these issues are addressed
throughout this report (see HIV Infection and Early Intervention
and specific disease sections). Because of its effects on the
immune system, HIV infection may alter the natural histories of
many STDs and the effect of antimicrobial therapy. Such effects are
likely to occur as the degree of immunosuppression advances;
frequent or severe episodes of some STDs or failure to respond
appropriately to therapy should lead the health-care provider to
consider HIV infection as a cause. Close clinical follow-up of
patients infected with both HIV and STDs is imperative.  STD infection among patients
with or without HIV is a sentinel
event, often indicating unprotected sexual activity. Further
patient  counseling  is  needed  in  such  situations.   HIV  INFECTION  AND  EARLY
INTERVENTION  Infection with HIV produces a spectrum that progresses from no
apparent illness to AIDS as a late manifestation. The pace of
disease progression is variable. The median time between infection
with HIV and the development of AIDS among adults is 10 years, with
a range from a few months to greater than or equal to 12 years.
Most adults and adolescents infected with HIV remain symptom-free
for long periods, but viral replication can be detected in
asymptomatic persons and increases substantially as the immune
system deteriorates. Most people who are infected with HIV will
eventually have symptoms related to the infection. In cohort
studies of adults infected with HIV, data indicated that symptoms
developed in 70%-85% of infected adults, and AIDS developed in 55%-
62% within 12 years after infection. Additional cases are expected
to occur among those who have remained AIDS-free for greater than
12 years.  Greater awareness of risky behaviors by both patients and
health-care providers has led to increased testing for HIV and
earlier diagnosis of early HIV infection, often before symptoms
develop (though emotional or psychological problems may occur).
Such early identification of HIV infection is important for several
reasons. Treatments are available to slow the decline of immune
system function. Persons who are infected with HIV and altered
immune function also are at increased risk for infections such as
tuberculosis (TB), bacterial pneumonia, and Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia (PCP), for which preventive measures are available.
Because of its effect on the immune system, HIV affects the
diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, and follow-up of many other
diseases and may affect the efficacy of antimicrobial therapy for
some STDs. Close clinical follow-up after treatment for STDs is
imperative.  During early infection, persons with HIV and their families
can be educated about the disease and become linked with a support
network that addresses their needs and with care systems effective
in maintaining good health and delaying the onset of symptoms.
Early diagnosis also offers the opportunity for counseling and for
assistance in preventing the transmission of HIV infection to
others.  For the purpose of these recommendations, early intervention
for HIV is defined as care for persons infected with HIV who are
without symptoms. However, recently detected HIV infection may not
have been recently acquired. Persons newly diagnosed with HIV may
be at many different stages of the infection. Therefore, early
intervention also involves assuming the responsibility for
coordinating care and for arranging access to resources necessary
to meet the medical, psychological, and social needs of persons
with more advanced HIV infection.  Diagnostic Testing for HIV-1 and HIV-2  HIV infection
is most often diagnosed by using HIV-1 antibody
tests. Antibody testing begins with a sensitive screening test such
as the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or a rapid assay.
If confirmed by Western blot or other supplemental test, a positive
antibody test means that a person is infected with HIV and is
capable of transmitting the virus to others. HIV antibody is
detectable in greater than or equal to 95% of patients within 6
months of infection. Although a negative antibody test usually
means a person is not infected, antibody tests cannot rule out
infection that occurred less than 6 months before the test.  Since there is transplacental
passage of maternal HIV
antibody, antibody tests for HIV are expected to be positive in the
serum of both infected and uninfected infants born to a
seropositive mother. Passively acquired HIV antibody falls to
undetectable levels among most infants by 15 months of age. A
definitive determination of HIV infection for an infant less than
15 months of age should be based either on the presence of antibody
to HIV in conjunction with a compatible immunologic profile and
clinical course or on laboratory evidence of HIV in blood or
tissues by culture, nucleic acid, or antigen detection.  Specific recommendations for the
diagnostic testing of HIV are
listed below:  
    Informed consent must be obtained before an HIV test is
    performed. Some states require written consent. See HIV Prevention
    Counseling for a discussion of pretest and posttest counseling.  
    Positive screening tests for HIV antibody must be confirmed by
    a more specific confirmatory test (either the Western blot assay or
    indirect immunofluorescence assay {IFA}) before being considered
    definitive for confirming HIV infection.  
    Persons with positive HIV tests must receive medical and
    psychosocial evaluation and monitoring services, or be referred for
    these services.  The prevalence of HIV-2 in the United States is extremely low,
and CDC does not recommend routine testing for HIV-2 in settings
other than blood centers, unless demographic or behavioral
information suggests that HIV-2 infection might be present. Those
at risk for HIV-2 infection include persons from a country in which
HIV-2 is endemic or the sex partners of such persons. (As of July
1992, HIV-2 was endemic in parts of West Africa and an increased
prevalence of HIV-2 had been reported in Angola, France,
Mozambique, and Portugal.) Additionally, testing for HIV-2 should
be conducted when there is clinical evidence or suspicion of HIV
disease in the absence of a positive test for antibodies to HIV-1
(6).  Counseling for Patients with HIV Infection  Behavioral and psychosocial services are
an integral part of
HIV early intervention. Patients usually experience emotional
distress when first being informed of a positive HIV test result,
and also later when notified of changes in immunologic markers,
when antiviral or prophylactic therapy is initiated, and when
symptoms develop. Patients face several major adaptive challenges:  
    accepting the possibility of a curtailed life span, b) coping
    with others' reactions to a stigmatizing illness, c) developing
    strategies for maintaining physical and emotional health, and d)
    initiating changes in behavior to prevent HIV transmission. Many
    patients also require assistance with making reproductive choices,
    gaining access to health services and health insurance, and
    confronting employment discrimination.  Interrupting HIV transmission depends upon
changes in behavior
by those persons at risk for transmitting or acquiring infection.
Though some viral culture studies suggest that antiviral treatment
reduces viral burden, clinical data are insufficient to determine
whether therapy might reduce the probability of transmission.
Infected persons, as potential sources of new infections, must
receive extra attention and support to help break chains of
transmission and to prevent infection of others. Targeting behavior
change programs toward HIV-infected persons and their sex partners,
or those with whom they share needles, is an important adjunct to
current AIDS prevention efforts.  Specific recommendations for counseling patients with
HIV
infection are listed below:  
    Persons who test positive for HIV antibody should be counseled
    by a person who is able to discuss the medical, psychological, and
    social implications of HIV infection.  
    Appropriate social support and psychological resources should
    be available, either on site or through referral, to assist
    patients in coping with emotional distress.  
    Persons who continue to be at risk for transmitting HIV should
    receive assistance in changing or avoiding behaviors that can
    transmit  infection  to  others.   Initial  Evaluation  and  Planning  for  Care   Practice
settings for offering early HIV care are variable,
depending upon local resources and needs. Primary-care providers
and outpatient facilities must ensure that appropriate resources
are available for each patient and must avoid fragmentation of
care; it is preferable for persons with HIV infection to receive
care from a single source that is able to provide comprehensive
care for all stages of HIV infection. But the limited availability
of such resources often results in the need to coordinate care
among outpatient, inpatient, and specialist providers in different
locations. Because of the progressive nature of HIV and the
increased risk for bacterial infections, including TB -- even
before HIV infection becomes advanced -- it is essential to
establish specific provisions for handling the medical,
psychological, and social problems likely to arise at any stage of
infection. An important component of early intervention is
effective linkage with referral settings where off-hours care and
specialty services are available. Development of an appropriate
plan for care involves the following:  
    Identification of patients in need of immediate medical care
    (e.g., patients with symptomatic HIV infection or emotional crisis)
    and of those in need of antiretroviral therapy or prophylaxis for
    opportunistic infections (e.g., PCP).  
    Evaluation for the presence of diseases associated with HIV,
    such as TB and STDs.  
    Administration of recommended vaccinations.  
    Case management or referral for case management.  
    Counseling (see Counseling for Patients with HIV Infection).
    The CD4+ T-lymphocyte count is the best laboratory indicator
    of clinical progression, and comprehensive management strategies
    for HIV infection are typically stratified by CD4 count. Either the
    absolute number or the percentage of CD4+ T cells may be
    determined. CD4+ percentage is more consistent than absolute CD4+
    count with successive measurements for the same person and less
    variable with delays in specimen processing. However, most clinical
    trials have used absolute CD4+ count to evaluate the need for and
    timing of therapeutic interventions. Patients with CD4+ counts
    greater than 500/uL usually do not demonstrate evidence of clinical
    immunosuppression. Patients with 200-500 CD4+ cells/uL are more
    likely to develop HIV-related symptoms and to require medical
    intervention. Patients with CD4+ counts less than 200 cells/uL, and
    those with higher CD4+ counts who develop thrush or unexplained
    fever (temperature greater than 37.8 C for greater than or equal to
    2 weeks) are at increased risk for developing complicated HIV
    disease. Such patients should be managed in a comprehensive
    treatment setting with access to specialty resources and
    hospitalization.  Providers unable to offer therapeutic management of HIV may
use the initial evaluation to identify the need for prompt referral
to appropriate resources. The initial evaluation of HIV-positive
patients should include the following essential components:  
    A detailed history, including sexual history, substance abuse
    history, and a review of systems for specific HIV-related symptoms.
  
    A physical examination; for females, this examination should
    include a gynecologic examination.  
    For females, testing for N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, a
    Papanicolaou (Pap) smear, and wet mount examination of vaginal
    secretions.  
    A syphilis serology.  
    A CD4+ T-lymphocyte analysis.  
    Complete blood and platelet counts.  
    A purified protein derivative (PPD) tuberculin skin test by
    the Mantoux method and anergy testing with two delayed-type
    hypersensitivity (DTH) antigens (Candida, mumps, or tetanus toxoid)
    administered by the Mantoux method or a multipuncture device.  
    A thorough psychosocial evaluation, including ascertainment of
    behavioral factors indicating risk for transmitting HIV and
    elucidation of information about any partners who should be
    notified  about  possible  exposure  to  HIV.   Preventive  Therapy  for  TB   Studies
conducted among persons with and without HIV infection
have suggested that HIV infection can depress tuberculin reactions
before signs and symptoms of HIV infection develop. Cutaneous
anergy (defined as skin test response of less than or equal to 3 mm
to all DTH antigens) may be present among greater than or equal to
10% of asymptomatic persons with CD4+ counts greater than 500
cells/uL, and among greater than 60% of persons with CD4+ counts
less than 200.  HIV-positive persons with a PPD reaction greater than or equal
to 5 mm induration are considered to be infected with M.
tuberculosis and should be evaluated for preventive treatment with
isoniazid after active TB has been excluded. Anergic persons whose
risk for tuberculous infection is estimated to be greater than or
equal to 10%, based on available prevalence data, also should be
considered for preventive therapy. For further details regarding
evaluation of patients for TB, refer to Purified Protein Derivative
(PPD-tuberculin anergy) and HIV Infection: Guidelines for Anergy
Testing and Management of Anergic Persons at Risk of Tuberculosis
(7).  The preliminary results from a randomized clinical trial
suggest that treatment with isoniazid is effective for preventing
active TB among HIV-infected persons. The usual regimen is
isoniazid 10 mg/kg daily, up to a maximum adult dose of 300 mg
daily. Twelve months of isoniazid preventive treatment is
recommended for persons with HIV infection. For further details
regarding preventive therapy for TB, refer to The Use of Preventive
Therapy for Tuberculous Infection in the United States (8) and
Management of Persons Exposed to Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis
(9).
 
 Recommended
 Immunizations
 for
 Adults
 and
 Adolescents
 
 Specific
recommendations for immunization of persons infected
with HIV are listed below:  
    Pneumococcal vaccination and an annual influenza vaccination
    should be administered.  
    Persons at increased risk for acquiring HBV and who lack
    evidence of immunity may receive a three-dose schedule of hepatitis
    B vaccine, with postvaccination serologic testing between 1 and 6
    months after the vaccination series.  Recommendations for vaccinating HIV-infected
persons are based
on expert opinions and consensus of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). No clinical data exist to document
the efficacy of inactivated vaccines among HIV-infected persons,
and pneumococcal vaccine failures have been reported. However, the
use of inactivated vaccines may be beneficial for persons with HIV
infection and there is no evidence that they are harmful.
Immunogenicity studies have suggested a generally poorer response
among HIV-infected persons, with higher response rates among
asymptomatic persons than among those with advanced HIV disease.  Current evidence
indicates that HIV infection does not
increase susceptibility to HBV, nor does it increase the severity
of clinical disease. The presence of HIV infection is not an
indication for hepatitis B vaccine, but HIV-infected persons are at
increased risk for becoming chronic carriers after hepatitis B
infection. Because the routes of transmission of HBV parallel those
of HIV, efforts to modify risky behaviors must be the primary focus
of prevention efforts. However, vaccine should be administered to
HIV-infected patients who continue to have a high likelihood for
HBV exposure.  Persons with HIV infection also are at increased risk for
invasive Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib) disease and for
complications from measles. Immunization against Hib and measles
should be considered for asymptomatic HIV-infected persons who may
have an increased risk for exposure to these infections. For
further details on immunization of HIV-infected patients, refer to
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP): Use of Vaccines and Immune Globulins in Persons with
Altered Immunocompetence (10).  Follow-Up Evaluation  There have been no controlled
studies to serve as the basis
for recommending specific follow-up tests or follow-up intervals.
The suggested frequency of monitoring is based on the slow decrease
in CD4+ counts observed among patients in cohort studies, but
should be modified depending on the patient's psychological status,
the presence of symptoms, or both. Repeat evaluation for STDs also
is important in the follow-up of HIV-infected persons and should be
performed on all persons who continue to be sexually active.
Follow-up evaluation should be performed every 6 months and should
include the following:  
    An interim history and physical examination;  
    A complete blood count, platelet count, and lymphocyte subset
    analysis;  
    Re-evaluation of psychosocial status and behavioral factors
    indicating risk for transmitting HIV.  To follow CD4+ measurements, providers should
use the same
laboratory and, optimally, obtain each specimen at the same time
each day. When unexpected or discrepant results are obtained or
when major treatment decisions are to be made, health-care
providers should consider repeating the CD4+ measurement after at
least 1 week.  More frequent laboratory monitoring, every 3-4 months, is
indicated if CD4+ results indicate a patient is close to a point
when a clinical intervention may be indicated.  Continuing Management of Patients with
Early HIV Infection  Providing comprehensive, continuing management of patients
with early HIV infection can include additional diagnostic studies
(e.g., chest x-ray, serum chemistry, antibody testing for
toxoplasmosis and hepatitis B), antiretroviral therapy and
monitoring, and PCP prophylaxis. Treatment of HIV infection and
prophylaxis against opportunistic infections continue to evolve
rapidly. This treatment should be undertaken in consultation with
physicians who are familiar with the care of persons with HIV
infection. The complete therapeutic management of HIV infection is
beyond  the  scope  of  this  document.   Antiretroviral  Therapy   The  optimal  time  for
initiating antiretroviral therapy has not
yet been established. Zidovudine (ZDV) at a dose of 500 mg/day (100
mg orally every 4 hours while the patient is awake) has been
recommended for symptomatic persons with less than 500 CD4+
T-cells/uL, and for asymptomatic persons with less than 300 CD4+
T-cells/uL. This recommendation is based on results of short-term
follow-up in three randomized clinical trials demonstrating that
the initiation of ZDV therapy delays progression to advanced
disease. Evidence for improved long-term survival after early
treatment is less conclusive. The effects of ZDV may be transient,
possibly because of the development of viral resistance or other
factors. Sequential or combination therapy with other
antiretroviral  agents  could  be  more  efficacious.   Whether  other  daily  dosages,  dose
schedules, or dosages based
on body weight would result in greater therapeutic benefit or few
side effects is not known. Providers should work with patients to
design a treatment strategy that is both clinically sound and
appropriate for each individual patient's needs, priorities, and
circumstances. An initial dose of 600 mg in divided doses has been
recommended by a panel of experts convened by the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). Preliminary
data suggest ZDV can yield therapeutic results when the dosing
interval is increased to 8 hours, and at doses of 200 mg three
times daily. Antiretroviral efficacy is diminished at doses less
than 300 mg/day, and it has been suggested that higher oral doses
may be required to achieve effective levels in the central nervous
system.  There are no data to support the use of antiretroviral drugs
other than ZDV as initial therapy. Didanosine (DDI) is recommended
for persons who are intolerant of ZDV or who experience progression
of symptoms despite ZDV. Two 100 mg tablets of DDI are recommended
every 12 hours for persons who weigh greater than or equal to 60
kg; the recommended dose for adults less than 60 kg is one 100 mg
tablet and one 25 mg tablet every 12 hours. Two tablets are
recommended at each dose so that adequate buffering is provided to
prevent gastric acid degradation of the drug.  Benefits have been reported from other
antiretroviral
regimens, including treatment with combinations of ZDV, DDC
(dideoxycytidine {zalcitabine}), and DDI, or switching therapy to
DDI after long-term therapy with ZDV. Experience with these
alternatives is insufficient to serve as a basis for
recommendations. Providers managing patients who are taking
antiretroviral therapy should be familiar with evidence being
developed in several clinical trials. Current information is
available from the NIAID AIDS Clinical Trials Information Service,
1-800-TRIALS-A.  Side effects that are serious (e.g., anemia, cytopenia,
pancreatitis, and peripheral neuropathy) and uncomfortable (e.g.,
nausea, vomiting, headaches, and insomnia) are common during
antiretroviral therapy. Although hematologic toxicity from ZDV is
less common with the lower doses recommended, approximately 2% of
patients who receive 500 mg/day manifest severe anemia by the 18th
month of treatment -- most within the 3rd through 8th month of
treatment. Careful hematologic monitoring of patients receiving ZDV
is  recommended.   PCP  Prophylaxis   Adults  and  adolescents  with  less  than  200  CD4+
T-cells/uL or
with constitutional symptoms, such as thrush or unexplained fever
greater than 100 F for greater than or equal to 2 weeks, and any
patient with a previous episode of PCP should receive PCP
prophylaxis. Prophylaxis should be continued for the lifetime of
the patient.  Based upon evidence from randomized controlled clinical
trials, the Public Health Service Task Force on Antipneumocystis
Prophylaxis has recommended the following regimens for PCP
prophylaxis among adults and adolescents:  
    Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) at a dose of one
    double-strength tablet (800 mg SMX and 160 mg TMP) orally once a
    day.  
    For patients unable to tolerate TMP-SMX: aerosol pentamidine
    administered by either the Respirgard II nebulizer regimen (300 mg
    once a month) or the Fisoneb nebulizer (initial loading regimen of
    five 60 mg doses during a 2-week period, followed by a 60 mg dose
    every 2 weeks).  The efficacy of alternatives for patients unable to tolerate
TMP-SMX, including dapsone 100 mg orally once a day and sulfa
desensitization, has not been studied extensively. For further
details on PCP prophylaxis, refer to Recommendations for
Prophylaxis Against Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia for adults and
adolescents  infected  with  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (11).   Management  of  Sex
Partners  The rationale for implementing partner notification is that
early diagnosis and treatment of HIV infection may reduce morbidity
and offers the opportunity to encourage risk-reducing behaviors.
Two complementary notification processes, patient referral and
provider referral, can be used to identify partners. With patient
referral, patients inform their own partners directly of their
exposure to HIV infection. With provider referral, trained health
department personnel locate partners on the basis of the names,
descriptions, and addresses provided by the patient. During the
notification process, the anonymity of patients is protected; their
names are not revealed to sex or needle-sharing partners who are
notified. Many state health departments provide assistance with
provider  referral  partner  notification  upon  request.   One  randomized  trial  suggested
that provider referral is more
effective in notifying partners than patient referral. In that
trial, 50% of partners in the provider referral group were
notified, yet only 7% of partners were notified by subjects in the
patient referral group. However, few data demonstrate whether
behavioral change takes place as a result of partner notification
and many patients are reluctant to disclose the names of partners
because of concern about discrimination, disruption of
relationships,  and  loss  of  confidentiality  for  the  partners.   When  referring  to  those
persons infected with HIV, the term
"partner" includes not only sex partners but also injecting drug
users who share needles or other injecting equipment. Partner
notification is a means of identifying and concentrating risk-
reduction efforts on persons at high risk for contracting or
transmitting HIV infection. Partner notification for HIV infection
must be confidential and should depend upon the voluntary
cooperation  of  the  patient.   Specific  recommendations  for  implementing  partner
notification
procedures are listed below:  
    Persons who are HIV-positive should be encouraged to notify
    their partners and to refer them for counseling and testing.
    Providers should assist in this process, if desired by the patient,
    either directly or through referral to health department partner
    notification programs.  
    If patients are unwilling to notify their partners or if it
    cannot be assured that their partners will seek counseling,
    physicians or health department personnel should use confidential
    procedures  to  assure  that  the  partners  are  notified.   Special  Considerations  
Pregnancy  Women who are HIV-infected should be specifically informed
about the risk for perinatal infection. Current evidence indicates
that 15%-39% of infants born to HIV- infected mothers are infected
with HIV, and the virus also can be transmitted from an infected
mother by breastfeeding. Pregnancy among HIV-infected patients does
not appear to increase maternal morbidity or mortality.  Women should be counseled
about their options regarding
pregnancy. The objective of counseling is to provide HIV-infected
women with current information for making reproductive decisions,
analogous to the model used in genetic counseling. Contraceptive,
prenatal, and abortion services should be available on site or by
referral.  Minimal information is available on the use of ZDV or other
antiretroviral drugs during pregnancy. Trials to evaluate its
efficacy in preventing perinatal transmission and its safety during
pregnancy are being conducted. A case series of 43 pregnant women
has been published; dosages of ZDV ranged from 300 to 1,200 mg/day.
ZDV was well tolerated and there were no malformations among the
newborns in this series. Although this observation is encouraging,
this series of negative case reports cannot be used to infer that
ZDV is not teratogenic.  Burroughs Wellcome Co. and Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc., in
cooperation with CDC, maintain a registry to assess the effects of
the use of ZDV and DDC during pregnancy. Women who receive either
ZDV or DDC during pregnancy should be reported to this registry
(1-800-722-9292, ext. 58465).  HIV Infection Among Infants and Children  Infants and
young children with HIV infection differ from
adults and adolescents with respect to the diagnosis, clinical
presentation, and management of HIV disease. For example, total
lymphocytes and absolute CD4+ cell counts are much higher in
infants and children than in healthy adults and are age dependent.
Specific indications and dosages for both antiretroviral and
prophylactic therapy have been developed for children (12). Other
modifications must be made in health services that are recommended
for infants and children, such as avoiding vaccination with live
oral polio vaccine when a child (or close household contact) is
infected with HIV.  State laws differ regarding consent of minor persons ( less
than 18 years of age) for HIV counseling and testing, evaluation,
treatment services, and participation in clinical trials. Although
most adolescents receive adult doses of antiretroviral and
prophylactic therapy, there are no data on modification of these
dosages during puberty. Management of infants, children, and
adolescents -- who are known or suspected to be infected with HIV  
    requires referral to, or close consultation with, physicians
    familiar with the manifestations and treatment of pediatric HIV
    infection.   DISEASES  CHARACTERIZED  BY  GENITAL  ULCERS   Management  of  the
Patient with Genital Ulcers  In the United States, most patients with genital ulcers have
genital herpes, syphilis, or chancroid. The relative frequency of
each varies by geographic area and patient population, but in most
areas of the United States genital herpes is the most common of
these diseases. More than one of these diseases may be present
among at least 3%-10% of patients with genital ulcers. Each disease
has been associated with an increased risk for HIV infection.  A diagnosis based only on
history and physical examination is
often inaccurate. Therefore, evaluation of all persons with genital
ulcers should include a serologic test for syphilis and possibly
other tests. Although ideally all of these tests should be
conducted for each patient with a genital ulcer, use of such tests
(other than a serologic test for syphilis) may be based on test
availability and clinical or epidemiologic suspicion. Specific
tests for the evaluation of genital ulcers are listed below:  
    Darkfield examination or direct immunofluorescence test for
    Treponema pallidum,  
    Culture or antigen test for HSV, and  
    Culture for Haemophilus ducreyi.
    HIV testing should be considered in the management of patients
    with genital ulcers, especially for those with syphilis or
    chancroid.  A health-care provider often must treat a patient before test
results are available (even after complete testing, at least one
quarter of patients with genital ulcers have no
laboratory-confirmed diagnosis). In that circumstance, the
clinician should treat for the diagnosis considered most likely.
Many experts recommend treatment for both chancroid and syphilis if
the diagnosis is unclear or if the patient resides in a community
in which chancroid morbidity is notable (especially when diagnostic
capabilities for chancroid and syphilis are not ideal).  Chancroid  Chancroid is endemic
in many areas of the United States and
also occurs in discrete outbreaks. Chancroid has been well
established as a co-factor for HIV transmission and a high rate of
HIV infection among patients with chancroid has been reported in
the United States and in other countries. As many as 10% of
patients with chancroid may be coinfected with T. pallidum or HSV.  Definitive diagnosis
of chancroid requires identification of
H. ducreyi on special culture media that are not commercially
available; even using these media, sensitivity is no higher than
80% and is usually lower. A probable diagnosis, for both clinical
and surveillance purposes, may be made if the person has one or
more painful genital ulcers, and a) no evidence of T. pallidum
infection by darkfield examination of ulcer exudate or by a
serologic test for syphilis performed at least 7 days after onset
of ulcers, and b) either the clinical presentation of the ulcer(s)
is not typical of disease caused by HSV or the HSV test results are
negative. The combination of a painful ulcer with tender inguinal
adenopathy (which occurs among one-third of patients) is suggestive
of chancroid, and when accompanied by suppurative inguinal
adenopathy  is  almost  pathognomonic.   Treatment   Successful  treatment  cures
infection, resolves clinical
symptoms, and prevents transmission to others. In extensive cases,
scarring  may  result  despite  successful  therapy.   Recommended  Regimens  
Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose
or
Ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly (IM) in a single dose
or
Erythromycin  base  500  mg  orally  4  times  a  day  for  7  days.   All  three  regimens  are
effective for the treatment of
chancroid among patients without HIV infection. Azithromycin and
ceftriaxone offer the advantage of single-dose therapy.
Antimicrobial resistance to ceftriaxone and azithromycin has not
been reported. Although two isolates resistant to erythromycin were
reported from Asia a decade ago, similar isolates have not been
reported.  Alternative Regimens  Amoxicillin 500 mg plus clavulanic acid 125 mg orally
3 times
a day for 7 days,  or
Ciprofloxacin  500  mg  orally  2  times  a  day  for  3  days.   NOTE:  Ciprofloxacin  is
contraindicated for pregnant and
lactating women, children, and adolescents less than or equal to 17
years of age.  These regimens have not been evaluated as extensively as the
recommended regimens; neither has been studied in the United
States.  Other Management Considerations  Patients should be tested for HIV infection
at the time of
diagnosis. Patients also should be tested 3 months later for both
syphilis  and  HIV,  if  initial  results  are  negative.   Follow-Up   Patients  should  be
re-examined 3-7 days after initiation of
therapy. If treatment is successful, ulcers improve symptomatically
within 3 days and improve objectively within 7 days after therapy.
If no clinical improvement is evident, the clinician must consider
whether a) the diagnosis is correct, b) coinfection with another
STD agent exists, c) the patient is infected with HIV, d) treatment
was not taken as instructed, or e) the H. ducreyi strain causing
infection is resistant to the prescribed antimicrobial. The time
required for complete healing is related to the size of the ulcer;
large ulcers may require greater than or equal to 2 weeks. Clinical
resolution of fluctuant lymphadenopathy is slower than that of
ulcers and may require needle aspiration through adjacent intact
skin -- even during successful therapy.  Management of Sex Partners  Persons who had
sexual contact with a patient who has
chancroid within the 10 days before onset of the patient's symptoms
should be examined and treated. The examination and treatment
should  be  administered  even  in  the  absence  of  symptoms.   Special  Considerations  
Pregnancy  The safety of azithromycin for pregnant and lactating women
has not been established. Ciprofloxacin is contraindicated during
pregnancy. No adverse effects of chancroid on pregnancy outcome or
on the fetus have been reported.  HIV Infection  Patients coinfected with HIV should be
closely monitored.
These patients may require courses of therapy longer than those
recommended in this report. Healing may be slower among
HIV-infected persons and treatment failures do occur, especially
after shorter-course treatment regimens. Since data on therapeutic
efficacy with the recommended ceftriaxone and azithromycin regimens
among patients infected with HIV are limited, those regimens should
be used among persons known to be infected with HIV only if
follow-up can be assured. Some experts suggest using the
erythromycin 7-day regimen for treating HIV-infected persons.  Genital Herpes Simplex
Virus Infections  Genital herpes is a viral disease that may be recurrent and
has no cure. Two serotypes of HSV have been identified: HSV-1 and
HSV-2; most cases of genital herpes are caused by HSV-2. On the
basis of serologic studies, approximately 30 million persons in the
United States may have genital HSV infection.  Most infected persons never recognize
signs suggestive of
genital herpes; some will have symptoms shortly after infection and
then never again. A minority of the total infected U.S. population
will have recurrent episodes of genital lesions. Some cases of
first clinical episode genital herpes are manifested by extensive
disease that requires hospitalization. Many cases of genital herpes
are acquired from persons who do not know that they have a genital
infection with HSV or who were asymptomatic at the time of the
sexual contact.  Randomized trials show that systemic acyclovir provides
partial control of the symptoms and signs of herpes episodes when
used to treat first clinical episodes, or when used as suppressive
therapy. However, acyclovir neither eradicates latent virus nor
affects subsequent risk, frequency, or severity of recurrences
after administration of the drug is discontinued. Topical therapy
with acyclovir is substantially less effective than the oral drug
and its use is discouraged. Episodes of HSV infection among
HIV-infected patients may require more aggressive therapy.
Immunocompromised persons may have prolonged episodes with
extensive disease. For these persons, infections caused by
acyclovir-resistant strains require selection of alternate
antiviral  agents.   First  Clinical  Episode  of  Genital  Herpes   Recommended  Regimen  
Acyclovir 200 mg orally 5 times a day for 7-10 days or until
clinical resolution is attained.  First Clinical Episode of Herpes Proctitis  Recommended
Regimen  Acyclovir 400 mg orally 5 times a day for 10 days or until
clinical resolution is attained.  Recurrent Episodes  When treatment is instituted during
the prodrome or within 2
days of onset of lesions, some patients with recurrent disease
experience limited benefit from therapy. However, since early
treatment can seldom be administered, most immunocompetent patients
with recurrent disease do not benefit from acyclovir treatment, and
it is not generally recommended.  Recommended Regimen  Acyclovir 200 mg orally 5
times a day for 5 days,
or
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3 times a day for 5 days,
or
Acyclovir  800  mg  orally  2  times  a  day  for  5  days.   Daily  Suppressive  Therapy   Daily
suppressive therapy reduces the frequency of HSV
recurrences by at least 75% among patients with frequent
recurrences (i.e., six or more recurrences per year).
Suppressive treatment with oral acyclovir does not totally
eliminate symptomatic or asymptomatic viral shedding or the
potential for transmission. Safety and efficacy have been
documented among persons receiving daily therapy for as long as 5
years. Acyclovir-resistant strains of HSV have been isolated from
some persons receiving suppressive therapy, but these strains have
not been associated with treatment failure among immunocompetent
patients. After 1 year of continuous suppressive therapy, acyclovir
should be discontinued to allow assessment of the patient's rate of
recurrent episodes.  Recommended Regimen  Acyclovir 400 mg orally 2 times a day.
Alternative  Regimen   Acyclovir  200  mg  orally  3-5  times  a  day.   The  goal  of  the
alternative regimen is to identify for each
patient the lowest dose that provides relief from frequently
recurring symptoms.  Severe Disease  Intravenous (IV) therapy should be provided for
patients with
severe disease or complications necessitating hospitalization
(e.g., disseminated infection that includes encephalitis,
pneumonitis, or hepatitis).  Recommended Regimen  Acyclovir 5-10 mg/kg body weight
IV every 8 hours for 5-7 days
or  until  clinical  resolution  is  attained.   Other  Management  Considerations   Other
considerations for managing patients with genital HSV
infection are as follows:  
    Patients should be advised to abstain from sexual activity
    while lesions are present.  
    Patients with genital herpes should be told about the natural
    history of the disease, with emphasis on the potential for
    recurrent episodes, asymptomatic viral shedding, and sexual
    transmission. Sexual transmission of HSV has been documented to
    occur during periods without evidence of lesions. Many cases are
    transmitted  during  such  asymptomatic  periods.   The  use  of  condoms  should  be
encouraged during all sexual
exposures. The risk for neonatal infection should be explained to
all patients -- male and female -- with genital herpes. Women of
childbearing age who have genital herpes should be advised to
inform health-care providers who care for them during pregnancy
about their HSV infection.  Management of Sex Partners  Sex partners of patients who
have genital herpes are likely to
benefit from evaluation and counseling. Symptomatic sex partners
should be managed in the same manner as any patient with genital
lesions. However, the majority of persons with genital HSV
infection do not have a history of typical genital lesions. These
asymptomatic persons may benefit from evaluation and counseling;
thus, even asymptomatic partners should be queried about histories
of typical and atypical genital lesions and encouraged to examine
themselves for lesions in the future.  Commercially available HSV type-specific antibody
tests have
not demonstrated adequate performance characteristics; their use is
not currently recommended. Sensitive and specific type-specific
serum antibody assays now utilized in research settings might
contribute to future intervention strategies. Should tests with
adequate sensitivity and specificity become commercially available,
it might be possible to accurately identify asymptomatic persons
infected with HSV-2, to focus counseling on how to detect lesions
by self-examination, and to reduce the risk for transmission to sex
partners.  Special Considerations  Allergy, Intolerance, or Adverse Reactions  Effective
alternatives to therapy with acyclovir are not
available.  HIV Infection  Lesions caused by HSV are relatively common among patients
infected with HIV. Intermittent or suppressive therapy with oral
acyclovir may be needed.  The acyclovir dosage for HIV-infected persons is
controversial, but experience strongly suggests that
immunocompromised patients benefit from increased dosage. Regimens
such as 400 mg orally 3 to 5 times a day, as used for other
immunocompromised persons, have been found useful. Therapy should
be  continued  until  clinical  resolution  is  attained.   For  severe  disease,  IV  acyclovir
therapy may be required. If
lesions persist among patients undergoing acyclovir treatment,
resistance to acyclovir should be suspected. These patients should
be managed in consultation with an expert. For severe disease
because of proven or suspected acyclovir-resistant strains,
hospitalization should be considered. Foscarnet, 40 mg/kg body
weight IV every 8 hours until clinical resolution is attained,
appears  to  be  the  best  available  treatment.   Pregnancy   The  safety  of  systemic
acyclovir therapy among pregnant women
has not been established. Burroughs Wellcome Co., in cooperation
with CDC, maintains a registry to assess the effects of the use of
acyclovir during pregnancy. Women who receive acyclovir during
pregnancy should be reported to this registry (1-800-722-9292, ext.
58465).  Current registry findings do not indicate an increase in the
number of birth defects identified among the prospective reports
when compared with those expected in the general population.
Moreover, no consistent pattern of abnormalities emerges among
retrospective reports. These findings provide some assurance in
counseling women who have had inadvertent prenatal exposure to
acyclovir. However, accumulated case histories comprise a sample of
insufficient size for reaching reliable and definitive conclusions
regarding the risks of acyclovir treatment to pregnant women and to
their fetuses.  In the presence of life-threatening maternal HSV infection
(e.g., disseminated infection that includes encephalitis,
pneumonitis, or hepatitis), acyclovir administered IV is indicated.
Among pregnant women without life-threatening disease, systemic
acyclovir should not be used to treat recurrences nor should it be
used as suppressive therapy near-term (or at other times during
pregnancy) to prevent reactivation.  Perinatal Infections  Most mothers of infants who
acquire neonatal herpes lack
histories of clinically evident genital herpes. The risk for
transmission to the neonate from an infected mother appears highest
among women with first episode genital herpes near the time of
delivery, and is low ( less than or equal to 3%) among women with
recurrent herpes. The results of viral cultures during pregnancy do
not predict viral shedding at the time of delivery, and such
cultures  are  not  routinely  indicated.   At  the  onset  of  labor,  all  women  should  be
carefully
questioned about symptoms of genital herpes and should be examined.
Women without symptoms or signs of genital herpes infection (or
prodrome) may deliver their babies vaginally. Among women who have
a history of genital herpes, or who have a sex partner with genital
herpes, cultures of the birth canal at delivery may aid in
decisions relating to neonatal management.  Infants delivered through an infected birth
canal (proven by
virus isolation or presumed by observation of lesions) should be
followed carefully, including virus cultures obtained 24-48 hours
after birth. Available data do not support the routine use of
acyclovir as anticipatory treatment for asymptomatic infants
delivered through an infected birth canal. Treatment should be
reserved for infants who develop evidence of clinical disease and
for  those  with  positive  postpartum  cultures.   All  infants  with  evidence  of  neonatal
herpes should be treated
with systemic acyclovir or vidarabine; refer to the Report of the
Committee on Infectious Diseases, American Academy of Pediatrics
(13). For ease of administration and to lower toxicity, acyclovir
(30 mg/kg/day for 10-14 days) is the preferred drug. The care of
these  infants  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  an  expert.   Lymphogranuloma
Venereum  Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV), a rare disease in the United
States, is caused by serovars L1, L2, or L3 of C. trachomatis. The
most common clinical manifestation of LGV among heterosexuals is
tender inguinal lymphadenopathy that is most commonly unilateral.
Women and homosexually active men may have proctocolitis or
inflammatory involvement of perirectal or perianal lymphatic
tissues resulting in fistulas and strictures. When patients seek
care, most no longer have the self-limited genital ulcer that
sometimes occurs at the site of inoculation. The diagnosis is
usually made serologically and by exclusion of other causes of
inguinal lymphadenopathy or genital ulcers.  Treatment  Treatment cures infection and
prevents ongoing tissue damage,
although tissue reaction can result in scarring. Buboes may require
aspiration or incision and drainage through intact skin.
Doxycycline is the preferred treatment.  Recommended Regimen  Doxycycline 100 mg
orally 2 times a day for 21 days.
Alternative Regimens  Erythromycin 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 21 days
or
Sulfisoxazole 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 21 days or
equivalent sulfonamide course.  Follow-Up  Patients should be followed clinically until
signs and
symptoms have resolved.  Management of Sex Partners  Persons who have had sexual
contact with a patient who has LGV
within the 30 days before onset of the patient's symptoms should be
examined, tested for urethral or cervical chlamydial infection, and
treated.  Special Considerations  Pregnancy  Pregnant and lactating women should be
treated with the
erythromycin  regimen.   HIV  infection   Persons  with  HIV  infection  and  LGV  should  be
treated following
the regimens previously cited.  Syphilis  General Principles  Background  Syphilis is a
systemic disease caused by T. pallidum. Patients
with syphilis may seek treatment for signs or symptoms of primary
infection (ulcer or chancre at site of infection), secondary
infection (manifestations that include rash, mucocutaneous lesions,
and adenopathy), or tertiary infection (cardiac, neurologic,
ophthalmic, auditory, or gummatous lesions). Infections also may be
detected during the latent stage by serologic testing. Patients
with latent syphilis who are known to have been infected within the
preceding year are considered to have early latent syphilis; others
have late latent syphilis or syphilis of unknown duration.
Theoretically, treatment for late latent syphilis (as well as
tertiary syphilis) requires therapy of longer duration because
organisms are dividing more slowly; however, the validity of this
division and its timing are unproven.  Diagnostic Considerations and Use of Serologic
Tests  Darkfield examinations and direct fluorescent antibody tests
of lesion exudate or tissue are the definitive methods for
diagnosing early syphilis. Presumptive diagnosis is possible with
the use of two types of serologic tests for syphilis: a)
nontreponemal (e.g., Venereal Disease Research Laboratory {VDRL}
and RPR, and b) treponemal (e.g., fluorescent treponemal antibody
absorbed {FTA-ABS} and microhemagglutination assay for antibody to
T. pallidum {MHA-TP}). The use of one type of test alone is not
sufficient for diagnosis. Nontreponemal test antibody titers
usually correlate with disease activity, and results should be
reported quantitatively. A fourfold change in titer, equivalent to
a change of two dilutions (e.g., from 1:16 to 1:4, or from 1:8 to
1:32), is necessary to demonstrate a substantial difference between
two nontreponemal test results that were obtained using the same
serologic test. A patient who has a reactive treponemal test
usually will have a reactive test for a lifetime, regardless of
treatment or disease activity (15%-25% of patients treated during
the primary stage may revert to being serologically nonreactive
after 2-3 years). Treponemal test antibody titers correlate poorly
with disease activity and should not be used to assess response to
treatment.  Sequential serologic tests should be performed using the same
testing method (e.g., VDRL or RPR) by the same laboratory. The VDRL
and RPR are equally valid, but quantitative results from the two
tests cannot be directly compared because RPR titers are often
slightly higher than VDRL titers.  Abnormal results of serologic testing (unusually high,
unusually low, and fluctuating titers) have been observed among
HIV-infected patients. For such patients, use of other tests (e.g.,
biopsy and direct microscopy) should be considered. However,
serologic tests appear to be accurate and reliable for the
diagnosis of syphilis and for evaluation of treatment response for
the  vast  majority  of  HIV-infected  patients.   No  single  test  can  be  used  to  diagnose
neurosyphilis among all
patients. The diagnosis of neurosyphilis can be made based on
various combinations of reactive serologic test results,
abnormalities of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cell count or protein,
or a reactive VDRL-CSF (RPR is not performed on CSF) with or
without clinical manifestations. The CSF leukocyte count is usually
elevated ( greater than 5 WBC/mm3) when active neurosyphilis is
present, and it is also a sensitive measure of the effectiveness of
therapy. The VDRL-CSF is the standard serologic test for CSF; when
reactive in the absence of substantial contamination of the CSF
with blood, it is considered diagnostic of neurosyphilis. However,
the VDRL-CSF may be nonreactive when neurosyphilis is present. Some
experts recommend performing an FTA-ABS test on CSF. The CSF
FTA-ABS is less specific (i.e., yields more false positives) for
neurosyphilis than the VDRL-CSF; however, the test is believed to
be  highly  sensitive.   Treatment   Parenteral  penicillin  G  is  the  preferred  drug  for
treatment of
all stages of syphilis. The preparation(s) used (i.e., benzathine,
aqueous procaine, or aqueous crystalline), the dosage, and the
length of treatment depend on the stage and clinical manifestations
of disease.  The efficacy of penicillin for the treatment of syphilis was
well established through clinical experience before the value of
randomized controlled clinical trials was recognized. Therefore,
nearly all the recommendations for the treatment of syphilis are
based on expert opinion reinforced by case series, open clinical
trials, and 50 years of clinical experience.  Parenteral penicillin G is the only therapy
with documented
efficacy for neurosyphilis or for syphilis during pregnancy.
Patients with neurosyphilis and pregnant women with syphilis in any
stage who report penicillin allergy should almost always be treated
with penicillin, after desensitization, if necessary. Skin testing
for penicillin allergy may be useful for some patients and in some
settings (see Management of the Patient With a History of
Penicillin Allergy). However, minor determinants needed for
penicillin skin testing are not available commercially.  The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction
is an acute febrile reaction  
    accompanied by headache, myalgia, and other symptoms -- that may
    occur within the first 24 hours after any therapy for syphilis;
    patients should be advised of this possible adverse reaction. The
    Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction is common among patients with early
    syphilis. Antipyretics may be recommended, but there are no proven
    methods for preventing this reaction. The Jarisch-Herxheimer
    reaction may induce early labor or cause fetal distress among
    pregnant women. This concern should not prevent or delay therapy
    (see Syphilis During Pregnancy).  Management of Sex Partners  Sexual transmission
of T. pallidum occurs only when
mucocutaneous syphilitic lesions are present; such manifestations
are uncommon after the first year of infection. However, persons
sexually exposed to a patient with syphilis in any stage should be
evaluated clinically and serologically according to the following
recommendations:  
    Persons who were exposed to a patient with primary, secondary,
    or latent (duration less than 1 year) syphilis within the preceding
    90 days might be infected even if seronegative, and therefore
    should be treated presumptively.  
    Persons who were sexually exposed to a patient with primary,
    secondary, or latent (duration less than 1 year) syphilis greater
    than 90 days before examination should be treated presumptively if
    serologic test results are not available immediately, and the
    opportunity for follow-up is uncertain.  
    For purposes of partner notification and presumptive treatment
    of exposed sex partners, patients who have syphilis of unknown
    duration and who have high nontreponemal serologic test titers (
    greater than or equal to 1:32) may be considered to be infected
    with early syphilis.  
    Long-term sex partners of patients with late syphilis should
    be  evaluated  clinically  and  serologically  for  syphilis.   The  time  periods  before
treatment used for identifying at-risk
sex partners are 3 months plus duration of symptoms for primary
syphilis, 6 months plus duration of symptoms for secondary
syphilis, and 1 year for early latent syphilis.  Primary and Secondary Syphilis  Treatment
 Four decades of experience indicate that parenteral penicillin
G is effective in achieving local cure (healing of lesions and
prevention of sexual transmission) and in preventing late sequelae.
However, no adequately conducted comparative trials have been
performed to guide the selection of an optimal penicillin regimen
(i.e., dose, duration, and preparation). Substantially fewer data
on nonpenicillin regimens are available.  Recommended Regimen for Adults  Nonallergic
patients with primary or secondary syphilis should
be treated with the following regimen:  Benzathine penicillin G, 2.4 million units IM in a
single
dose.  NOTE: Recommendations for treating pregnant women and
HIV-infected persons for syphilis are discussed in separate
sections.   Recommended  Regimen  for  Children   After  the  newborn  period,  children
diagnosed with syphilis
should have a CSF examination to exclude a diagnosis of
neurosyphilis, and birth and maternal medical records should be
reviewed to assess whether the child has congenital or acquired
syphilis (see Congenital Syphilis). Children with acquired primary
or secondary syphilis should be evaluated (including consultation
with child-protection services) and treated using the following
pediatric regimen (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children).  Benzathine penicillin G,
50,000 units/kg IM, up to the adult
dose  of  2.4  million  units  in  a  single  dose.   Other  Management  Considerations   All
patients with syphilis should be tested for HIV. In areas
with high HIV prevalence, patients with primary syphilis should be
retested  for  HIV  after  3  months.   Patients  who  have  syphilis  and  who  also  have
symptoms or signs
suggesting neurologic disease (e.g., meningitis) or ophthalmic
disease (e.g., uveitis) should be fully evaluated for neurosyphilis
and syphilitic eye disease (including CSF analysis and ocular
slit-lamp examination). Such patients should be treated
appropriately according to the results of this evaluation.  Invasion of CSF by T. pallidum
with accompanying CSF
abnormalities is common among adults who have primary or secondary
syphilis. However, few patients develop neurosyphilis after
treatment with the regimens described in this report. Therefore,
unless clinical signs or symptoms of neurologic involvement are
present (e.g., auditory, cranial nerve, meningeal, or ophthalmic
manifestations), lumbar puncture is not recommended for routine
evaluation of patients with primary or secondary syphilis.  Follow-Up  Treatment failures
can occur with any regimen. However,
assessing response to treatment is often difficult, and no
definitive criteria for cure or failure exist. Serologic test
titers may decline more slowly among patients with a prior syphilis
infection. Patients should be re-examined clinically and
serologically at 3 months and again at 6 months.  Patients with signs or symptoms that
persist or recur or who
have a sustained fourfold increase in nontreponemal test titer
compared with either the baseline titer or to a subsequent result,
can be considered to have failed treatment or to be reinfected.
These patients should be re-treated after evaluation for HIV
infection. Unless reinfection is likely, lumbar puncture also
should be performed.  Failure of nontreponemal test titers to decline fourfold by 3
months after therapy for primary or secondary syphilis identifies
persons at risk for treatment failure. Those persons should be
evaluated for HIV infection. Optimal management of such patients is
unclear if they are HIV negative. At a minimum, these patients
should have additional clinical and serologic follow-up. If further
follow-up cannot be assured, re-treatment is recommended. Some
experts recommend CSF examination in such situations.  When patients are re-treated,
most experts recommend
re-treatment with three weekly injections of benzathine penicillin
G 2.4 million units IM, unless CSF examination indicates that
neurosyphilis  is  present.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Refer  to  General  Principles,
Management of Sex Partners.  Special Considerations  Penicillin Allergy  Nonpregnant
penicillin-allergic patients who have primary or
secondary syphilis should be treated with the following regimen.  Doxycycline 100 mg
orally 2 times a day for 2 weeks
or
Tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 2 weeks.  There is less clinical experience
with doxycycline than with
tetracycline, but compliance is likely to be better with
doxycycline. Therapy for a patient who cannot tolerate either
doxycycline or tetracycline should be based upon whether the
patient's compliance with the therapy regimen and with follow-up
examinations  can  be  assured.   For  nonpregnant  patients  whose  compliance  with
therapy and
follow-up can be assured, an alternative regimen is erythromycin
500 mg orally 4 times a day for 2 weeks. Various ceftriaxone
regimens also may be considered.  Patients whose compliance with therapy or follow-up
cannot be
assured should be desensitized, if necessary, and treated with
penicillin. Skin testing for penicillin allergy may be useful in
some situations (see Management of the Patient With a History of
Penicillin Allergy).  Erythromycin is less effective than other recommended
regimens. Data on ceftriaxone are limited, and experience has been
too brief to permit identification of late failures. Optimal dose
and duration have not been established for ceftriaxone, but
regimens that provide 8-10 days of treponemicidal levels in the
blood should be used. Single dose ceftriaxone therapy is not
effective  for  treating  syphilis.   Pregnancy   Pregnant  patients  who  are  allergic  to
penicillin should be
treated with penicillin, after desensitization, if necessary (see
Management of the Patient With a History of Penicillin Allergy and
Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).   HIV  Infection   Refer  to  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected
Patients.  Latent Syphilis  Latent syphilis is defined as those periods after infection
with T. pallidum when patients are seroreactive, but show no other
evidence of disease. Patients who have latent syphilis and who have
acquired syphilis within the preceding year are classified as
having early latent syphilis. Patients can be demonstrated to have
acquired syphilis within the preceding year on the basis of
documented seroconversion, a fourfold or greater increase in titer
of a nontreponemal serologic test, history of symptoms of primary
or secondary syphilis, or if they had a sex partner with primary,
secondary, or latent syphilis (documented independently as duration
less than 1 year). Nearly all others have latent syphilis of
unknown duration and should be managed as if they had late latent
syphilis.  Treatment  Treatment of latent syphilis is intended to prevent occurrence
or progression of late complications. Although clinical experience
supports belief in the effectiveness of penicillin in achieving
those goals, limited evidence is available for guidance in choosing
specific regimens. There is very little evidence to support the use
of nonpenicillin regimens.  Recommended Regimens for Adults  These regimens are for
nonallergic patients with normal CSF
examination (if performed).  Early Latent Syphilis  Benzathine penicillin G, 2.4 million
units IM in a single
dose.  Late Latent Syphilis or Latent Syphilis of Unknown Duration  Benzathine penicillin
G, 7.2 million units total, administered
as 3 doses of 2.4 million units IM each, at 1-week intervals.  Recommended Regimens
for Children  After the newborn period, children diagnosed with syphilis
should have a CSF examination to exclude neurosyphilis, and birth
and maternal medical records should be reviewed to assess whether
the child has congenital or acquired syphilis (see Congenital
Syphilis). Older children with acquired latent syphilis should be
evaluated as described for adults and treated using the following
pediatric regimens (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). These
regimens are for nonallergic children who have acquired syphilis
and  who  have  had  a  normal  CSF  examination.   Early  Latent  Syphilis   Benzathine
penicillin G, 50,000 units/kg IM, up to the adult
dose  of  2.4  million  units  in  a  single  dose.   Late  Latent  Syphilis  or  Latent  Syphilis  of
Unknown Duration  Benzathine penicillin G, 50,000 units/kg IM, up to the adult
dose of 2.4 million units, for three total doses (total 150,000
units/kg up to adult total dose of 7.2 million units).  Other Management Considerations 
All patients with latent syphilis should be evaluated
clinically for evidence of tertiary disease (e.g., aortitis,
neurosyphilis, gumma, and iritis). Recommended therapy for patients
with latent syphilis may not be optimal therapy for the persons
with asymptomatic neurosyphilis. However, the yield from CSF
examination, in terms of newly diagnosed cases of neurosyphilis, is
low.  Patients with any one of the criteria listed below should have
a CSF examination before treatment:  
    Neurologic or ophthalmic signs or symptoms;  
    Other evidence of active syphilis (e.g., aortitis, gumma,
    iritis);  
    Treatment failure;  
    HIV infection;  
    Serum nontreponemal titer greater than or equal to 1:32,
    unless duration of infection is known to be less than 1 year; or  
    Nonpenicillin therapy planned, unless duration of infection is
    known to be less than 1 year.  If dictated by circumstances and patient preferences,
CSF
examination may be performed for persons who do not meet the
criteria listed above. If a CSF examination is performed and the
results show abnormalities consistent with CNS syphilis, the
patient should be treated for neurosyphilis (see Neurosyphilis).  
    All syphilis patients should be tested for HIV.  Follow-Up  Quantitative nontreponemal
serologic tests should be repeated
at 6 months and again at 12 months. Limited data are available to
guide evaluation of the response to therapy for a patient with
latent syphilis. If titers increase fourfold, or if an initially
high titer ( greater than or equal to 1:32) fails to decline at
least fourfold (two dilutions) within 12-24 months, or if the
patient develops signs or symptoms attributable to syphilis, the
patient should be evaluated for neurosyphilis and re-treated
appropriately.  Management of Sex Partners  Refer to General Principles, Management
of Sex Partners.  Special Considerations  Penicillin Allergy  For patients who have latent
syphilis and who are allergic to
penicillin, nonpenicillin therapy should be used only after CSF
examination has excluded neurosyphilis. Nonpregnant,
penicillin-allergic patients should be treated with the following
regimens.  Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day
or
Tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times a day.  Both drugs are administered for 2 weeks if
duration of
infection is known to have been less than 1 year; otherwise, for 4
weeks.  Pregnancy  Pregnant patients who are allergic to penicillin should be
treated with penicillin, after desensitization, if necessary (see
Management of the Patient With a History of Penicillin Allergy and
Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).   HIV  Infection   Refer  to  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected
Patients.  Late Syphilis  Late (tertiary) syphilis refers to patients with gumma and
patients with cardiovascular syphilis, but not to neurosyphilis.
Nonallergic patients without evidence of neurosyphilis should be
treated with the following regimen.  Recommended Regimen  Benzathine penicillin G,
7.2 million units total, administered
as  3  doses  of  2.4  million  units  IM,  at  1-week  intervals.   Other  Management
Considerations  Patients with symptomatic late syphilis should undergo CSF
examination before therapy. Some experts treat all patients who
have cardiovascular syphilis with a neurosyphilis regimen. The
complete management of patients with cardiovascular or gummatous
syphilis is beyond the scope of these guidelines. These patients
should be managed in consultation with experts.  Follow-Up  There is minimal evidence
regarding follow-up of patients
infected with late syphilis. Clinical response depends partly on
the  nature  of  the  lesions.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Refer  to  General  Principles,
Management  of  Sex  Partners.   Special  Considerations   Penicillin  Allergy   Patients
allergic to penicillin should be treated according to
treatment  regimens  recommended  for  late  latent  syphilis.   Pregnancy   Pregnant
patients who are allergic to penicillin should be
treated with penicillin, after desensitization, if necessary (see
Management of the Patient With a History of Penicillin Allergy and
Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).   HIV  Infection   Refer  to  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected
Patients.  Neurosyphilis  Treatment  Central nervous system disease can occur during
any stage of
syphilis. A patient with clinical evidence of neurologic
involvement (e.g., ophthalmic or auditory symptoms, cranial nerve
palsies) with syphilis warrants a CSF examination. Although four
decades of experience have confirmed the effectiveness of
penicillin, the evidence to guide the choice of the best regimen is
limited.  Syphilitic eye disease is frequently associated with
neurosyphilis, and patients with this disease should be treated
according to neurosyphilis treatment recommendations. CSF
examination should be performed on all such patients to identify
those patients with CSF abnormalities who should have follow-up CSF
examinations  to  assess  response  to  treatment.   Patients  who  have  neurosyphilis  or
syphilitic eye disease
(e.g., uveitis, neuroretinitis, or optic neuritis) and who are not
allergic to penicillin should be treated with the following
regimen.  Recommended Regimen  12-24 million units aqueous crystalline penicillin G
daily,
administered as 2-4 million units IV every 4 hours, for 10-14 days.
  If compliance with therapy can be assured, patients may be
treated with the following alternative regimen.  Alternative Regimen  2.4 million units
procaine penicillin IM daily, plus
probenecid 500 mg orally 4 times a day, both for 10-14 days.  The durations of these
regimens are shorter than that of the
regimen used for late syphilis in the absence of neurosyphilis.
Therefore, some experts administer benzathine penicillin, 2.4
million units IM after completion of these neurosyphilis treatment
regimens  to  provide  a  comparable  total  duration  of  therapy.   Other  Management
Considerations  Other considerations in the management of the patient with
neurosyphilis are the following:  
    All patients with syphilis should be tested for HIV.  
    Many experts recommend treating patients with evidence of
    auditory disease caused by syphilis in the same manner as for
    neurosyphilis,  regardless  of  the  findings  on  CSF  examination.   Follow-Up   If  CSF
pleocytosis was present initially, CSF examination
should be repeated every 6 months until the cell count is normal.
Follow-up CSF examinations also may be used to evaluate changes in
the VDRL-CSF or CSF protein in response to therapy, though changes
in these two parameters are slower and persistent abnormalities are
of less certain importance. If the cell count has not decreased at
6 months, or if the CSF is not entirely normal by 2 years,
re-treatment  should  be  considered.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Refer  to  General
Principles, Management of Sex Partners.  Special Considerations  Penicillin Allergy  No
data have been collected systematically for evaluation of
therapeutic alternatives to penicillin for treatment of
neurosyphilis. Therefore, patients who report being allergic to
penicillin should be treated with penicillin, after desensitization
if necessary, or should be managed in consultation with an expert.
In some situations, skin testing to confirm penicillin allergy may
be useful (see Management of the Patient With a History of
Penicillin Allergy).  Pregnancy  Pregnant patients who are allergic to penicillin should be
treated with penicillin, after desensitization if necessary (see
Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).   HIV  Infection   Refer  to  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected
Patients.   Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected  Patients   Diagnostic  Considerations   Unusual
serologic responses have been observed among
HIV-infected persons who also have syphilis. Most reports involved
serologic titers that were higher than expected, but false-negative
serologic test results or delayed appearance of seroreactivity have
also been reported. Nevertheless, both treponemal and nontreponemal
serologic tests for syphilis are accurate for the majority of
patients with syphilis and HIV coinfection.  When clinical findings suggest that syphilis is
present, but
serologic tests are nonreactive or confusing, it may be helpful to
perform such alternative tests as biopsy of a lesion, darkfield
examination, or direct fluorescent antibody staining of lesion
material.  Neurosyphilis should be considered in the differential
diagnosis  of  neurologic  disease  among  HIV-infected  persons.   Treatment   Although
adequate research-based evidence is not available,
published case reports and expert opinion suggest that HIV-infected
patients with early syphilis are at increased risk for neurologic
complications and have higher rates of treatment failure with
currently recommended regimens. The magnitude of these risks,
although not precisely defined, is probably small. No treatment
regimens have been demonstrated to be more effective in preventing
development of neurosyphilis than those recommended for patients
without HIV infection. Careful follow-up after therapy is
essential.   Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected  Patients   Treatment  
Treatment with benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM,
as for patients without HIV infection, is recommended. Some experts
recommend additional treatments, such as multiple doses of
benzathine penicillin G as suggested for late syphilis, or other
supplemental antibiotics in addition to benzathine penicillin G 2.4
million  units  IM.   Other  Management  Considerations   CSF  abnormalities  are  common
among HIV-infected patients who
have primary or secondary syphilis, but these abnormalities are of
unknown prognostic significance. Most HIV-infected patients respond
appropriately to currently recommended penicillin therapy; however,
some experts recommend CSF examination before therapy and
modification  of  treatment  accordingly.   Follow-Up   Patients  should  be  evaluated
clinically and serologically for
treatment failure at 1 month and at 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after
therapy. Although of unproven benefit, some experts recommend
performing  CSF  examination  after  therapy  (i.e.,  at  6  months).   HIV-infected  patients
who meet the criteria for treatment
failure should undergo CSF examination and be retreated just as for
patients without HIV infection. CSF examination and re-treatment
also should be strongly considered for patients in whom the
suggested fourfold decrease in nontreponemal test titer does not
occur within 3 months for primary or secondary syphilis. Most
experts would re-treat patients with benzathine penicillin G 7.2
million units (as 3 weekly doses of 2.4 million units each) if the
CSF  examination  is  normal.   Special  Considerations   Penicillin  Allergy   Penicillin
regimens should be used to treat HIV-infected
patients in all stages of syphilis. Skin testing to confirm
penicillin allergy may be used (see Management of the Patient With
a History of Penicillin Allergy), but data on the utility of that
approach among immunocompromised patients are inadequate. Patients
may be desensitized, then treated with penicillin.  Latent Syphilis Among HIV-Infected
Patients  Diagnostic Considerations  Patients who have both latent syphilis (regardless
of apparent
duration) and HIV infection should undergo CSF examination before
treatment.  Treatment  A patient with latent syphilis, HIV infection, and a normal
CSF examination can be treated with benzathine penicillin G 7.2
million  units  (as  3  weekly  doses  of  2.4  million  units  each).   Special  Considerations  
Penicillin Allergy  Penicillin regimens should be used to treat all stages of
syphilis among HIV- infected patients. Skin testing to confirm
penicillin allergy may be used (see Management of the Patient With
a History of Penicillin Allergy), but data on the utility of that
approach in immunocompromised patients are inadequate. Patients may
be  desensitized,  then  treated  with  penicillin.   Syphilis  During  Pregnancy   All  women
should be screened serologically for syphilis during
the early stages of pregnancy. In populations in which utilization
of prenatal care is not optimal, RPR-card test screening and
treatment, if that test is reactive, should be performed at the
time a pregnancy is diagnosed. In communities and populations with
high syphilis prevalence or for patients at high risk, serologic
testing should be repeated during the third trimester and again at
delivery. (Some states mandate screening at delivery for all
women.) Any woman who delivers a stillborn infant after 20 weeks
gestation should be tested for syphilis. No infant should leave the
hospital without the serologic status of the infant's mother having
been  determined  at  least  once  during  pregnancy.   Diagnostic  Considerations  
Seropositive pregnant women should be considered infected
unless treatment history is clearly documented in a medical or
health department record and sequential serologic antibody titers
have  appropriately  declined.   Treatment   Penicillin  is  effective  for  preventing
transmission to fetuses
and for treating established infection among fetuses. Evidence is
insufficient, however, to determine whether the specific,
recommended  penicillin  regimens  are  optimal.   Recommended  Regimens   Treatment
during pregnancy should be the penicillin regimen
appropriate for the woman's stage of syphilis. Some experts
recommend additional therapy (e.g., a second dose of benzathine
penicillin 2.4 million units IM) 1 week after the initial dose,
particularly for those women in the third trimester of pregnancy
and  for  women  who  have  secondary  syphilis  during  pregnancy.   Other  Management
Considerations  Women who are treated for syphilis during the second half of
pregnancy are at risk for premature labor or fetal distress, or
both, if their treatment precipitates the Jarisch-Herxheimer
reaction. These women should be advised to seek medical attention
following treatment if they notice any change in fetal movements or
if they have contractions. Stillbirth is a rare complication of
treatment; however, since therapy is necessary to prevent further
fetal damage, that concern should not delay treatment. All patients
with syphilis should be tested for HIV.  Follow-Up  Serologic titers should be checked
monthly until adequacy of
treatment has been assured. The antibody response should be
appropriate for the stage of disease.  Management of Sex Partners  Refer to General
Principles,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.   Special  Considerations   Penicillin  Allergy  
There are no proven alternatives to penicillin. A pregnant
woman with a history of penicillin allergy should be treated with
penicillin, after desensitization, if necessary. Skin testing may
be helpful for some patients and in some settings (see Management
of the Patient With a History of Penicillin Allergy).
Tetracycline and doxycycline are contraindicated during pregnancy.
Erythromycin should not be used because it cannot be relied upon to
cure an infected fetus.  Congenital Syphilis  Diagnostic Considerations  Who Should Be
Evaluated  Infants should be evaluated for congenital syphilis if they
were born to seropositive (nontreponemal test confirmed by
treponemal test) women who meet the following criteria:  
    Have untreated syphilis;* or  
    Were treated for syphilis during pregnancy with erythromycin;
    or  
    Were treated for syphilis less than 1 month before delivery;
    or  
    Were treated for syphilis during pregnancy with the
    appropriate penicillin regimen, but nontreponemal antibody titers
    did not decrease sufficiently after therapy to indicate an adequate
    response ( greater than or equal to fourfold decrease); or  
    Do not have a well-documented history of treatment for
    syphilis; or  
    Were treated appropriately before pregnancy but had
    insufficient serologic follow-up to assure that they had responded
    appropriately to treatment and are not currently infected ( greater
    than or equal to fourfold decrease for patients treated for early
    syphilis; stable or declining titers less than or equal to 1:4 for
    other patients).  No infant should leave the hospital without the serologic
status of the infant's mother having been documented at least once
during pregnancy. Serologic testing also should be performed at
delivery in communities and populations at risk for congenital
syphilis. Serologic tests can be nonreactive among infants infected
late  during  their  mother's  pregnancy.   Evaluation  of  the  Infant   The  clinical  and
laboratory evaluation of infants born to
women described above should include the following:  
    A thorough physical examination for evidence of congenital
    syphilis;  
    A quantitative nontreponemal serologic test for syphilis
    performed on the infant's sera (not on cord blood);  
    CSF analysis for cells, protein, and VDRL;  
    Long bone x-rays;  
    Other tests as clinically indicated (e.g., chest x-ray,
    complete blood count, differential and platelet count, liver
    function tests);  
    For infants who have no evidence of congenital syphilis on the
    above evaluation, determination of presence of specific
    antitreponemal IgM antibody by a testing method recognized by CDC
    as having either provisional or standard status;  
    Pathologic examination of the placenta or amniotic cord using
    specific fluorescent antitreponemal antibody staining.  Treatment  Therapy Decisions 
Infants should be treated for presumed congenital syphilis if
they were born to mothers who, at delivery, had untreated syphilis
or who had evidence of relapse or reinfection after treatment (see
Congenital Syphilis, Diagnostic Considerations). Additional
criteria for presumptively treating infants with congenital
syphilis are as follows:  
    Physical evidence of active disease;  
    X-ray evidence of active disease;  
    A reactive VDRL-CSF or, for infants born to seroreactive
    mothers, an abnormal ** CSF white blood cell count or protein,
    regardless of CSF serology;  
    A serum quantitative nontreponemal serologic titer that is at
    least fourfold greater than the mother's titer ***;  
    Specific antitreponemal IgM antibody detected by a testing
    method that has been given provisional or standard status by CDC;  
    If they meet the previously cited criteria for "Who Should Be
    Evaluated," but have not been fully evaluated (see Congenital
    Syphilis, Diagnostic Considerations).  NOTE: Infants with clinically evident congenital
syphilis
should  have  an  ophthalmologic  examination.   Recommended  Regimens   Aqueous
crystalline penicillin G, 100,000-150,000 units/kg/day
(administered as 50,000 units/kg IV every 12 hours during the first
7 days of life and every 8 hours thereafter) for 10-14 days,  or
Procaine penicillin G, 50,000 units/kg IM daily in a single
dose for 10-14 days.  If more than 1 day of therapy is missed, the entire course
should be restarted. An infant whose complete evaluation was normal
and whose mother was a) treated for syphilis during pregnancy with
erythromycin, or b) treated for syphilis less than 1 month before
delivery, or c) treated with an appropriate regimen before or
during pregnancy but did not yet have an adequate serologic
response should be treated with benzathine penicillin G, 50,000
units/kg IM in a single dose. In some cases, infants with a normal
complete evaluation for whom follow-up can be assured can be
followed  closely  without  treatment.   Treatment  of  Older  Infants  and  Children  with
Congenital Syphilis  After the newborn period, children diagnosed with syphilis
should have a CSF examination to exclude neurosyphilis and records
should be reviewed to assess whether the child has congenital or
acquired syphilis (see Primary and Secondary Syphilis and Latent
Syphilis). Any child who is thought to have congenital syphilis (or
who has neurologic involvement) should be treated with aqueous
crystalline penicillin G, 200,000-300,000 units/kg/day IV or IM
(administered  as  50,000  units/kg  every  4-6  hours)  for  10-14  days.   Follow-Up   A
seroreactive infant (or an infant whose mother was
seroreactive at delivery) who is not treated for congenital
syphilis during the perinatal period should receive careful
follow-up examinations at 1 month and at 2, 3, 6, and 12 months
after therapy. Nontreponemal antibody titers should decline by 3
months of age and should be nonreactive by 6 months of age if the
infant was not infected and the titers were the result of passive
transfer of antibody from the mother. If these titers are found to
be stable or increasing, the child should be re-evaluated,
including CSF examination, and fully treated. Passively transferred
treponemal antibodies may be present for as long as 1 year. If they
are present greater than 1 year, the infant should be re-evaluated
and treated for congenital syphilis.  Treated infants also should be followed every 2-3
months to
assure that nontreponemal antibody titers decline; these infants
should have become nonreactive by 6 months of age (response may be
slower for infants treated after the neonatal period). Treponemal
tests should not be used to evaluate response to treatment because
test results can remain positive despite effective therapy if the
child was infected. Infants with CSF pleocytosis should undergo CSF
examination every 6 months, or until the cell count is normal. If
the cell count is still abnormal after 2 years, or if a downward
trend is not present at each examination, the child should be
re-treated. The VDRL-CSF also should be checked at 6 months; if
still  reactive,  the  infant  should  be  re-treated.   Follow-up  of  children  treated  for
congenital syphilis after
the newborn period should be the same as that prescribed for
congenital syphilis among neonates.  Special Considerations  Penicillin Allergy  Children
who require treatment for syphilis after the newborn
period, but who have a history of penicillin allergy, should be
treated with penicillin after desensitization, if necessary. Skin
testing may be helpful in some patients and settings (see
Management of the Patient With a History of Penicillin Allergy).  HIV Infection  Mothers
of infants with congenital syphilis should be tested
for HIV. Infants born to mothers who have HIV infection should be
referred for evaluation and appropriate follow-up.  No data exist to suggest that infants
with congenital syphilis
whose mothers are coinfected with HIV require different evaluation,
therapy, or follow-up for syphilis than is recommended for all
infants.   Management  of  the  Patient  With  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy   No  proven
alternatives to penicillin are available for
treating neurosyphilis, congenital syphilis, or syphilis among
pregnant women. Penicillin also is recommended for use, whenever
possible, with HIV-infected patients. Unfortunately, 3%-10% of the
adult population in the United States have experienced urticaria,
angioedema, or anaphylaxis (upper airway obstruction, bronchospasm,
or hypotension) with penicillin therapy. Re-administration of
penicillin can cause severe immediate reactions among these
patients. Because anaphylactic reactions to penicillin can be
fatal, every effort should be made to avoid administering
penicillin to penicillin-allergic patients, unless the anaphylactic
sensitivity has been removed by acute desensitization.  However, only approximately
10% of persons who report a
history of severe allergic reactions to penicillin are still
allergic. With the passage of time after an allergic reaction to
penicillin, most persons who have experienced a severe reaction
stop expressing penicillin-specific IgE. These persons can be
treated safely with penicillin. Many studies have found that skin
testing with the major and minor determinants can reliably identify
persons at high risk for penicillin reactions. Although these
reagents are easily generated and have been available in academic
centers for greater than 30 years, currently only
penicilloyl-poly-L-lysine (Pre-Pen, the major determinant) and
penicillin G are available commercially. Experts estimate that
testing with only the major determinant and penicillin G detects
90%-97% of the currently allergic patients. However, because skin
testing without the minor determinants would still miss 3%-10% of
allergic patients, and serious or fatal reactions can occur among
these minor determinant positive patients, experts suggest caution
when the full battery of skin test reagents listed in the table is
not available.  Recommendations  If the full battery of skin-test reagents is available,
including the major and minor determinants (see Penicillin Allergy
Skin Testing), patients who report a history of penicillin reaction
and are skin-test negative can receive conventional penicillin
therapy.  Skin-test  positive  patients  should  be  desensitized.   If  the  full  battery  of
skin-test reagents, including the minor
determinants, is not available, the patient should be skin tested
using penicilloyl (the major determinant, Pre-Pen) and penicillin
G. Those with positive tests should be desensitized. Some experts
believe that persons with negative tests, in that situation, should
be regarded as probably allergic and should be desensitized. Others
suggest that those with negative skin tests can be test-dosed
gradually with oral penicillin in a monitored setting in which
treatment for anaphylactic reaction is possible.  Penicillin Allergy Skin Testing  Patients
at high risk for anaphylaxis (i.e., a history of
penicillin-related anaphylaxis, asthma or other diseases that would
make anaphylaxis more dangerous, or therapy with beta-adrenergic
blocking agents) should be tested with 100-fold dilutions of the
full-strength skin-test reagents before testing with full-strength
reagents. In these situations, patients should be tested in a
monitored setting in which treatment for an anaphylactic reaction
is possible. If possible, the patient should not have taken
antihistamines (e.g., chlorpheniramine maleate or terfenadine
during the past 24 hours, diphenhydramine HCl or hydroxyzine during
the past 4 days, or astemizole during the past 3 weeks).  Reagents (Adapted from Beall
{14}) #  Major Determinant  
    Benzylpenicilloyl poly-L-lysine (Pre-Pen {Taylor Pharmacal
    Company, Decatur, Illinois}) (6 x 10-5M).  Minor Determinant Precursors ##  
    Benzylpenicillin G (10-2M, 3.3 mg/mL, 6000 U/mL),  
    Benzylpenicilloate (10-2M, 3.3 mg/mL),  
    Benzylpenilloate (or penicilloyl propylamine)(10-2M, 3.3
    mg/mL).  Positive Control  
    Commercial histamine for epicutaneous skin testing (1 mg/mL).  Negative Control  
    Diluent used to dissolve other reagents, usually phenol
    saline.  Procedures  Dilute the antigens 100-fold for preliminary testing if the
patient has had a life-threatening reaction, or 10-fold if the
patient has had another type of immediate, generalized reaction
within the past year.  Epicutaneous (prick) tests. Duplicate drops of skin-test
reagent are placed on the volar surface of the forearm. The
underlying epidermis is pierced with a 26-gauge needle without
drawing blood.  An epicutaneous test is positive if the average wheal diameter
after 15 minutes is 4 mm larger than that of negative controls;
otherwise, the test is negative. The histamine controls should be
positive to assure that results are not falsely negative because of
the effect of antihistaminic drugs.  Intradermal test. If epicutaneous tests are negative,
duplicate 0.02 mL intradermal injections of negative control and
antigen solutions are made into the volar surface of the forearm
using a 26- or 27-gauge needle on a syringe. The crossed diameters
of  the  wheals  induced  by  the  injections  should  be  recorded.   An  intradermal  test  is
positive if the average wheal diameter
15 minutes after injection is 2 mm or larger than the initial wheal
size and also is at least 2 mm larger than the negative controls.
Otherwise, the tests are negative.  Desensitization  Patients who have a positive skin
test to one of the
penicillin determinants can be desensitized. This is a
straightforward, relatively safe procedure that can be done orally
or IV. Although the two approaches have not been compared, oral
desensitization is thought to be safer, simpler, and easier.
Patients should be desensitized in a hospital setting because
serious IgE-mediated allergic reactions, although unlikely, can
occur. Desensitization can usually be completed in about 4 hours,
after which the first dose of penicillin is given (Table_1).
 STD
programs should have a referral center where patients with positive
skin tests can be desensitized. After desensitization, patients
must be maintained on penicillin continuously for the duration of
the  course  of  therapy.   DISEASES  CHARACTERIZED  BY  URETHRITIS  AND  CERVICITIS  
Management of the Patient with Urethritis  Urethritis, or inflammation of the urethra, is
caused by an
infection characterized by the discharge of mucoid or purulent
material and by burning during urination. However, asymptomatic
infections are common. The two bacterial agents primarily
responsible for urethritis among men are N. gonorrhoeae and C.
trachomatis. Testing to determine the specific diagnosis is
recommended because both of these infections are reportable to
state health departments and because with a specific diagnosis,
treatment compliance may be better and the likelihood of partner
notification may be improved. If diagnostic tools (e.g., Gram stain
and microscope) are unavailable, health-care providers should treat
patients for both infections. The added expense of treating a
person with nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) for both infections also
should encourage the health-care provider to make a specific
diagnosis. (See Nongonococcal Urethritis, Chlamydial Infections,
and  Gonococcal  Infections.)   Nongonococcal  Urethritis   NGU,  or  inflammation  of  the
urethra not caused by gonococcal
infection, is characterized by a mucoid or purulent urethral
discharge. In the presence or absence of a discharge, NGU may be
diagnosed by greater than or equal to 5 polymorphonuclear
leukocytes per oil immersion field on a smear of an intraurethral
swab specimen. Increasingly, the leukocyte esterase test (LET) is
being used to screen urine from asymptomatic males for evidence of
urethritis (either gonococcal or nongonococcal). The diagnosis of
urethritis among males tested with LET should be confirmed with a
Gram-stained smear of a urethral swab specimen. C. trachomatis is
the most frequent cause of NGU (23%-55% of cases); however,
prevalence varies among age groups, with lower prevalence found
among older men. Ureaplasma urealyticum causes 20%-40% of cases,
and Trichomonas vaginalis 2%-5%. HSV is occasionally responsible
for cases of NGU. The etiology of the remaining cases of NGU is
unknown.  Complications of NGU among men infected with C. trachomatis
include epididymitis and Reiter's syndrome. Female sex partners of
men who have NGU are at risk for chlamydial infection and
associated complications.  Recommended Regimen  Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times
a day for 7 days.###
Alternative Regimens  Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 7 days
or
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 800 mg orally 4 times a day for 7
days.  If a patient cannot tolerate high-dose erythromycin schedules,
one of the following regimens may be used:  Erythromycin base 250 mg orally 4 times a
day for 14 days
or
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 400 mg orally 4 times a day for 14
days.  Treatment with the recommended regimen has been demonstrated
in most cases to result in alleviation of symptoms and in
microbiologic cure of infection. If the etiologic organism is
susceptible to the antimicrobial agent used, sequelae specific to
that organism will be prevented, as will further transmission; this
is especially important for cases of NGU caused by C. trachomatis.  Follow-Up  Patients
should be instructed to return for evaluation if
symptoms persist or recur after completion of therapy. Patients
with persistent or recurrent urethritis should be re-treated with
the initial regimen if they failed to comply with the treatment
regimen or if they were re-exposed to an untreated sex partner.
Otherwise, a wet mount examination and culture of an intraurethral
swab specimen for T. vaginalis should be performed; if negative,
the patient should be retreated with an alternative regimen
extended to 14 days (e.g., erythromycin base 500 mg orally 4 times
a day for 14 days). The use of alternative regimens ensures
treatment  of  possible  tetracycline-resistant  U.  urealyticum.   Effective  regimens  have
not been identified for treating
patients who experience persistent symptoms or frequent recurrences
following treatment with doxycycline and erythromycin. Urologic
examinations do not usually reveal a specific etiology. Such
patients should be assured that, although they have persistent or
frequently recurring urethritis, the condition is not known to
cause complications among them or their sex partners and is not
known to be sexually transmitted. However, men exposed to a new sex
partner should be re-evaluated. Symptoms alone, without
documentation of signs or laboratory evidence of urethral
inflammation, are not a sufficient basis for re-treatment.  Management of Sex Partners 
Patients should be instructed to refer sex partners for
evaluation and treatment. Since exposure intervals have received
limited evaluation, the following recommendations are somewhat
arbitrary. Sex partners of symptomatic patients should be evaluated
and treated if their last sexual contact with the index patient was
within 30 days of onset of symptoms. If the index patient is
asymptomatic, sex partners whose last sexual contact with the index
patient was within 60 days of diagnosis should be evaluated and
treated. If the patient's last sexual intercourse preceded the time
intervals previously described, the most recent sex partner should
be treated. A specific diagnosis may facilitate partner referral
and partner cooperation. Therefore, testing for both gonorrhea and
chlamydia is encouraged.  Patients should be instructed to abstain from sexual
intercourse until patient and partners are cured. In the absence of
microbiologic test-of-cure, this means when therapy is completed
and patient and partners are without symptoms or signs.  Special Considerations  HIV
Infection  Persons with HIV infection and NGU should receive the same
treatment  as  patients  without  HIV  infection.   Management  of  the  Patient  With
Mucopurulent Cervicitis  Mucopurulent cervicitis (MPC) is characterized by a yellow
endocervical exudate visible in the endocervical canal or in an
endocervical swab specimen. Some experts also make the diagnosis on
the basis of an increased number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes on
cervical Gram stain. The condition is asymptomatic among many
women, but some may experience an abnormal vaginal discharge and
abnormal vaginal bleeding (e.g., following intercourse). The
condition can be caused by C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae,
although in most cases neither organism can be isolated. Patients
with MPC should have cervical specimens tested for C. trachomatis
and cultured for N. gonorrhoeae. MPC is not a sensitive predictor
of infection; however, most women with C. trachomatis or N.
gonorrhoeae do not have MPC.  Treatment  The results of tests for C. trachomatis or N.
gonorrhoeae
should determine the need for treatment, unless the likelihood of
infection with either organism is high or unless the patient is
unlikely to return for treatment. Treatment for MPC should include
the following:  
    Treatment for gonorrhea and chlamydia in patient populations
    with high prevalence of both infections, such as patients seen at
    many STD clinics.  
    Treatment for chlamydia only, if the prevalence of N.
    gonorrhoeae is low but the likelihood of chlamydia is substantial.  
    Await test results if the prevalence of both infections are
    low and if compliance with a recommendation for a return visit is
    likely.  Follow-Up  Follow-up should be as recommended for the infections for
which the woman is being treated.  Management of Sex Partners  Management of sex
partners of women with MPC should be
appropriate for the STD (C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae)
identified. Partners should be notified, examined, and treated on
the basis of test results. However, partners of patients who are
treated presumptively should receive the same treatment as the
index patient.  Special Considerations  HIV Infection  Persons with HIV infection and MPC
should receive the same
treatment as patients without HIV infection.  Chlamydial Infections  Chlamydial genital
infection is common among adolescents and
young adults in the United States. Asymptomatic infection is common
among both men and women. Testing sexually active adolescent girls
for chlamydial infection should be routine during gynecologic
examination, even if symptoms are not present. Screening of young
adult women 20-24 years of age also is suggested, particularly for
those who do not consistently use barrier contraceptives and who
have new or multiple partners. Periodic surveys of chlamydial
prevalence among these groups should be conducted to confirm the
validity of using these recommendations in specific clinical
settings.   Chlamydial  Infections  Among  Adolescents  and  Adults   The  following
recommended treatment regimens or the
alternative regimens relieve symptoms and cure infection. Among
women, several important sequelae may result from C. trachomatis
infection, the most serious among them being PID, ectopic
pregnancy, and infertility. Some women with apparently
uncomplicated cervical infection already have subclinical upper
reproductive tract infection. Treatment of cervical infection is
believed to reduce the likelihood of sequelae, although few studies
have demonstrated that antimicrobial therapy reduces the risk of
subsequent ascending infections or decreases the incidence of
long-term complications of tubal infertility and ectopic pregnancy.
  Treatment of infected patients prevents transmission to sex
partners, and for infected pregnant women may prevent transmission
of C. trachomatis to infants during birth. Treatment of sex
partners will help to prevent re-infection of the index patient and
infection of other partners.  Because of the high prevalence of coinfection with C.
trachomatis among patients with gonococcal infection, presumptive
treatment for chlamydia of patients being treated for gonorrhea is
appropriate, particularly if no diagnostic test for C. trachomatis
infection  will  be  performed  (see  Gonococcal  Infections).   Recommended  Regimens  
Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day for 7 days,
or
Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose.
Alternative Regimens  Ofloxacin 300 mg orally 2 times a day for 7 days
or
Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 7 days
or
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 800 mg orally 4 times a day for 7
days  or
Sulfisoxazole 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 10 days
(inferior  efficacy  to  other  regimens).   Doxycycline  and  azithromycin  appear  similar  in
efficacy and
toxicity; however, the safety and efficacy of azithromycin for
persons less than or equal to 15 years of age have not been
established. Doxycycline has a longer history of extensive use,
safety, efficacy, and the advantage of low cost. Azithromycin has
the advantage of single-dose administration. Ofloxacin is similar
in efficacy to doxycycline and azithromycin, but is more expensive
than doxycycline, cannot be used during pregnancy or with persons
less than or equal to 17 years of age, and offers no advantage in
dosing. Ofloxacin is the only quinolone with proven efficacy
against chlamydial infection. Sulfisoxazole is the least desirable
treatment because of inferior efficacy.  Follow-Up  Patients do not need to be retested
for chlamydia after
completing treatment with doxycycline or azithromycin unless
symptoms persist or re-infection is suspected. Retesting may be
considered 3 weeks after completion of treatment with erythromycin,
sulfisoxazole, or amoxicillin. This is usually unnecessary if the
patient was treated with doxycycline, azithromycin, or ofloxacin.
The validity of chlamydial culture testing performed at less than
3 weeks following completion of therapy among patients failing
therapy has not been established. False-negative results may occur
because of small numbers of chlamydial organisms. In addition,
nonculture tests conducted at less than 3 weeks following
completion of therapy for patients successfully treated may
sometimes be false-positive because of the continued excretion of
dead organisms.  Some studies have demonstrated high rates of infection among
women retested several months following treatment, presumably
because of reinfection. Rescreening women several months following
treatment may be an effective strategy for detecting further
morbidity  in  some  populations.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Patients  should  be
instructed to refer their sex partners for
evaluation and treatment. Because exposure intervals have received
limited evaluation, the following recommendations are somewhat
arbitrary. Sex partners of symptomatic patients with C. trachomatis
should be evaluated and treated for chlamydia if their last sexual
contact with the index patient was within 30 days of onset of the
index patient's symptoms. If the index patient is asymptomatic, sex
partners whose last sexual contact with the index patient was
within 60 days of diagnosis should be evaluated and treated.
Health-care providers should treat the last sex partner even if
last sexual intercourse took place before the foregoing time
intervals.  Patients should be instructed to avoid sex until they and
their partners are cured. In the absence of microbiologic
test-of-cure, this means until therapy is completed and patient and
partner(s) are without symptoms.  Special Considerations  Pregnancy  Doxycycline and
ofloxacin are contraindicated for pregnant
women, and sulfisoxazole is contraindicated for women during
pregnancy near-term and for women who are nursing. The safety and
efficacy of azithromycin among pregnant and lactating women have
not been established. Repeat testing, preferably by culture, after
completing therapy with the following regimens is recommended
because there are few data regarding the effectiveness of these
regimens, and the frequent gastrointestinal side effects of
erythromycin may discourage a patient from complying with the
prescribed  treatment.   Recommended  Regimen  for  Pregnant  Women   Erythromycin
base 500 mg orally 4 times a day for 7 days.
Alternative Regimens for Pregnant Women  Erythromycin base 250 mg orally 4 times a
day for 14 days
or
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 800 mg orally 4 times a day for 7
days  or
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 400 mg orally 4 times a day for 14
days  or
If erythromycin cannot be tolerated:
Amoxicillin 500 mg orally 3 times a day for 7-10 days.  NOTE: Erythromycin estolate is
contraindicated during
pregnancy because of drug-related hepatotoxicity. Few data exist
concerning  the  efficacy  of  amoxicillin.   HIV  Infection   Persons  with  HIV  infection  and
chlamydial infection should
receive  the  same  treatment  as  patients  without  HIV  infection.   Chlamydial  Infections
Among Infants  Prenatal screening of pregnant women can prevent chlamydial
infection among neonates. Pregnant women less than 25 years of age
and those with new or multiple sex partners should, in particular,
be targeted for screening. Periodic surveys of chlamydial
prevalence can be conducted to confirm the validity of using these
recommendations  in  specific  clinical  settings.   C.  trachomatis  infection  of  neonates
results from perinatal
exposure to the mother's infected cervix. The prevalence of C.
trachomatis infection generally exceeds 5% among pregnant women,
regardless of race/ethnicity or socioeconomic status. Neonatal
ocular prophylaxis with silver nitrate solution or antibiotic
ointments is ineffective in preventing perinatal transmission of
chlamydial infection from mother to infant. However, ocular
prophylaxis with those agents does prevent gonococcal ophthalmia
and should be continued for that reason (see Prevention of
Ophthalmia Neonatorum).  Initial C. trachomatis perinatal infection involves mucous
membranes of the eye, oropharynx, urogenital tract, and rectum. C.
trachomatis infection among neonates can most often be recognized
because of conjunctivitis developing 5-12 days after birth.
Chlamydia is the most frequent identifiable infectious cause of
ophthalmia neonatorum. C. trachomatis also is a common cause of
subacute, afebrile pneumonia with onset from 1 to 3 months of age.
Asymptomatic infections of the oropharynx, genital tract, and
rectum among neonates also occur.  Ophthalmia Neonatorum Caused by C. trachomatis
 A chlamydial etiology should be considered for all infants
with  conjunctivitis  through  30  days  of  age.   Diagnostic  Considerations   Sensitive  and
specific methods to diagnose chlamydial
ophthalmia for the neonate include isolation by tissue culture and
nonculture tests, direct fluorescent antibody tests, and
immunoassays. Giemsa-stained smears are specific for C.
trachomatis, but are not sensitive. Specimens must contain
conjunctival cells, not exudate alone. Specimens for culture
isolation and nonculture tests should be obtained from the everted
eyelid using a dacron-tipped swab or the swab specified by the
manufacturer's test kit. A specific diagnosis of C. trachomatis
infection confirms the need for chlamydial treatment not only for
the neonate, but also for the mother and her sex partner(s). Ocular
exudate from infants being evaluated for chlamydial conjunctivitis
should also be tested for N. gonorrhoeae.  Recommended Regimen  Erythromycin 50
mg/kg/day orally divided into 4 doses for 10-
14 days.  Topical antibiotic therapy alone is inadequate for treatment
of chlamydial infection and is unnecessary when systemic treatment
is  undertaken.   Follow-Up   The  possibility  of  chlamydial  pneumonia  should  be
considered.
The efficacy of erythromycin treatment is approximately 80%; a
second course of therapy may be required. Follow-up of infants to
determine resolution is recommended.  Management of Mothers and Their Sex Partners
 The mothers of infants who have chlamydial infection and the
mother's sex partners should be evaluated and treated following the
treatment recommendations for adults with chlamydial infections
(see Chlamydial Infections Among Adolescents and Adults).  Infant Pneumonia Caused
by C. trachomatis  Characteristic signs of chlamydial pneumonia among infants
include a repetitive staccato cough with tachypnea, and
hyperinflation and bilateral diffuse infiltrates on a chest
roentgenogram. Wheezing is rare, and infants are typically
afebrile. Peripheral eosinophilia, documented in a complete blood
count, is sometimes observed among infants with chlamydial
pneumonia. Because variation from this clinical presentation is
common, initial treatment and diagnostic tests should encompass C.
trachomatis for all infants 1-3 months of age who have possible
pneumonia.   Diagnostic  Considerations   Specimens  should  be  collected  from  the
nasopharynx for
chlamydial testing. Tissue culture remains the definitive standard
for chlamydial pneumonia; nonculture tests can be used with the
knowledge that nonculture tests of nasopharyngeal specimens produce
lower sensitivity and specificity than nonculture tests of ocular
specimens. Tracheal aspirates and lung biopsy specimens, if
collected, should be tested for C. trachomatis.  The microimmunofluorescence test for
C. trachomatis antibody
is useful but not widely available. An acute IgM antibody titer
greater than or equal to 1:32 is strongly suggestive of C.
trachomatis pneumonia.  Because of the delay in obtaining test results for chlamydia,
inclusion of an agent active against C. trachomatis in the
antibiotic regimen must frequently be decided on the basis of the
clinical and radiologic findings. Conducting tests for chlamydial
infection is worthwhile, not only to assist in the management of an
infant's illness, but also to determine the need for treatment of
the mother and her sex partners.  Recommended Regimen  Erythromycin 50 mg/kg/day
orally divided into 4 doses for 10-
14 days.  Follow-Up  The effectiveness of erythromycin treatment is approximately
80%; a second course of therapy may be required. Follow-up of
infants is recommended to determine that the pneumonia has
resolved. Some infants with chlamydial pneumonia have had abnormal
pulmonary  function  tests  later  in  childhood.   Management  of  Mothers  and  Their  Sex
Partners  Mothers of infants who have chlamydial infection and the
mother's sex partners should be evaluated and treated according to
the recommended treatment of adults with chlamydial infections (see
Chlamydial  Infections  Among  Adolescents  and  Adults).   Infants  Born  to  Mothers  Who
Have Chlamydial Infection  Infants born to mothers who have untreated chlamydia are
at
high risk for infection and should be evaluated and treated as for
infants with ophthalmia neonatorum caused by C. trachomatis.  Chlamydial Infections
Among Children  Sexual abuse must be considered a cause of chlamydial
infection among preadolescent children, although perinatally
transmitted C. trachomatis infection of the nasopharynx, urogenital
tract, and rectum may persist beyond 1 year (see Sexual Assault or
Abuse of Children). Because of the potential for a criminal
investigation and legal proceedings for sexual abuse, diagnosis of
C. trachomatis among preadolescent children requires the high
specificity provided by isolation in cell culture. The cultures
should be confirmed by microscopic identification of the
characteristic intracytoplasmic inclusions, preferably by
fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal antibodies specific for C.
trachomatis.  Diagnostic Considerations  Nonculture chlamydia tests should not be used
because of the
possibility of false-positive test results. With respiratory tract
specimens, false-positive test results can occur because of
cross-reaction of test reagents with Chlamydia pneumoniae; with
genital and anal specimens, false-positive test results occur
because of cross-reaction with fecal flora.  Recommended Regimen  Children who weigh
less than 45 kg  Erythromycin 50 mg/kg/day divided into four doses for 10-14
days.  NOTE: The effectiveness of erythromycin treatment is
approximately 80%; a second course of therapy may be required.  Children who weigh
greater than or equal to 45 kg but who are
less than 8 years of age  Use the same treatment regimens for these children as the
adult regimens of erythromycin (see Chlamydial Infections Among
Adolescents  and  Adults).   Children  greater  than  or  equal  to  8  years  of  age   Use  the
same treatment regimens for these children as the
adult regimens of doxycycline or tetracycline (see Chlamydial
Infections Among Adolescents and Adults). Adult regimens of
azithromycin  also  may  be  considered  for  adolescents.   Other  Management
Considerations  See Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children.  Follow-Up  Follow-up cultures
are necessary to ensure that treatment has
been effective.  Gonococcal Infections  Gonococcal Infections Among Adolescents and
Adults  An estimated 1 million new infections with N. gonorrhoeae
occur in the United States each year. Most infections among men
produce symptoms that cause the person to seek curative treatment
soon enough to prevent serious sequelae -- but not soon enough to
prevent transmission to others. Many infections among women do not
produce recognizable symptoms until complications such as PID have
occurred. PID, whether symptomatic or asymptomatic, can cause tubal
scarring leading to infertility or ectopic pregnancy. Because
gonococcal infections among women are often asymptomatic, a primary
measure for controlling gonorrhea in the United States has been the
screening  of  high-risk  women.   Uncomplicated  Gonococcal  Infections   Recommended
Regimens  Ceftriaxone 125 mg IM in a single dose
or
Cefixime 400 mg orally in a single dose
or
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally in a single dose
or
Ofloxacin 400 mg orally in a single dose
PLUS
A regimen effective against possible coinfection with C.
trachomatis, such as doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day for 7
days.  Many antibiotics are safe and effective for treating
gonorrhea, eradicating N. gonorrhoeae, ending the possibility of
further transmission, relieving symptoms, and reducing the chances
of sequelae.  Selection of a treatment regimen for N. gonorrhoeae infection
requires consideration of the anatomic site of infection,
resistance of N. gonorrhoeae strains to antimicrobials, the
possibility of concurrent infection with C. trachomatis, and the
side effects and costs of the various treatment regimens.  Because coinfection with C.
trachomatis is common, persons
treated for gonorrhea should be treated presumptively with a
regimen that is effective against C. trachomatis (see Chlamydial
Infections).  Most experts agree that other regimens recommended for the
treatment of C. trachomatis infection are also likely to be
satisfactory for the treatment of co- infection (see Chlamydial
Infections). However, studies have not been conducted to
investigate possible interactions between other treatments for N.
gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, including interactions influencing
the effectiveness and side effects of cotreatment.  In clinical trials, these recommended
regimens cured greater
than 95% of anal and genital infections; any of the regimens may be
used for uncomplicated anal or genital infection. Published studies
indicate that ceftriaxone 125 mg and ciprofloxacin 500 mg can cure
greater than or equal to 90% of pharyngeal infections. If
pharyngeal infection is a concern, one of these two regimens should
be used.  Ceftriaxone in a single dose of either 125 mg or 250 mg
provides sustained, high bactericidal levels in the blood.
Extensive clinical experience indicates that both doses are safe
and effective for the treatment of uncomplicated gonorrhea at all
sites. In the past, the 250 mg dose has been recommended on the
supposition that the routine use of a higher dose may forestall the
development of resistance. However, on the basis of ceftriaxone's
activity against N. gonorrhoeae, its pharmacokinetics, and the
results in clinical trials of doses as low as 62.5 mg, the 125 mg
dose appears to have a therapeutic reserve at least as large as
that of other accepted treatment regimens. No ceftriaxone-resistant
strains of N. gonorrhoeae have been reported. The drawbacks of
ceftriaxone are that it is expensive, currently unavailable in
vials of less than 250 mg, and must be administered by injection.
Some health-care providers believe that the discomfort of the
injection may be reduced by using 1% lidocaine solution as a
diluent. Ceftriaxone also may abort incubating syphilis, a concern
when gonorrhea treatment is not accompanied by a 7-day course of
doxycycline or erythromycin for the presumptive treatment of
chlamydia.  Cefixime has an antimicrobial spectrum similar to that of
ceftriaxone, but the 400 mg oral dose does not provide as high nor
as sustained a bactericidal level as does 125 mg of ceftriaxone.
Cefixime appears to be effective against pharyngeal gonococcal
infection, but few patients with pharyngeal infection have been
included in studies. No gonococcal strains resistant to cefixime
have been reported. The advantage of cefixime is that it can be
administered orally. It is not known if the 400 mg dose can cure
incubating syphilis.  Ciprofloxacin at a dose of 500 mg provides sustained
bactericidal levels in the blood. Clinical trials have demonstrated
that both 250 mg and 500 mg doses are safe and effective for the
treatment of uncomplicated gonorrhea at all sites. Most clinical
experience in the United States has been with the 500 mg dose.
Ciprofloxacin can be administered orally and is less expensive than
ceftriaxone. No resistance has been reported in the United States,
but strains with decreased susceptibility to some quinolones are
becoming common in Asia and have been reported in North America.
The 500 mg dose is recommended, rather than the 250 mg dose,
because of the trend toward decreasing susceptibility to quinolones
and because of rare reports of treatment failure. Quinolones are
contraindicated for pregnant or nursing women and for persons less
than or equal to 17 years of age on the basis of information from
animal  studies.  Quinolones  are  not  active  against  T.  pallidum.   Ofloxacin  is  active
against N. gonorrhoeae, has favorable
pharmacokinetics, and the 400 mg dose has been effective for the
treatment of uncomplicated anal and genital gonorrhea. In published
studies  a  400  mg  dose  cured  22  (88%)  of  25  pharyngeal  infections.   Alternative
Regimens  
    Spectinomycin 2 g IM in a single dose. Spectinomycin has the
    disadvantages of being injectable, expensive, inactive against T.
    pallidum, and relatively ineffective against pharyngeal gonorrhea.
    In addition, resistant strains have been reported in the United
    States. However, spectinomycin remains useful for the treatment of
    patients who can tolerate neither cephalosporins nor quinolones.  
    Injectable cephalosporin regimens other than ceftriaxone 125
    mg that have demonstrated efficacy against uncomplicated anal or
    genital gonococcal infections include these injectable
    cephalosporins: ceftizoxime 500 mg IM in a single dose; cefotaxime
    500 mg IM in a single dose; cefotetan 1 g IM in a single dose; and
    cefoxitin 2 g IM in a single dose.  None of these injectable cephalosporins offers any
advantage
compared with ceftriaxone, and there is less clinical experience
with them for the treatment of uncomplicated gonorrhea. Of these
four regimens, ceftizoxime 500 mg appears to be the most effective
according to cumulative experience in published clinical trials.  
    Oral cephalosporin regimens other than cefixime 400 mg include
    cefuroxime axetil 1 g orally in a single dose and cefpodoxime
    proxetil 200 mg orally in a single dose. These two regimens have
    anti-gonococcal activity and pharmacokinetics less favorable than
    the 400 mg cefixime regimen, and there is less clinical experience
    with them in the treatment of gonorrhea. They have not been very
    effective against pharyngeal infections among the few patients
    studied.  
    Quinolone regimens other than ciprofloxacin 500 mg and
    ofloxacin 400 mg include enoxacin 400 mg orally in a single dose;
    lomefloxacin 400 mg orally in a single dose; and norfloxacin 800 mg
    orally in a single dose. They appear to be safe and effective for
    the treatment of uncomplicated gonorrhea, but none appears to offer
    any advantage over ciprofloxacin at a dose of 500 mg or ofloxacin
    at 400 mg.  
    Enoxacin and norfloxacin are active against N. gonorrhoeae,
    have favorable pharmacokinetics, and have been effective in
    clinical trials, but there is minimal experience with their use in
    the United States. Lomefloxacin is effective against N. gonorrhoeae
    and has very favorable pharmacokinetics, but there are few
    published clinical studies to support its use for the treatment of
    gonorrhea, and there is little experience with its use in the
    United States.  Many other antimicrobials are active against N. gonorrhoeae.
These guidelines are not intended to be a comprehensive list of all
effective treatment regimens.  Other Management Considerations  Persons treated for
gonorrhea should be screened for syphilis
by serology when gonorrhea is first detected. Gonorrhea treatment
regimens that include ceftriaxone or a 7-day course of either
doxycycline or erythromycin may cure incubating syphilis, but few
data relevant to this topic are available.  Follow-Up  Persons who have uncomplicated
gonorrhea and who are treated
with any of the regimens in these guidelines need not return for a
test-of-cure. Those persons with symptoms persisting after
treatment should be evaluated by culture for N. gonorrhoeae, and
any gonococci isolated should be tested for antimicrobial
susceptibility. Infections detected after treatment with one of the
recommended regimens more commonly occur because of reinfection
rather than treatment failure, indicating a need for improved sex
partner referral and patient education. Persistent urethritis,
cervicitis, or proctitis also may be caused by C. trachomatis and
other organisms.  Management of Sex Partners  Patients should be instructed to refer
sex partners for
evaluation and treatment. Sex partners of symptomatic patients who
have N. gonorrhoeae infection should be evaluated and treated for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis infections, if their last sexual
contact with the patient was within 30 days of onset of the
patient's symptoms. If the index patient is asymptomatic, sex
partners whose last sexual contact with the patient was within 60
days of diagnosis should be evaluated and treated. Health-care
providers should treat the most recent sex partner, if last sexual
intercourse took place before those time periods.  Patients should be instructed to avoid
sexual intercourse
until patient and partner(s) are cured. In the absence of
microbiologic test-of-cure, this means until therapy is completed
and  patient  and  partner(s)  are  without  symptoms.   Special  Considerations   Allergy,
Intolerance, or Adverse Reactions  Persons who cannot tolerate cephalosporins should,
in general,
be treated with quinolones. Those who can take neither
cephalosporins nor quinolones should be treated with spectinomycin,
except for those patients who are suspected or known to have
pharyngeal infection. For pharyngeal infections among persons who
can tolerate neither a cephalosporin nor quinolones, some studies
suggest that trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole may be effective at a
dose of 720 mg trimethoprim/3,600 mg sulfamethoxazole orally once
a day for 5 days.  Pregnancy  Pregnant women should not be treated with quinolones or
tetracyclines. Those infected with N. gonorrhoeae should be treated
with a recommended or alternate cephalosporin. Women who cannot
tolerate a cephalosporin should be administered a single dose of 2
g of spectinomycin IM. Erythromycin is the recommended treatment
for presumptive or diagnosed C. trachomatis infection during
pregnancy  (see  Chlamydial  Infections).   HIV  Infection   Persons  with  HIV  infection  and
gonococcal infection should
receive  the  same  treatment  as  persons  not  infected  with  HIV.   Gonococcal
Conjunctivitis  Only one North American study of the treatment of gonococcal
conjunctivitis among adults has been published in recent years. In
that study, 12 of 12 patients responded favorably to a single 1 g
IM injection of ceftriaxone. The recommendations that follow
reflect  the  opinions  of  expert  consultants.   Treatment   Recommended  Regimen   A
single, 1 g dose of ceftriaxone should be administered IM,
and the infected eye should be lavaged with saline solution once.  Management of Sex
Partners  As for uncomplicated infections, patients should be instructed
to refer sex partner(s) for evaluation and treatment (see
Uncomplicated  Gonococcal  Infections,  Management  of  Sex  Partners).   Disseminated
Gonococcal Infection  Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) results from
gonococcal bacteremia, often resulting in petechial or pustular
acral skin lesions, asymmetrical arthalgias, tenosynovitis or
septic arthritis -- and is occasionally complicated by hepatitis
and, rarely, by endocarditis or meningitis. Strains of N.
gonorrhoeae that cause DGI tend to cause little genital
inflammation. These strains have become uncommon in the United
States during the past decade.  No North American studies of the treatment of DGI have
been
published recently. The recommendations that follow reflect the
opinions of expert consultants.  Treatment  Hospitalization is recommended for initial
therapy, especially
for patients who cannot be relied on to comply with treatment, for
those for whom the diagnosis is uncertain, and for those who have
purulent synovial effusions or other complications. Patients should
be examined for clinical evidence of endocarditis and meningitis.
Patients treated for DGI should be treated presumptively for
concurrent C. trachomatis infection.  Recommended Initial Regimen  Ceftriaxone 1 g IM
or IV every 24 hours.
Alternative Initial Regimens  Cefotaxime 1 g IV every 8 hours
or
Ceftizoxime 1 g IV every 8 hours
or  For persons allergic to B-lactam drugs:
Spectinomycin 2 g IM every 12 hours.  All regimens should be continued for 24-48 hours
after
improvement begins; then therapy may be switched to one of the
following regimens to complete a full week of antimicrobial
therapy:  Cefixime 400 mg orally 2 times a day
or
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2 times a day.  NOTE: Ciprofloxacin is contraindicated for
children,
adolescents less than or equal to 17 years of age, and pregnant and
lactating  women.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Gonococcal  infection  is  often
asymptomatic in sex partners of
patients with DGI. As for uncomplicated infections, patients should
be instructed to refer sex partner(s) for evaluation and treatment
(see Uncomplicated Gonococcal Infections, Management of Sex
Partners).  Gonococcal Meningitis and Endocarditis  Recommended Initial Regimen  1-2
g  of  ceftriaxone  IV  every  12  hours.   Therapy  for  meningitis  should  be  continued  for
10-14 days and
for endocarditis for at least 4 weeks. Treatment of complicated DGI
should be undertaken in consultation with an expert.  Management of Sex Partners  As
for uncomplicated infections, patients should be instructed
to refer sex partners for evaluation and treatment (see
Uncomplicated  Gonococcal  Infections,  Management  of  Sex  Partners).   Gonococcal
Infections Among Infants  Gonococcal infection among neonates usually results from
peripartum exposure to infected cervical exudate of the mother.
Gonococcal infection among neonates is usually an acute illness
beginning 2-5 days after birth. The incidence of N. gonorrhoeae
among neonates varies in U.S. communities, depends on the
prevalence of infection among pregnant women, on whether pregnant
women are screened for gonorrhea, and on whether newborns receive
ophthalmia prophylaxis. The prevalence of infection is less than 1%
in most prenatal patient populations, but may be higher in some
settings.  Of greatest concern are complications of ophthalmia neonatorum
and sepsis, including arthritis and meningitis. Less serious
manifestations at sites of infection include rhinitis, vaginitis,
urethritis, and inflammation at sites of intrauterine fetal
monitoring.   Ophthalmia  Neonatorum  Caused  by  N.  gonorrhoeae   In  most  patient
populations in the United States, C.
trachomatis and nonsexually transmitted agents are more common
causes of neonatal conjunctivitis than N. gonorrhoeae. However, N.
gonorrhoeae is especially important because gonococcal ophthalmia
may  result  in  perforation  of  the  globe  and  in  blindness.   Diagnostic  Considerations  
Infants at high risk for gonococcal ophthalmia in the United
States are those who do not receive ophthalmia prophylaxis, whose
mothers have had no prenatal care, or whose mothers have a history
of STDs or substance abuse. The presence of typical Gram-negative
diplococci in a Gram-stained smear of conjunctival exudate suggests
a diagnosis of N. gonorrhoeae conjunctivitis. Such patients should
be treated presumptively for gonorrhea after obtaining appropriate
cultures for N. gonorrhoeae; appropriate chlamydial testing should
be done simultaneously. The decision not to treat presumptively for
N. gonorrhoeae among patients without evidence of gonococci on a
Gram-stained smear of conjunctival exudate, or among patients for
whom a Gram-stained smear cannot be performed, must be made on a
case-by-case basis after considering the previously described risk
factors.  A specimen of conjunctival exudate also should be cultured for
isolation of N. gonorrhoeae, since culture is needed for definitive
microbiologic identification and for antibiotic susceptibility
testing. Such definitive testing is required because of the public
health and social consequences for the infant and mother that may
result from the diagnosis of gonococcal ophthalmia. Moraxella
catarrhalis and other Neisseria species are uncommon causes of
neonatal conjunctivitis that can mimic N. gonorrhoeae on
Gram-stained smear. To differentiate N. gonorrhoeae from M.
catarrhalis and other Neisseria species, the laboratory should be
instructed to perform confirmatory tests on any colonies that meet
presumptive criteria  for N.  gonorrhoeae.   Recommended  Regimen   Ceftriaxone 25-50
mg/kg IV or IM in a single dose, not to
exceed 125 mg.  NOTE: Topical antibiotic therapy alone is inadequate and is
unnecessary if systemic treatment is administered.  Other Management Considerations 
Simultaneous infection with C. trachomatis has been reported
and should be considered for patients who do not respond
satisfactorily. The mother and infant should be tested for
chlamydial infection at the same time that gonorrhea testing is
done (see Ophthalmia Neonatorum Caused by C. trachomatis).
Ceftriaxone should be administered cautiously among infants with
elevated  bilirubin  levels,  especially  premature  infants.   Follow-Up   Infants  should  be
admitted to the hospital and evaluated for
signs of disseminated infection (e.g., sepsis, arthritis, and
meningitis). One dose of ceftriaxone is adequate for gonococcal
conjunctivitis, but many pediatricians prefer to maintain infants
on antibiotics until cultures are negative at 48-72 hours. The
decision on duration of therapy should be made with input from
experienced physicians.  Management of Mothers and Their Sex Partners  The mothers
of infants with gonococcal infection and their sex
partners should be evaluated and treated following the
recommendations for treatment of gonococcal infections in adults
(see Gonococcal Infections Among Adolescents and Adults).  Disseminated Gonococcal
Infection Among Infants  Sepsis, arthritis, meningitis, or any combination thereof are
rare complications of neonatal gonococcal infection. Gonococcal
scalp abscesses also may develop as a result of fetal monitoring.
Detection of gonococcal infection among neonates who have sepsis,
arthritis, meningitis, or scalp abscesses requires cultures of
blood, CSF, and joint aspirate on chocolate agar. Cultures of
specimens from the conjunctiva, vagina, oropharynx, and rectum onto
gonococcal selective medium are useful to identify sites of primary
infection, especially if inflammation is present. Positive
Gram-stained smears of exudate, CSF, or joint aspirate provide a
presumptive basis for initiating treatment for N. gonorrhoeae.
Diagnoses based on positive Gram-stained smears or presumptive
isolation by cultures should be confirmed with definitive tests on
culture isolates.  Recommended Regimen  Ceftriaxone 25-50 mg/kg/day IV or IM in a
single daily dose
for 7 days, with a duration of 10-14 days, if meningitis is
documented;  or
Cefotaxime 25 mg/kg IV or IM every 12 hours for 7 days, with
a  duration  of  10-14  days,  if  meningitis  is  documented.   Prophylactic  Treatment  for
Infants Whose Mothers Have Gonococcal
Infection  Infants born to mothers who have untreated gonorrhea are at
high risk for infection.  Recommended Regimen in the Absence of Signs of Gonococcal
Infection
  Ceftriaxone 25-50 mg/kg IV or IM, not to exceed 125 mg, in a
single  dose.   Other  Management  Considerations   If  simultaneous  infection  with  C.
trachomatis has been
reported, mother and infant should be tested for chlamydial
infection.  Follow-Up  Follow-up examination is not required.  Management of Mothers
and Their Sex Partners  The mothers of infants with gonococcal infection and the
mother's sex partners should be evaluated and treated following the
recommendations for treatment of gonococcal infections among adults
(see Gonococcal Infections).  Gonococcal Infections Among Children  After the neonatal
period, sexual abuse is the most common
cause of gonococcal infection among preadolescent children (see
Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). Vaginitis is the most common
manifestation of gonococcal infection among preadolescent children.
PID following vaginal infection appears to be less common than
among adults. Among sexually-abused children, anorectal and
pharyngeal infections with N. gonorrhoeae are common and are
frequently  asymptomatic.   Diagnostic  Considerations   Because  of  the  potential
medical/legal use of the test results
for N. gonorrhoeae among children, only standard culture systems
for the isolation of N. gonorrhoeae should be used to diagnose N.
gonorrhoeae for these children. Nonculture gonococcal tests,
including Gram-stained smear, DNA probes, or EIA tests should not
be used; none of these tests have been approved by the FDA for use
in the oropharynx, rectum, or genital tract of children. Specimens
from the vagina, urethra, pharynx, or rectum should be streaked
onto selective media for isolation of N. gonorrhoeae. All
presumptive isolates of N. gonorrhoeae should be confirmed by at
least two tests that involve different principles, e.g.,
biochemical, enzyme substrate, or serologic. Isolates should be
preserved  to  permit  additional  or  repeated  analysis.   Recommended  Regimen  for
Children   Children  Who  Weigh  greater  than  or  equal  to  45  kg   Children  who  weigh
greater than or equal to 45 kg should be
administered the same treatment regimens as those recommended for
adults (see Gonococcal Infections).  Children Who Weigh less than 45 kg  The following
treatment recommendations are for children with
uncomplicated gonococcal vulvovaginitis, cervicitis, urethritis,
pharyngitis, or proctitis.  Ceftriaxone 125 mg IM in a single dose.  Alternative Regimen 
Spectinomycin 40 mg/kg (maximum 2 g) IM in a single dose.  Children Who Weigh less
than 45 kg and Who Have Bacteremia,
Arthritis, or Meningitis  Recommended Regimen  Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg (maximum 1 g)
IM or IV in a single dose
daily for 7 days.  NOTE: For meningitis, increase the duration of treatment to
10-14 days and the maximum dose to 2 g.  Follow-Up  Follow-up cultures of specimens
from infected sites are
necessary  to  ensure  that  treatment  has  been  effective.   Other  Management
Considerations  Only parenteral cephalosporins are recommended for use among
children. Ceftriaxone is approved for all gonococcal indications
among children; cefotaxime is approved for gonococcal ophthalmia
only. Oral cephalosporins (cefixime, cefuroxime axetil,
cefpodoxime) have not received adequate evaluation in the treatment
of gonococcal infections among pediatric patients to recommend
their use. The pharmacokinetic activity of these drugs among adults
cannot be extrapolated to children.  All children with gonococcal infections should be
evaluated
for coinfection with syphilis and C. trachomatis. For a discussion
of issues regarding sexual assault, refer to Sexual Assault or
Abuse of Children.  Ophthalmia Neonatorum Prophylaxis  Instillation of a prophylactic
agent into the eyes of all
newborn infants is recommended to prevent gonococcal ophthalmia
neonatorum and is required by law in most states. Although all the
regimens that follow effectively prevent gonococcal eye disease,
their efficacy in preventing chlamydial eye disease is not clear.
Furthermore, they do not eliminate nasopharyngeal colonization with
C. trachomatis. Treatment of gonococcal and chlamydial infections
among pregnant women is the best method for preventing neonatal
gonococcal and chlamydial disease. However, ocular prophylaxis
should continue because it can prevent gonococcal ophthalmia and,
in some populations, greater than 10% of pregnant women may receive
no prenatal care.  Prophylaxis  Recommended Preparations  Silver nitrate (1%) aqueous
solution in a single application
or
Erythromycin (0.5%) ophthalmic ointment in a single
application  or
Tetracycline ophthalmic ointment (1%) in a single application.
  One of the above preparations should be instilled into the
eyes of every neonate as soon as possible after delivery. If
prophylaxis is delayed (i.e., not administered in the delivery
room), hospitals should establish a monitoring system to see that
all infants receive prophylaxis. All infants should be administered
ocular prophylaxis, whether delivery is vaginal or caesarian.
Single-use tubes or ampules are preferable to multiple-use tubes.
Bacitracin  is  not  effective.   DISEASES  CHARACTERIZED  BY  VAGINAL  DISCHARGE  
Management  of  the  Patient  with  Vaginitis   Vaginitis  is  characterized  by  a  vaginal
discharge (usually) or
vulvar itching and irritation; a vaginal odor may be present. The
three common diseases characterized by vaginitis include
trichomoniasis (caused by T. vaginalis), BV (caused by a
replacement of the normal vaginal flora by an overgrowth of
anaerobic microorganisms and Gardnerella vaginalis), and
candidiasis (usually caused by Candida albicans). MPC caused by C.
trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae may uncommonly cause a vaginal
discharge. Although vulvovaginal candidiasis is not usually
transmitted sexually, it is included here because it is a common
infection among women being evaluated for STDs.  The diagnosis of vaginitis is made
by pH and microscopic
examination of fresh samples of the discharge. The pH of the
vaginal secretions can be determined by narrow-range pH paper for
the elevated pH (greater than 4.5) typical of BV or trichomoniasis.
One way to examine the discharge is to dilute a sample in 1-2 drops
of 0.9% normal saline solution on one slide and 10% potassium
hydroxide (KOH) solution on a second slide. An amine odor detected
immediately after applying KOH suggests either BV or
trichomoniasis. A cover slip is placed on each slide and they are
examined under a microscope at low- and high-dry power. The motile
T. vaginalis or the clue cells of BV are usually easily identified
in the saline specimen. The yeast or pseudohyphae of Candida
species are more easily identified in the KOH specimen. The
presence of objective signs of vulvar inflammation in the absence
of vaginal pathogens, along with a minimal amount of discharge,
suggests the possibility of mechanical or chemical irritation of
the vulva. Culture for T. vaginalis or Candida species is more
sensitive than microscopic examination, but the specificity of
culture for Candida species to diagnose vaginitis is less clear.
Laboratory testing fails to identify a cause among a substantial
minority  of  women.   Bacterial  Vaginosis   BV  is  a  clinical  syndrome  resulting  from
replacement of the
normal H2O2-producing Lactobacillus spp in the vagina with high
concentrations of anaerobic bacteria (e.g., Bacteroides spp,
Mobiluncus spp), G. vaginalis, and Mycoplasma hominis. This
condition is the most prevalent cause of vaginal discharge or
malodor. However, half the women who meet clinical criteria for BV
have no symptoms. The cause of the microbial alteration is not
fully understood. Although BV is associated with sexual activity in
that women who have never been sexually active are rarely affected
and acquisition of BV is associated with having multiple sex
partners, BV is not considered exclusively an STD. Treatment of the
male sex partner has not been found beneficial in preventing the
recurrence  of  BV.   Diagnostic  Considerations   BV  may  be  diagnosed  by  the  use  of
clinical or Gram stain
criteria. Clinical criteria require three of the following symptoms
or signs:  
    A homogeneous, white, noninflammatory discharge that adheres
    to the vaginal walls;  
    The presence of clue cells on microscopic examination;  
    pH of vaginal fluid greater than 4.5;  
    A fishy odor of vaginal discharge before or after addition of
    10% KOH (whiff test).  When Gram stain is used, determining the relative
concentration of the bacterial morphotypes characteristic of the
altered flora of BV is an acceptable laboratory method for
diagnosing BV. Culture of G. vaginalis is not recommended as a
diagnostic tool because it is not specific. G. vaginalis can be
isolated from vaginal cultures among half of normal women.  Treatment  The principal
goal of therapy is to relieve vaginal symptoms
and signs. Therefore, only women with symptomatic disease require
treatment. Because male sex partners of women with BV are not
symptomatic, and because treatment of male partners has not been
shown to alter either the clinical course of BV in women during
treatment or the relapse/reinfection rate, preventing transmission
to  men  is  not  a  goal  of  therapy.   Many  bacterial  flora  characterizing  BV  have  been
recovered
from the endometrium or salpinx of women with PID. BV has been
associated with endometritis, PID, or vaginal cuff cellulitis
following invasive procedures such as endometrial biopsy,
hysterectomy, hysterosalpingography, placement of IUD, caesarian
section, or uterine curettage. A randomized controlled trial found
that treatment of BV with metronidazole substantially reduced
post-abortion PID. Based on these data, it may be reasonable to
consider treatment of BV (symptomatic or asymptomatic) before
performing surgical abortion procedures. However, more data are
needed to consider treatment of asymptomatic patients with BV when
performing other invasive procedures.  Recommended Regimen  Metronidazole 500 mg
orally 2 times a day for 7 days.  NOTE: Patients should be advised to avoid using alcohol
during
treatment  with  metronidazole  and  for  24  hours  thereafter.   Alternative  Regimens  
Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose.
The following alternative regimens have been effective in
clinical trials, although experience with these regimens is
limited.  Clindamycin cream, 2%, one full applicator (5 g)
intravaginally at bedtime for 7 days;  or
Metronidazole gel, 0.75%, one full applicator (5 g)
intravaginally, 2 times a day for 5 days;  or
Clindamycin  300  mg  orally  2  times  a  day  for  7  days.   Oral  metronidazole  has  been
shown in numerous studies to be
efficacious for the treatment of BV, resulting in relief of
symptoms and improvement in clinical course and flora disturbances.
Based on efficacy data from four randomized-controlled trials, the
overall cure rates are 95% for the 7-day regimen and 84% for the 2
g single-dose regimen.  Some health-care providers remain concerned about the
possibility of metronidazole mutagenicity, which has been suggested
by experiments on animals using extremely high and prolonged doses.
However, there is no evidence for mutagenicity in humans. Some
health-care providers prefer the intravaginal route because of lack
of systemic side effects such as mild-to-moderate gastrointestinal
upset and unpleasant taste (mean peak serum concentrations of
metronidazole following intravaginal administration are less than
2% those of standard 500 mg oral doses and mean bioavailability of
clindamycin  cream  is  about  4%).   Follow-Up   Follow-up  visits  are  not  necessary  if
symptoms resolve.
Recurrence of BV is common. The alternative treatment regimens
suitable for BV treatment may be used for treatment of recurrent
disease. No long-term maintenance regimen with any therapeutic
agent is currently available.  Management of Sex Partners  Treatment of sex partners in
clinical trials has not
influenced the woman's response to therapy, nor has it influenced
the relapse or recurrence rate. Therefore, routine treatment of sex
partners  is  not  recommended.   Special  Considerations   Allergy  or  Intolerance  to  the
Recommended Therapy  Clindamycin cream is preferred in case of allergy or
intolerance to metronidazole. Metronidazole gel can be considered
for patients who do not tolerate systemic metronidazole, but
patients allergic to oral metronidazole should not be administered
metronidazole vaginally.  Pregnancy  Because metronidazole is contraindicated during
the first
trimester of pregnancy, clindamycin vaginal cream is the preferred
treatment for BV during the first trimester of pregnancy
(clindamycin cream is recommended instead of oral clindamycin
because of the general desire to limit the exposure of the fetus to
medication). During the second and third trimesters of pregnancy,
oral metronidazole can be used, although the vaginal metronidazole
gel  or  clindamycin  cream  may  be  preferable.   BV  has  been  associated  with  adverse
outcomes of pregnancy
(e.g., premature rupture of the membranes, preterm labor, preterm
delivery), and the organisms found in increased concentration in BV
are also commonly present in postpartum or post-caesarean
endometritis. Whether treatment of BV among pregnant women would
reduce the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes is unknown;
randomized controlled trials have not been conducted.  HIV infection  Persons with HIV
and BV should receive the same treatment as
persons  without  HIV.   Trichomoniasis   Trichomoniasis  is  caused  by  the  protozoan  T.
vaginalis. The
majority of men infected with T. vaginalis are asymptomatic, but
many women are symptomatic. Among women, T. vaginalis typically
causes a diffuse, malodorous, yellow-green discharge with vulvar
irritation. There is recent evidence of a possible relationship
between vaginal trichomoniasis and adverse pregnancy outcomes,
particularly premature rupture of the membranes and preterm
delivery.  Recommended Regimen  Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose.
Alternative Regimen  Metronidazole 500 mg twice daily for 7 days.  Only metronidazole
is available in the United States for the
treatment of trichomoniasis. In randomized clinical trials, both of
the recommended metronidazole regimens have resulted in cure rates
of approximately 95%. Treatment of the patient and sex partner
results in relief of symptoms, microbiologic cure, and reduction of
transmission. Metronidazole gel has been approved for the treatment
of BV but it has not been studied for the treatment of
trichomoniasis. Earlier preparations of metronidazole for topical
vaginal therapy demonstrated low efficacy against trichomoniasis.  Follow-Up  Follow-up
is unnecessary for men and for women who become
asymptomatic after treatment.
Infections by strains of T. vaginalis with diminished
susceptibility to metronidazole occur. However, most of these
organisms respond to higher doses of metronidazole. If failure
occurs with either regimen, the patient should be retreated with
metronidazole 500 mg 2 times a day for 7 days. If repeated failure
occurs, the patient should be treated with a single 2 g dose of
metronidazole once daily for 3-5 days.  Patients with culture-documented infection who
do not respond
to the regimens described in this report and in whom reinfection
has been excluded, should be managed in consultation with an
expert. Evaluation of such cases should include determination of
the susceptibility of T. vaginalis to metronidazole.  Management of Sex Partners  Sex
partners should be treated. Patients should be instructed
to avoid sex until patient and partner(s) are cured. In the absence
of microbiologic test-of-cure, this means when therapy has been
completed and patient and partner(s) are without symptoms.  Special Considerations 
Allergy,  Intolerance,  or  Adverse  Reactions   Effective  alternatives  to  therapy  with
metronidazole are not
available.  Pregnancy  The use of metronidazole is contraindicated in the first
trimester of pregnancy. Patients may be treated after the first
trimester with 2 g of metronidazole in a single dose.  HIV Infection  Persons with HIV
infection and trichomoniasis should receive
the  same  treatment  as  persons  without  HIV.   Vulvovaginal  Candidiasis   Vulvovaginal
candidiasis (VVC) is caused by C. albicans or,
occasionally, by other Candida spp, Torulopsis sp, or other yeasts.
An estimated 75% of women will experience at least one episode of
VVC during their lifetime, and 40%-45% will experience two or more
episodes. A small percentage of women (probably less than 5%)
experience recurrent VVC (RVVC). Typical symptoms of VVC include
pruritus and vaginal discharge. Other symptoms may include vaginal
soreness, vulvar burning, dyspareunia, and external dysuria. None
of these symptoms is specific for VVC. VVC usually is not sexually
acquired or transmitted.  Diagnostic Considerations  A diagnosis of Candida vaginitis is
suggested clinically by
pruritus in the vulvar area together with erythema of the vagina or
vulva; a white discharge may occur. The diagnosis can be made when
a woman has signs and symptoms of vaginitis, and when a wet
preparation or Gram stain of vaginal discharge demonstrates yeasts
or pseudohyphae, or when a culture or other test yields a positive
result for a yeast species. Vaginitis solely because of Candida
infection is associated with a normal vaginal pH ( less than or
equal to 4.5). Use of 10% KOH in wet preparations improves the
visualization of yeast and mycelia by disrupting cellular material
that may obscure the yeast or pseudohyphae. Identifying Candida in
the absence of symptoms should not lead to treatment, because
approximately 10%-20% of women normally harbor Candida spp and
other yeasts in the vagina. VVC may be present concurrently with
STDs.  Treatment  Topical formulations provide effective treatment for VVC. The
topically applied azole drugs are more effective than nystatin.
Treatment with azoles results in relief of symptoms and negative
cultures  among  80%-90%  of  patients  after  therapy  is  completed.   Recommended
Regimens  The following intravaginal formulations are recommended for
the treatment of VVC.  Butoconazole 2% cream 5 g intravaginally for 3 days;@
or
Clotrimazole 1% cream 5 g intravaginally for 7-14 days;@@
or
Clotrimazole 100 mg vaginal tablet for 7 days;@@
or
Clotrimazole 100 mg vaginal tablet, two tablets for 3 days;
or
Clotrimazole 500 mg vaginal tablet, one tablet single
application;  or
Miconazole 2% cream 5 g intravaginally for 7 days;@ @@
or
Miconazole 200 mg vaginal suppository, one suppository for 3
days;@  or
Miconazole 100 mg vaginal suppository, one suppository for 7
days;@ @@  or
Tioconazole 6.5% ointment 5 g intravaginally in a single
application;@  or
Terconazole 0.4% cream 5 g intravaginally for 7 days;
or
Terconazole 0.8% cream 5 g intravaginally for 3 days;
or
Terconazole 80 mg suppository, 1 suppository for 3 days.@  Although information is not
conclusive, single-dose treatments
should probably be reserved for cases of uncomplicated
mild-to-moderate VVC. Multi-day regimens (3- and 7-day) are the
preferred  treatment  for  severe  or  complicated  VVC.   Preparations  for  intravaginal
administration of both
miconazole and clotrimazole are now available over-the-counter (OTC
{nonprescription}), and women with VVC can choose one of those
preparations. The duration for treatment with either preparation is
7 days. Self-medication with OTC preparations should be advised
only for women who have been diagnosed previously with VVC and who
experience a recurrence of the same symptoms. Any woman whose
symptoms persist after using an OTC preparation or who experiences
a  recurrence  of  symptoms  within  2  months  should  seek  medical  care.   Alternative
Regimens  Several trials have demonstrated that oral azole agents such
as fluconazole, ketoconazole, and itraconazole may be as effective
as topical agents. The optimum dose and duration of oral therapy
have not been established, but a range of 1-5 days of treatment,
depending on the agent, has been effective in clinical trials. The
ease of administration of oral agents is an advantage over topical
therapies. However, the potential for toxicity associated with
using a systemic drug, particularly ketoconazole, must be
considered. No oral agent is approved currently by the FDA for the
treatment of acute VVC.  Follow-Up  Patients should be instructed to return for follow-up
visits
only if symptoms persist or recur. Women who experience three or
more episodes of VVC per year should be evaluated for predisposing
conditions (see Recurrent Vulvovaginal Candidiasis).  Management of Sex Partners  VVC
is not acquired through sexual intercourse; treatment of
sex partners has not been demonstrated to reduce the frequency of
recurrences. Therefore, routine notification or treatment of sex
partners is not warranted. A minority of male sex partners may have
balanitis, which is characterized by erythematous areas on the
glans in conjunction with pruritus or irritation. These partners
may benefit from treatment with topical antifungal agents to
relieve symptoms.  Special Considerations  Allergy or Intolerance to the Recommended
Therapy  Topical agents are usually free of systemic side effects,
although local burning or irritation may occur. Oral agents
occasionally cause nausea, abdominal pain, and headaches. Therapy
with the oral azoles has been associated rarely with abnormal
elevations of liver enzymes. Hepatotoxicity secondary to
ketoconazole therapy has been estimated to appear in 1:10,000 to
1:15,000 exposed persons. Clinically important interactions may
occur when these oral agents are administered with other drugs,
including terfenadine, rifampin, astemizole, phenytoin, cyclosporin
A,  coumarin-like  agents,  or  oral  hypoglycemic  agents.   Pregnancy   VVC  is  common
during pregnancy. Only topical azole therapies
should be used for the treatment of pregnant women. The most
effective treatments that have been studied for pregnant women are
clotrimazole, miconazole, butoconazole, and terconazole. Many
experts  recommend  7  days  of  therapy  during  pregnancy.   HIV  Infection   Acute  VVC
occurs frequently among women with HIV infection and
may be more severe for these women than for other women. However,
insufficient information exists to determine the optimal management
of VVC in HIV-infected women. Until such information becomes
available, women with HIV infection and acute VVC should be treated
following  the  same  regimens  as  for  women  without  HIV  infection.   Recurrent
Vulvovaginal  Candidiasis   RVVC,  usually  defined  as  three  or  more  episodes  of
symptomatic
VVC annually, affects a small proportion of women (probably less
than 5%). The natural history and pathogenesis of RVVC are poorly
understood. Risk factors for RVVC include diabetes mellitus,
immunosuppression, broad spectrum antibiotic use, corticosteroid
use, and HIV infection, although the majority of women with RVVC
have no apparent predisposing conditions. Clinical trials
addressing the management of RVVC have involved continuing therapy
between  episodes.   Treatment   The  optimal  treatment  for  RVVC  has  not  been
established.
Ketoconazole 100 mg orally, once daily for up to 6 months reduces
the frequency of episodes of RVVC. Current studies are evaluating
weekly intravaginal administration of clotrimazole, as well as oral
therapy with itraconazole and fluconazole, in the treatment of
RVVC. All cases of RVVC should be confirmed by culture before
maintenance therapy is initiated.  Although patients with RVVC should be evaluated for
predisposing conditions, routinely performing HIV testing for women
with RVVC who do not have HIV risk factors is unwarranted.  Follow-Up  Patients who
are receiving treatment for RVVC should receive
regular follow-up to monitor the effectiveness of therapy and the
occurrence  of  side  effects.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Treatment  of  sex  partners
does not prevent recurrences, and
routine therapy is not warranted. However, partners with
symptomatic balanitis or penile dermatitis should be treated with
a topical agent.  Special Considerations  HIV Infection  Insufficient information exists to
determine the optimal
management of RVVC among HIV-infected women. Until such information
becomes available, management should be the same as for other women
with  RVVC.   PELVIC  INFLAMMATORY  DISEASE   PID  comprises  a  spectrum  of
inflammatory disorders of the
upper genital tract among women and may include any combination of
endometritis, salpingitis, tubo-ovarian abscess, and pelvic
peritonitis. Sexually transmitted organisms, especially N.
gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, are implicated in the majority of
cases; however, microorganisms that can be part of the vaginal
flora, such as anaerobes, G. vaginalis, H. influenzae, enteric
Gram-negative rods, and Streptococcus agalactiae also can cause
PID. Some experts also believe that M. hominis and U. urealyticum
are etiologic agents of PID.  Diagnostic Considerations  Because of the wide variation in
many symptoms and signs among
women with this condition, a clinical diagnosis of acute PID is
difficult. Many women with PID exhibit subtle or mild symptoms that
are not readily recognized as PID. Consequently, delay in diagnosis
and effective treatment probably contributes to inflammatory
sequelae in the upper reproductive tract. Laparoscopy can be used
to obtain a more accurate diagnosis of salpingitis and a more
complete bacteriologic diagnosis. However, this diagnostic tool is
often neither readily available for acute cases nor easily
justifiable when symptoms are mild or vague. Moreover, laparoscopy
will not detect endometritis and may not detect subtle inflammation
of the fallopian tubes. Consequently, the diagnosis of PID is
usually made on the basis of clinical findings.  The clinical diagnosis of acute PID is also
imprecise. Data
indicate that a clinical diagnosis of symptomatic PID has a
positive predictive value (PPV) for salpingitis of 65%-90% when
compared with laparoscopy as the standard. The PPV of a clinical
diagnosis of acute PID varies depending on epidemiologic
characteristics and the clinical setting, with higher PPV among
sexually active young (especially teenage) women and among patients
attending STD clinics or from settings with high rates of gonorrhea
or chlamydia. In all settings, however, no single historical,
physical, or laboratory finding is both sensitive and specific for
the diagnosis of acute PID (i.e., can be used both to detect all
cases of PID and to exclude all women without PID). Combinations of
diagnostic findings that improve either sensitivity (detect more
women who have PID) or specificity (exclude more women who do not
have PID) do so only at the expense of the other. For example,
requiring two or more findings excludes more women without PID but
also reduces the number of women with PID who are detected.  Many episodes of PID
go unrecognized. Although some women may
have asymptomatic PID, others are undiagnosed because the patient
or the health-care provider fails to recognize the implications of
mild or nonspecific symptoms or signs, such as abnormal bleeding,
dyspareunia, or vaginal discharge ("atypical PID"). Because of the
difficulty of diagnosis and the potential for damage to the
reproductive health of women even by apparently mild or atypical
PID, experts recommend that providers maintain a low threshold of
diagnosis for PID. Even so, the long-term outcome of early
treatment of women with asymptomatic or atypical PID on important
clinical outcomes is unknown. The following recommendations for
diagnosing PID are intended to help health-care providers recognize
when PID should be suspected and when they need to obtain
additional information to increase diagnostic certainty. These
recommendations are based in part on the fact that diagnosis and
management of other common causes of lower abdominal pain (e.g.,
ectopic pregnancy, acute appendicitis, and functional pain) are
unlikely to be impaired by initiating empiric antimicrobial therapy
for PID.  Minimum Criteria  Empiric treatment of PID should be instituted on the basis of
the presence of all of the following three minimum clinical
criteria for pelvic inflammation and in the absence of an
established cause other than PID:  
    Lower abdominal tenderness,  
    Adnexal tenderness, and  
    Cervical motion tenderness.  Additional Criteria  For women with severe clinical signs,
more elaborate
diagnostic evaluation is warranted because incorrect diagnosis and
management may cause unnecessary morbidity. These additional
criteria may be used to increase the specificity of the diagnosis.  Listed below are the
routine criteria for diagnosing PID:  
    Oral temperature greater than 38.3 C,  
    Abnormal cervical or vaginal discharge,  
    Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate,  
    Elevated C-reactive protein,  
    Laboratory documentation of cervical infection with N.
    gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis.  Listed below are the elaborate criteria for diagnosing
PID:  
    Histopathologic evidence of endometritis on endometrial
    biopsy,  
    Tubo-ovarian abscess on sonography or other radiologic tests,  
    Laparoscopic abnormalities consistent with PID.
    Although initial treatment decisions can be made before
    bacteriologic diagnosis of C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae
    infection, such a diagnosis emphasizes the need to treat sex
    partners.  Treatment  PID therapy regimens must provide empiric, broad-spectrum
coverage of likely pathogens. Antimicrobial coverage should include
N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, Gram-negative facultative bacteria,
anaerobes, and streptococci. Although several antimicrobial
regimens have proven effective in achieving clinical and
microbiologic cure in randomized clinical trials with short-term
follow-up, few studies have been done to assess and compare
elimination of infection of the endometrium and fallopian tubes, or
the incidence of long-term complications such as tubal infertility
and  ectopic  pregnancy.   No  single  therapeutic  regimen  has  been  established  for
persons
with PID. When selecting a treatment regimen, health-care providers
should consider availability, cost, patient acceptance, and
regional differences in antimicrobial susceptibility of the likely
pathogens.  Many experts recommend that all patients with PID be
hospitalized so that supervised treatment with parenteral
antibiotics can be initiated. Hospitalization is especially
recommended when the following criteria are met:
The diagnosis is uncertain, and surgical emergencies such as
appendicitis and ectopic pregnancy cannot be excluded,  
    Pelvic abscess is suspected,  
    The patient is pregnant,  
    The patient is an adolescent (among adolescents, compliance
    with therapy is unpredictable),  
    The patient has HIV infection,  
    Severe illness or nausea and vomiting preclude outpatient
    management,  
    The patient is unable to follow or tolerate an outpatient
    regimen,  
    The patient has failed to respond clinically to outpatient
    therapy,  
    Clinical follow-up within 72 hours of starting antibiotic
    treatment cannot be arranged.  Inpatient Treatment  Experts have experience with
both of the following regimens.
Also, there are multiple randomized trials demonstrating the
efficacy of each regimen.  Regimen A  Cefoxitin 2 g IV every 6 hours or cefotetan 2 g IV
every 12
hours,  PLUS
Doxycycline  100  mg  IV  or  orally  every  12  hours.   NOTE:  This  regimen  should  be
continued for at least 48 hours
after the patient demonstrates substantial clinical improvement,
after which doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day should be
continued for a total of 14 days. Doxycycline administered orally
has bioavailability similar to that of the IV formulation and may
be administered if normal gastrointestinal function is present.  Clinical data are limited
for other second- or
third-generation cephalosporins (e.g., ceftizoxime, cefotaxime, and
ceftriaxone), which might replace cefoxitin or cefotetan, although
many authorities believe they also are effective therapy for PID.
However, they are less active than cefoxitin or cefotetan against
anaerobic bacteria.  Regimen B  Clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours,
PLUS
Gentamicin loading dose IV or IM (2 mg/kg of body weight)
followed by a maintenance dose (1.5 mg/kg) every 8 hours.  NOTE:This regimen should
be continued for at least 48 hours
after the patient demonstrates substantial clinical improvement,
then followed with doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day or
clindamycin 450 mg orally 4 times a day to complete a total of 14
days of therapy. When tubo-ovarian abscess is present, many
health-care providers use clindamycin for continued therapy rather
than doxycycline, because it provides more effective anaerobic
coverage. Clindamycin administered intravenously appears to be
effective against C. trachomatis infection; however, the
effectiveness of oral clindamycin against C. trachomatis has not
been determined.  Alternative Inpatient Regimens. Limited data support the use
of other inpatient regimens, but two regimens have undergone at
least one clinical trial and have broad-spectrum coverage.
Ampicillin/sulbactam plus doxycycline has good anaerobic coverage
and appears to be effective for patients with a tubo-ovarian
abscess. Intravenous ofloxacin has been studied as a single agent.
A regimen of ofloxacin plus either clindamycin or metronidazole
provides broad-spectrum coverage. Evidence is insufficient to
support the use of any single agent regimen for inpatient treatment
of PID.  Outpatient Treatment  Clinical trials of outpatient regimens have provided little
information regarding intermediate and long-term outcomes. The
following regimens provide coverage against the common etiologic
agents of PID, but evidence from clinical trials supporting their
use is limited. The second regimen provides broader coverage
against anaerobic organisms but costs substantially more than the
other regimen. Patients who do not respond to outpatient therapy
within 72 hours should be hospitalized to confirm the diagnosis and
to receive parenteral therapy.  Regimen A  Cefoxitin 2 g IM plus probenecid, 1 g orally
in a single dose
concurrently, or ceftriaxone 250 mg IM or other parenteral
third-generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftizoxime or cefotaxime),  PLUS
Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day for 14 days.  Regimen B  Ofloxacin 400 mg
orally 2 times a day for 14 days,
PLUS
Either clindamycin 450 mg orally 4 times a day, or
metronidazole  500  mg  orally  2  times  a  day  for  14  days.   Clinical  trials  have
demonstrated that the cefoxitin regimen
is effective in obtaining short-term clinical response. Fewer data
support the use of ceftriaxone or other third-generation
cephalosporins, but, based on their similarities to cefoxitin, they
also are considered effective. No data exist regarding the use of
oral  cephalosporins  for  the  treatment  of  PID.   Ofloxacin  is  effective  against  both  N.
gonorrhoeae and C.
trachomatis. One clinical trial demonstrated the effectiveness of
oral ofloxacin in obtaining short-term clinical response with PID.
Despite results of this trial, there is concern related to
ofloxacin's lack of anaerobic coverage; the addition of clindamycin
or metronidazole provides this coverage. Clindamycin, but not
metronidazole, further enhances the Gram-positive coverage of the
regimen.  Alternative Outpatient Regimens. Information regarding other
outpatient regimens is limited. The combination of
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid plus doxycycline was effective in
obtaining short-term clinical response in one clinical trial, but
many of the patients had to discontinue the regimen because of
gastrointestinal  symptoms.   Follow-Up   Hospitalized  patients  receiving  IV  therapy
should show
substantial clinical improvement (e.g., defervescence, reduction in
direct or rebound abdominal tenderness, and reduction in uterine,
adnexal, and cervical motion tenderness) within 3-5 days of
initiation of therapy. Patients who do not demonstrate improvement
within this time period usually require further diagnostic workup
or surgical intervention, or both.  If the provider elects to prescribe outpatient therapy,
follow-up examination should be performed within 72 hours, using
the  criteria  for  clinical  improvement  previously  described.   Because  of  the  risk  for
persistent infection, particularly
with C. trachomatis, patients should have a microbiologic
re-examination 7-10 days after completing therapy. Some experts
also recommend rescreening for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae 4-
6  weeks  after  completing  therapy.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Evaluation  and
treatment of sex partners of women who have PID
is imperative because of the risk for re-infection and the high
likelihood of urethral gonococcal or chlamydial infection of the
partner.  Since nonculture, and perhaps culture, tests for C.
trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae are thought to be insensitive among
asymptomatic men, sex partners should be treated empirically with
regimens effective against both of these infections -- regardless
of the apparent etiology of PID or pathogens isolated from the
infected woman.  Even in clinical settings in which only women are seen,
special arrangements should be made to provide care for male sex
partners of women with PID. When this is not feasible, health-care
providers should ensure that sex partners are appropriately
referred  for  treatment.   Special  Considerations   Pregnancy   Pregnant  women  with
suspected PID should be hospitalized and
treated  with  parenteral  antibiotics.   HIV  Infection   Differences  in  the  clinical
manifestations of PID between
HIV-infected women and noninfected women have not been described
clearly. However, in one study, HIV-infected women with PID tended
to have a leukopenia or a lesser leukocytosis than women who were
not HIV-infected, and they were more likely to require surgical
intervention. HIV-infected women who develop PID should be managed
aggressively. Hospitalization and inpatient therapy with one of the
IV  antimicrobial  regimens  described  in  this  report  is  recommended.   EPIDIDYMITIS  
Among men less than 35 years of age, epididymitis is most
often caused by N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis. Epididymitis
caused by sexually transmitted Escherichia coli infection also
occurs among homosexual men who are the insertive partners during
anal intercourse. Sexually transmitted epididymitis is usually
accompanied by urethritis, which is often asymptomatic. Nonsexually
transmitted epididymitis associated with urinary tract infections
caused by Gram-negative enteric organisms is more common among men
greater than 35 years of age, and among men who have recently
undergone  urinary  tract  instrumentation  or  surgery.   Diagnostic  Considerations   Men
with epididymitis typically have unilateral testicular
pain and tenderness; palpable swelling of the epididymis is usually
present. Testicular torsion, a surgical emergency, should be
considered in all cases but is more frequent among adolescents.
Emergency testing for torsion may be indicated when the onset of
pain is sudden, pain is severe, or test results available during
the initial visit do not permit a diagnosis of urethritis or
urinary tract infection. The evaluation of men for epididymitis
should include the following procedures:
__   A Gram-stained smear of urethral exudate or intraurethral swab
specimen for N. gonorrhoeae and for NGU ( greater than or equal to
5 polymorphonuclear leukocytes per oil immersion field),
__   A culture of urethral exudate or intraurethral swab specimen
for N. gonorrhoeae,
__   A test of an intraurethral swab specimen for C. trachomatis,
__   Culture and Gram-stained smear of uncentrifuged urine for
Gram-negative bacteria.  Treatment  Empiric therapy is indicated before culture results
are
available. Treatment of epididymitis caused by C. trachomatis or N.
gonorrhoeae will result in microbiologic cure of infection, improve
signs  and  symptoms,  and  prevent  transmission  to  others.   Patients  with  suspected
sexually transmitted epididymitis
should be treated with an antimicrobial regimen effective against
C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae; confirmation of these agents by
testing will assist in partner notification efforts, but current
tests for C. trachomatis are not sufficiently sensitive to exclude
infection with that agent.  Recommended Regimen  Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single
dose
and
Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day for 10 days.  The effect of substituting the 125
mg dose of ceftriaxone
recommended for treatment of uncomplicated N. gonorrhoeae, or the
azithromycin regimen recommended for treatment of C. trachomatis,
is unknown.  As an adjunct to therapy, bed rest and scrotal elevation are
recommended until fever and local inflammation have subsided.  Alternative Regimen 
Ofloxacin 300 mg orally 2 times a day for 10 days.
RX =  NOTE: Ofloxacin is contraindicated for persons less than or
equal  to  17  years  of  age.   Follow-Up   Failure  to  improve  within  3  days  requires
re-evaluation of
both the diagnosis and therapy, and consideration of
hospitalization. Swelling and tenderness that persist after
completing antimicrobial therapy should be evaluated for testicular
cancer and tuberculous or fungal epididymitis.  Management of Sex Partners  Patients
with epididymitis that is known or suspected to be
caused by N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis should be instructed to
refer sex partners for evaluation and treatment. Sex partners of
these patients should be referred if their contact with the index
patient  was  within  30  days  of  onset  of  symptoms.   Patients  should  be  instructed  to
avoid sexual intercourse
until patient and partner(s) are cured. In the absence of
microbiologic test-of-cure, this means until therapy is completed
and patient and partner(s) are without symptoms.  Special Considerations  HIV Infection
 Persons with HIV infection and uncomplicated epididymitis
should receive the same treatment as persons without HIV. Fungal
and mycobacterial causes of epididymitis are more common, however,
among patients who are immunocompromised.  HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS INFECTION 
Genital Warts  Exophytic genital and anal warts are benign growths most
commonly caused by HPV types 6 or 11. Other types that may be
present in the anogenital region (e.g., types 16, 18, 31, 33, and
35) have been strongly associated with genital dysplasia and
carcinoma. These types are usually associated with subclinical
infection,  but  occasionally  are  found  in  exophytic  warts.   Treatment   The  goal  of
treatment is removal of exophytic warts and the
amelioration of signs and symptoms -- not the eradication of HPV.
No therapy has been shown to eradicate HPV. HPV has been identified
in adjacent tissue after laser treatment of HPV- associated
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and after attempts to eliminate
subclinical HPV by extensive laser vaporization of the anogenital
area.  Genital warts are generally benign growths that cause minor or
no symptoms aside from their cosmetic appearance. Treatment of
external genital warts is not likely to influence the development
of cervical cancer. A multitude of randomized clinical trials and
other treatment studies have demonstrated that currently available
therapeutic methods are 22%-94% effective in clearing external
exophytic genital warts, and that recurrence rates are high
(usually at least 25% within 3 months) with all modalities. Several
well-designed studies have indicated that treatment is more
successful for genital warts that are small and that have been
present less than 1 year. No studies have assessed if treatment of
exophytic warts reduces transmission of HPV. Many experts speculate
that exophytic warts may be more infectious than subclinical
infection, and therefore, the risk for transmission might be
reduced by "debulking" genital warts. Most experts agree that
recurrences of genital warts more commonly result from reactivation
of subclinical infection than reinfection by a sex partner. The
effect of treatment on the natural history of HPV is unknown. If
left untreated, genital warts may resolve on their own, remain
unchanged, or grow. In placebo-controlled studies, genital warts
have cleared spontaneously without treatment in 20%-30% of patients
within  3  months.   Regimens   Treatment  of  genital  warts  should  be  guided  by  the
preference
of the patient. Expensive therapies, toxic therapies, and
procedures that result in scarring should be avoided. A specific
treatment regimen should be chosen with consideration given to
anatomic site, size, and number of warts as well as the expense,
efficacy, convenience, and potential for adverse effects. Extensive
or  refractory  disease  should  be  referred  to  an  expert.   Carbon  dioxide  laser  and
conventional surgery are useful in
the management of extensive warts, particularly for those patients
who have not responded to other regimens; these alternatives are
not appropriate for treatment of limited lesions. One randomized
trial of laser therapy indicated efficacy of 43%, with recurrence
among 95% of patients. A randomized trial of surgical excision
demonstrated efficacy of 93%, with recurrences among 29% of
patients. These therapies and more cost-effective treatments do not
eliminate HPV infection.  Interferon therapy is not recommended because of its cost and
its association with a high frequency of adverse side effects, and
efficacy is no greater than that of other available therapies. Two
randomized trials established systemic interferon alpha to be no
more effective than placebo. Efficacy of interferon injected
directly into genital warts (intralesional therapy) during two
randomized trials was 44%-61%, with recurrences among none to 67%
of patients.  Therapy with 5-fluorouracil cream has not been evaluated in
controlled studies, frequently causes local irritation, and is not
recommended  for  the  treatment  of  genital  warts.   External  Genital/Perianal  Warts  
Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or cryoprobe.
or
Podofilox 0.5% solution for self-treatment (genital warts
only). Patients may apply podofilox with a cotton swab to warts
twice daily for 3 days, followed by 4 days of no therapy. This
cycle may be repeated as necessary for a total of 4 cycles. Total
wart area treated should not exceed 10 cm2, and total volume of
podofilox should not exceed 0.5 mL per day. The health-care
provider should demonstrate the proper application technique and
identify which warts should be treated. If possible, the
health-care provider should apply the initial treatment to
demonstrate the proper application technique and identify which
warts should be treated. The use of podofilox is contraindicated
during pregnancy.  or
Podophyllin 10%-25%, in compound tincture of benzoin. To avoid
the possibility of problems with systemic absorption and toxicity,
some experts recommend that application be limited to less than or
equal to 0.5 mL or less than or equal to 10 cm2 per session.
Thoroughly wash off in 1-4 hours. Repeat weekly if necessary. If
warts persist after six applications, other therapeutic methods
should be considered. The use of podophyllin is contraindicated
during pregnancy.  or
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 80%-90%. Apply only to warts;
powder with talc or sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) to remove
unreacted acid. Repeat weekly if necessary. If warts persist after
six applications, other therapies should be considered.  or
Electrodesiccation or electrocautery. Electrodesiccation and
electrocautery are contraindicated for patients with cardiac
pacemakers  or  for  lesions  proximal  to  the  anal  verge.   Cryotherapy  is  relatively
inexpensive, does not require
anesthesia, and does not result in scarring if performed properly.
Special equipment is required, and most patients experience
moderate pain during and after the procedure. Efficacy during four
randomized trials was 63%-88%, with recurrences among 21%-39% of
patients.  Therapy with 0.5% podofilox solution is relatively
inexpensive, simple to use, safe, and is self-applied by patients
at home. Unlike podophyllin, podofilox is a pure compound with a
stable shelf-life and does not need to be washed off. Most patients
experience mild/moderate pain or local irritation after treatment.
Heavily keratinized warts may not respond as well as those on moist
mucosal surfaces. To apply the podofilox solution safely and
effectively, the patient must be able to see and reach the warts
easily. Efficacy during five recent randomized trials was 45%-88%,
with  recurrences  among  33%-60%  of  patients.   Podophyllin  therapy  is  relatively
inexpensive, simple to use,
and safe. Compared with other available therapies, a larger number
of treatments may be required. Most patients experience mild to
moderate pain or local irritation after treatment. Heavily
keratinized warts may not respond as well as those on moist mucosal
surfaces. Efficacy in four recent randomized trials was 32%-79%,
with  recurrences  among  27%-65%  of  patients.   Few  data  on  the  efficacy  of  TCA  are
available. One randomized
trial among men demonstrated 81% efficacy and recurrence among 36%
of patients; the frequency of adverse reactions was similar to that
seen with the use of cryotherapy. One study among women showed
efficacy and frequency of patient discomfort to be similar to
podophyllin. No data on the efficacy of bichloroacetic acid are
available.  Few data on the efficacy of electrodesiccation are available.
One randomized trial of electrodesiccation demonstrated an efficacy
of 94%, with recurrences among 22% of patients; another randomized
trial of diathermocoagulation demonstrated an efficacy of 35%.
Local anesthesia is required, and patient discomfort is usually
moderate.  Cervical Warts  For women with (exophytic) cervical warts, dysplasia must
be
excluded before treatment is begun. Management should be carried
out in consultation with an expert.  Vaginal Warts  Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen. The
use of a cryoprobe in
the vagina is not recommended because of the risk for vaginal
perforation and fistula formation.  or
TCA 80%-90%. Apply only to warts; powder with talc or sodium
bicarbonate (baking soda) to remove unreacted acid. Repeat weekly
as necessary. If warts persist after six applications, other
therapeutic methods should be considered.  or
Podophyllin 10%-25% in compound tincture of benzoin. Apply to
the treatment area, which must be dry before removing the speculum.
Treat less than or equal to 2 cm2 per session. Repeat application
at weekly intervals. Because of concern about potential systemic
absorption, some experts caution against vaginal application of
podophyllin. The use of podophyllin is contraindicated during
pregnancy.  Urethral Meatus Warts  Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen.
or
Podophyllin 10%-25% in compound tincture of benzoin. The
treatment area must be dry before contact with normal mucosa.
Podophyllin must be washed off in 1-2 hours. Repeat weekly if
necessary. If warts persist after six applications, other
therapeutic methods should be considered. The use of podophyllin is
contraindicated during pregnancy.  Anal Warts  Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen.
or
TCA 80%-90%. Apply only to warts; powder with talc or sodium
bicarbonate (baking soda) to remove unreacted acid. Repeat weekly
if necessary. If warts persist after six applications, other
therapeutic methods should be considered.  or
Surgical removal.  NOTE: Management of warts on rectal mucosa should be referred
to an expert.  Oral Warts  Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
or
Electrodesiccation or electrocautery
or
Surgical removal.  Follow-Up  After warts have responded to therapy, follow-up is not
necessary. Annual cytologic screening is recommended for women with
or without genital warts. The presence of genital warts is not an
indication for colposcopy.  Management of Sex Partners  Examination of sex partners is
not necessary for management of
genital warts because the role of reinfection is probably minimal.
Many sex partners have obvious exophytic warts and may desire
treatment; also, partners may benefit from counseling. Patients
with exophytic anogenital warts should be made aware that they are
contagious to uninfected sex partners. The majority of partners,
however, are probably already subclinically infected with HPV, even
if they do not have visible warts. No practical screening tests for
subclinical infection are available. Even after removal of warts,
patients may harbor HPV in surrounding normal tissue, as may
persons without exophytic warts. The use of condoms may reduce
transmission to partners likely to be uninfected, such as new
partners; however, the period of communicability is unknown.
Experts speculate that HPV infection may persist throughout a
patient's lifetime in a dormant state and become infectious
intermittently. Whether patients with subclinical HPV infection are
as  contagious  as  patients  with  exophytic  warts  is  unknown.   Special  Considerations  
Pregnancy  The use of podophyllin and podofilox are contraindicated
 during
pregnancy. Genital papillary lesions have a tendency to proliferate
and to become friable during pregnancy. Many experts advocate
removal  of visible warts during  pregnancy.   HPV types 6 and  11 can  cause laryngeal
papillomatosis among
infants. The route of transmission (transplacental, birth canal, or
postnatal) is unknown, and laryngeal papillomatosis has occurred
among infants delivered by caesarean section. Hence, the preventive
value of caesarean delivery is unknown. Caesarean delivery must not
be performed solely to prevent transmission of HPV infection to the
newborn. However, in rare instances, caesarean delivery may be
indicated for women with genital warts if the pelvic outlet is
obstructed or if vaginal delivery would result in excessive
bleeding.  HIV Infection  Persons infected with HIV may not respond to therapy for HPV
as  well  as  persons  without  HIV.   Subclinical  Genital  HPV  Infection  (Without  Exophytic
Warts)  Subclinical genital HPV infection is much more common than
exophytic warts among both men and women. Infection is often
indirectly diagnosed on the cervix by Pap smear, colposcopy, or
biopsy and on the penis, vulva, and other genital skin by the
appearance of white areas after application of acetic acid.
Acetowhitening is not a specific test for HPV infection, and
false-positive tests are common. Definitive diagnosis of HPV
infection relies on detection of viral nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) or
capsid proteins. Pap smear diagnosis of HPV generally does not
correlate well with detection of HPV DNA in cervical cells. Cell
changes attributed to HPV in the cervix are similar to those of
mild dysplasia and often regress spontaneously without treatment.
Tests for the detection of several types of HPV DNA in cells
scraped from the cervix are now widely available, but the clinical
utility of these tests for managing patients is not known.
Management decisions should not be made on the basis of HPV DNA
tests. Screening for subclinical genital HPV infection using DNA
tests  or  acetic  acid  is  not  recommended.   Treatment   In  the  absence  of  coexistent
dysplasia, treatment is not
recommended for subclinical genital HPV infection diagnosed by Pap
smear, colposcopy, biopsy, acetic acid soaking of genital skin or
mucous membranes, or the detection of HPV nucleic acids (DNA or
RNA) or capsid antigen, because diagnosis often is questionable and
no therapy has been demonstrated to eradicate infection. HPV has
been demonstrated in adjacent tissue after laser treatment of
HPV-associated dysplasia and after attempts to eliminate
subclinical HPV by extensive laser vaporization of the anogenital
area of men and women.  In the presence of coexistent dysplasia, management should
be
based  on  the  grade  of  dysplasia.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Examination  of  sex
partners is not necessary. The majority of
partners are probably already infected subclinically with HPV. No
practical screening tests for subclinical infection are available.
The use of condoms may reduce transmission to partners likely to be
uninfected, such as new partners; however, the period of
communicability is unknown. Experts speculate that HPV infection
may persist throughout a patient's lifetime in a dormant state and
become infectious intermittently. Whether patients with subclinical
HPV infection are as contagious as patients with exophytic warts is
unknown.  CERVICAL CANCER SCREENING FOR WOMEN WHO ATTEND STD CLINICS OR
WHO
HAVE A HISTORY OF STDs  Women who have a history of STDs are at increased risk for
cervical cancer, and women attending STD clinics may have
additional characteristics that place them at even higher risk.
Prevalence studies have found that precursor lesions for cervical
cancer occur approximately five times more often among women
attending STD clinics than among women attending family planning
clinics.  The Pap smear (cervical smear) is an effective and relatively
low-cost screening test for invasive cervical cancer and squamous
intraepithelial lesions (SIL)@@@, the precursors of cervical
 cancer.
The screening guidelines of both the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Cancer Society
recommend annual Pap smears for sexually active women. Although
these guidelines take the position that Pap smears can be obtained
less frequently in some situations, women who attend STD clinics or
who have a history of STDs should be screened annually because of
their increased risk for cervical cancer. Moreover, reports from
STD clinics indicate that many women do not understand the purpose
or importance of Pap smears, and many women who have had a pelvic
examination believe they have had a Pap smear when they actually
have  not.   Recommendations   Whenever  a  woman  has  a  pelvic  examination  for  STD
screening,
the health-care provider should inquire about the result of her
last Pap smear and should discuss the following information with
the patient:
__   Purpose and importance of the Pap smear,
__   Whether a Pap smear was obtained during the clinic visit,
__   Need for a Pap smear each year,
__   Names of local providers or referral clinics that can obtain
Pap smears and adequately follow up results (if a Pap smear was not
obtained  during  this  examination).   If  a  woman  has  not  had  a  Pap  smear  during  the
previous 12
months, a Pap smear should be obtained as part of the routine
pelvic examination in most situations. Health-care providers should
be aware that, after a pelvic examination, many women may believe
they have had a Pap smear when they actually have not, and
therefore may report they have had a recent Pap smear.  In STD clinics, a Pap smear
should be obtained during the
routine clinical evaluation of women who have not had a documented
normal smear within the past 12 months.  A woman may benefit from receiving printed
information about
Pap smears and a report containing a statement that a Pap smear was
obtained during her clinic visit. Whenever possible, a copy of the
Pap  smear  result  should  be  sent  to  the  patient  for  her  records.   Follow-Up   If  a  Pap
smear shows severe inflammation with reactive
cellular changes, the woman should be advised to have another Pap
smear within 3 months. If possible, underlying infection should be
treated before the repeat Pap smear is obtained.  If a Pap smear shows either SIL (or
equivalent) or atypical
squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASCUS), the woman
should be notified promptly and appropriate follow-up initiated.  Appropriate follow-up
of Pap smears showing a high-grade SIL
(or equivalent) on Pap smears should always include referral to a
health-care provider who has the capacity to provide a colposcopic
examination of the lower genital tract and, if indicated,
colposcopically directed biopsies. Because clinical follow-up of
abnormal Pap smears with colposcopy and biopsy is beyond the scope
of many public clinics, including most STD clinics, in most
situations women with Pap smears demonstrating these abnormalities
will need to be referred to other local providers or clinics. Women
with either a low-grade SIL or ASCUS also need similar follow-up,
although some experts believe that, in some situations, a repeat
Pap smear may be a satisfactory alternative to referral for
colposcopy  and  biopsy.   Other  Management  Considerations   Other  considerations  in
performing Pap smears are the
following:
__   The Pap smear is not an effective screening test for STDs;
__   If a woman is menstruating, a Pap smear should be postponed
and the woman should be advised to have a Pap smear at the earliest
opportunity;
__   If a woman has an obvious severe cervicitis, the Pap smear may
be deferred until after antibiotic therapy has been completed to
obtain an optimum smear;
__   A woman with external genital warts does not require Pap
smears more frequently than a woman without warts, unless otherwise
indicated.  Special Considerations  Pregnancy  Women who are pregnant should have a
Pap smear as part of
routine prenatal care. A cytobrush may be used for obtaining Pap
smears from pregnant women, although care should be taken not to
disrupt the mucous plug.  HIV Infection  Recent studies have documented an increased
prevalence of SIL
among women infected with HIV. Also, HIV may hasten the progression
of precursor lesions to invasive cervical cancer; however, evidence
supporting such a progression is limited. The following provisional
recommendations for Pap smear screening among HIV-infected women
are based partially on consultation with experts in the care and
management  of  cervical  cancer  and  HIV  infection  among  women.   These  provisional
recommendations may be altered in the future
as more information regarding cervical disease among HIV-infected
women becomes available:
__   Women who are HIV-infected should be advised to have a
comprehensive gynecologic examination, including a Pap smear, as
part of their initial medical evaluation.
__   If initial Pap smear results are within normal limits, at
least one additional Pap smear should be obtained in approximately
6 months to rule out the possibility of false-negative results on
the initial Pap smear. If the repeat Pap smear is normal,
HIV-infected women should be advised to have a Pap smear obtained
annually.
__   If the initial or follow-up Pap smear shows severe
inflammation with reactive squamous cellular changes, another Pap
smear should be collected within 3 months.
__   If the initial or follow-up Pap smear shows SIL (or
equivalent) or ASCUS, the woman should be referred for a
colposcopic examination of the lower genital tract and, if
indicated,  colposcopically  directed  biopsies.   HIV  infection  is  not  an  indication  for
colposcopy among women
with  normal  Pap  smears.   HEPATITIS  B   Hepatitis  B  is  a  common  STD.  Sexual
transmission accounts for
an estimated one-third to two-thirds of the estimated 200,000 to
300,000 new HBV infections that occurred annually in the United
States during the past 10 years. Of persons infected as adults, 6%-
10% become chronic HBV carriers. These persons are capable of
transmitting HBV to others and are at risk for developing fatal
complications. HBV leads to an estimated 5,000 deaths annually in
the United States from cirrhosis of the liver and hepatocellular
carcinoma.  The risk of perinatal HBV infection among infants born to
HBV-infected mothers ranges from 10% to 85%, depending on the
mother's hepatitis B e antigen status. Infected newborns usually
become HBV carriers and are at high risk for developing chronic
liver  disease.   Prevention   Infection  of  both  adults  and  neonates  can  be  readily
prevented
with a safe and effective vaccine that has been used in the United
States for more than 10 years. Universal vaccination of newborns is
now recommended (17). The use of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG)
combined with vaccination can prevent infection among persons
exposed sexually to HBV if administered within 14 days of exposure.
  Vaccination Eligibility  Persons known to be at high risk for acquiring HBV (e.g.,
persons with multiple sex partners, sex partners of HBV carriers,
or injecting drug users) should be advised of their risk for HBV
infection (as well as HIV infection) and the means to reduce their
risk (i.e., exclusivity in sexual relationships, use of condoms,
avoidance of nonsterile drug injection equipment, and HBV
vaccination).  Selected high-risk groups for which HBV vaccination is
recommended by the ACIP include the following persons:
__   Sexually active homosexual and bisexual men,
__   Men and women diagnosed as having recently acquired another
STD,
__   Persons who have had more than one sex partner in the
preceding 6 months.  Such persons should be vaccinated unless they are immune to
HBV as a result of past infection or vaccination. Refer to
Hepatitis B Virus: A Comprehensive Strategy for Eliminating
Transmission in the United States Through Universal Child
Vaccination, Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) (17).  Screening for Antibody Versus Vaccination Without
Screening  The prevalence of past HBV infection among sexually active
homosexual men and among injecting drug users is high. Serologic
screening for evidence of past infection before vaccinating members
of these groups may be cost-effective, depending on the relative
costs of laboratory testing and vaccine. Among those attending STD
clinics, it may be cost-effective to screen older persons for past
infection. During a recent study of 2,000 STD clinic patients who
accepted HBV vaccination, 28% of those greater than or equal to 25
years of age had evidence of past infection, whereas only 7% of
persons less than 25 years of age had evidence of past infection.
Past infection with HBV can be detected with a serologic test for
antibody to the hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc). Immunity can
be demonstrated by a test for antibody to the hepatitis B surface
antigen (anti-HBs). The HBV carrier state can be detected by a test
for HBsAg. If only a test for anti-HBc is used to screen for
susceptibility to infection, persons immune because of prior
vaccination will be falsely classified as susceptible. If only a
test for anti-HBs is used, carriers will be falsely classified as
susceptible.  Vaccination Schedules  The usual vaccination schedule is three doses of
vaccine at 0,
1, and 6 months. An alternative schedule of 0, 1, 2, and 12 months
also has been approved for one vaccine. The dose is 1 mL for
adults, which must be administered IM in the deltoid -- not in a
buttock. For persons 11-19 years of age, the dose is either 0.5 or
1 mL, depending on the manufacturer of the vaccine.  Management of Persons Exposed
to HBV  Susceptible persons exposed to HBV through sexual contact with
a person who has acute or chronic HBV infection should receive
postexposure prophylaxis with 0.06 mL/kg of HBIG in a single IM
dose within 14 days of their last exposure; early administration
may be more effective. HBIG administration should be followed by
the standard three-dose immunization series with HBV vaccine
beginning  at  the  time  of  HBIG  administration.   Special  Considerations   Pregnancy  
Pregnancy is not a contraindication to HBV or HBIG vaccine
administration.  HIV Infection  Among HIV-infected persons, HBV infection is more likely
to
lead to chronic HBV carriage. HIV infection also impairs the
response to HBV vaccine. Therefore, HIV- infected persons who are
vaccinated should be tested for anti-HBs 1-2 months after the third
vaccine dose. Revaccination with one or more doses should be
considered for those who do not respond to vaccination initially.
Those who do not respond to additional doses should be advised that
they  may  remain  susceptible.   PROCTITIS,  PROCTOCOLITIS,  AND  ENTERITIS   Sexually
transmitted gastrointestinal syndromes include
proctitis, proctocolitis, and enteritis. Proctitis occurs
predominantly among persons who participate in anal intercourse,
and enteritis occurs among those whose sexual practices include
oral-fecal contact. Proctocolitis may be acquired by either route
depending on the pathogen. Evaluation should include appropriate
diagnostic procedures, such as anoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, stool
examination, and culture.  Proctitis is an inflammation limited to the rectum (the distal
10 cm-12 cm) that is associated with anorectal pain, tenesmus, and
rectal discharge. N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis (including LGV
serovars), T. pallidum, and HSV are the most common sexually
transmitted pathogens involved. Among patients coinfected with HIV,
herpes proctitis may be especially severe.  Proctocolitis is associated with symptoms of
proctitis plus
diarrhea and/or abdominal cramps and inflammation of the colonic
mucosa extending to 12 cm. Pathogenic organisms include
Campylobacter spp, Shigella spp, Entamoeba histolytica, and,
rarely, C. trachomatis (LGV serovars). CMV or other opportunistic
agents may be involved among immunosuppressed patients with HIV
infection.  Enteritis usually results in diarrhea and abdominal cramping
without signs of proctitis or proctocolitis. In otherwise healthy
patients, Giardia lamblia is most commonly implicated. Among
patients with HIV infection, other infections that are not
generally sexually transmitted may occur, including CMV,
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, Salmonella spp,
Cryptosporidium, Microsporidium, and Isospora. Multiple stool
examinations may be necessary to detect Giardia, and special stool
preparations are required to diagnose cryptosporidiosis and
microsporidiosis. Additionally, enteritis may be a primary effect
of HIV infection.  When laboratory diagnostic capabilities are available,
treatment should be based on the specific diagnosis. Diagnostic and
treatment recommendations for all enteric infections are beyond the
scope of these guidelines.  Treatment  Acute proctitis of recent onset among persons
who have
recently practiced receptive anal intercourse is most often
sexually transmitted. Such patients should be examined by anoscopy
and should be evaluated for infection with HSV, N. gonorrhoeae, C.
trachomatis, and T. pallidum. If anorectal pus is found on
examination, or if polymorphonuclear leukocytes are found on a
Gram-stained smear of anorectal secretions, the following therapy
may be prescribed pending results of further laboratory tests.  Recommended Regimen 
Ceftriaxone 125 mg IM (or another agent effective against anal
and genital gonorrhea)  and
Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times a day for 7 days.  NOTE: For patients with herpes
proctitis, refer to Genital
Herpes  Simplex  Virus  Infections.   Follow-Up   Follow-up  should  be  based  on  specific
etiology and severity of
clinical symptoms. Reinfection may be difficult to distinguish from
treatment  failure.   Management  of  Sex  Partners   Partners  of  patients  with  sexually
transmitted enteric
infections should be evaluated for any diseases diagnosed in the
index patient.  ECTOPARASITIC INFECTIONS  Pediculosis Pubis  Patients with pediculosis
pubis (pubic lice) usually seek
medical attention because of pruritus. Commonly, they also notice
lice  on  pubic  hair.   Recommended  Regimens   Lindane  1%  shampoo  applied  for  4
minutes and then thoroughly
washed off (not recommended for pregnant or lactating women or for
children less than 2 years of age)  or
Permethrin 1% creme rinse applied to affected areas and washed
off after 10 minutes  or
Pyrethrins with piperonyl butoxide applied to the affected
area  and  washed  off  after  10  minutes.   The  lindane  regimen  remains  the  least
expensive therapy;
toxicity (as indicated by seizure and aplastic anemia) has not been
reported when treatment is limited to the recommended 4-minute
period. Permethrin has less potential for toxicity in the event of
inappropriate  use.   Other  Management  Considerations   The  recommended  regimens
should not be applied to the eyes.
Pediculosis of the eyelashes should be treated by applying
occlusive ophthalmic ointment to the eyelid margins two times a day
for 10 days.  Bedding and clothing should be decontaminated (machine washed
or machine dried using heat cycle or dry-cleaned) or removed from
body contact for at least 72 hours. Fumigation of living areas is
not  necessary.   Follow-Up   Patients  should  be  evaluated  after  1  week  if  symptoms
persist.
Re-treatment may be necessary if lice are found or if eggs are
observed at the hair-skin junction. Patients who are not responding
to one of the recommended regimens should be retreated with an
alternative regimen.  Management of Sex Partners  Sex partners within the last month
should be treated.  Special Considerations  Pregnancy  Pregnant and lactating women
should be treated with permethrin
or  pyrethrins  with  piperonyl  butoxide.   HIV  Infection   Persons  with  HIV  infection  and
pediculosis pubis should
receive the same treatment as those without HIV infection.  Scabies  The predominant
symptom of scabies is pruritus. For pruritus
to occur, sensitization to Sarcoptes scabiei must occur. Among
persons with their first infection, sensitization takes several
weeks to develop, while pruritus may occur within 24 hours after
reinfestation. Scabies among adults may be sexually transmitted,
although scabies among children is usually not sexually
transmitted.  Recommended Regimen  Permethrin cream (5%) applied to all areas of
the body from
the neck down and washed off after 8-14 hours,  or
Lindane (1%) 1 oz. of lotion or 30 g of cream applied thinly
to all areas of the body from the neck down and washed off
thoroughly after 8 hours.  NOTE: Lindane should not be used following a bath, and it
should not be used by persons with extensive dermatitis, pregnant
or  lactating  women,  and  children  less  than  2  years  of  age.   Alternative  Regimen  
Crotamiton (10%) applied to the entire body from the neck
down, nightly for 2 consecutive nights, and washed off 24 hours
after  the  second  application.   Permethrin  is  effective  and  safe  but  costs  more  than
lindane.
Lindane is effective in most areas of the country, but lindane
resistance has been reported in some areas of the world, including
parts of the United States. Seizures have occurred when lindane was
applied after a bath or used by patients with extensive dermatitis.
Aplastic  anemia  following  lindane  use  also  has  been  reported.   Other  Management
Considerations  Bedding and clothing should be decontaminated (machine washed
or machine dried using hot cycle or dry-cleaned) or removed from
body contact for at least 72 hours. Fumigation of living areas is
not  necessary.   Follow-Up   Pruritus  may  persist  for  several  weeks.  Some  experts
recommend
re-treatment after 1 week for patients who are still symptomatic;
other experts recommend re- treatment only if live mites can be
observed. Patients who are not responding to the recommended
treatment  should  be  retreated  with  an  alternative  regimen.   Management  of  Sex
Partners  Both sexual and close personal or household contacts within
the  last  month  should  be  examined  and  treated.   Special  Considerations   Pregnant
Women,  Infants,  and  Young  Children   Infants,  young  children,  and  pregnant  and
lactating women
should not be treated with lindane. They may be treated with
permethrin  or  crotamiton  regimens.   HIV  Infection   Persons  with  HIV  infection  and
uncomplicated scabies should
receive the same treatment as persons without HIV infection.
Persons with HIV infection and others who are immunosuppressed are
at increased risk for Norwegian scabies, a disseminated
dermatologic infection. Such patients should be managed in
consultation  with  an  expert.   SEXUAL  ASSAULT  AND  STDs   Adults  and  Adolescents  
Recommendations in this report are limited to the
identification and treatment of sexually transmitted infections and
conditions commonly identified in the management of such
infections. The documentation of findings and collection of
specimens for forensic purposes and the management of potential
pregnancy or physical and psychological trauma are beyond the scope
of these recommendations. Among sexually active adults, the
identification of sexually transmitted infections following assault
is usually more important for the psychological and medical
management of the patient than for legal purposes, if the infection
could  have  been  acquired  before  the  assault.   Trichomoniasis,  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,
and BV appear to be the
infections most commonly diagnosed among women following sexual
assault. Since the prevalence of these conditions is substantial
among sexually active women, their presence (post-assault) does not
necessarily signify acquisition during the assault. Chlamydial and
gonococcal infection among females are of special concern because
of the possibility of ascending infection.  Evaluation for Sexually Transmitted Infections 
Initial Examination  An initial examination should include the following
procedures:  
    Cultures for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis from specimens
    collected from any sites of penetration or attempted penetration.  
    If chlamydial culture is not available, nonculture tests for
    chlamydia are an acceptable substitute, although false-negative
    test results are more common with nonculture tests and
    false-positive test results may occur. If a nonculture test is
    used, a positive test result should be verified with a second test
    based on a different diagnostic principle or with a blocking
    antibody or competitive probe procedure.  
    Wet mount and culture of a vaginal swab specimen for T.
    vaginalis infection. If vaginal discharge or malodor is evident,
    the wet mount should also be examined for evidence of BV and yeast
    infection.  
    Collection of a serum sample to be preserved for subsequent
    analysis if follow-up serologic tests are positive (see Follow-up
    Examination 12 Weeks After Assault).  Follow-Up Examination 2 Weeks After Assault 
Examination for sexually transmitted infections should be
repeated 2 weeks after the assault. Because infectious agents
acquired through assault may not have produced sufficient
concentrations of organisms to result in positive tests at the
initial examination, culture and wet mount tests should be repeated
at the 2-week visit unless prophylactic treatment has already been
provided.   Follow-Up  Examination  12  Weeks  After  Assault   Serologic  tests  for  syphilis
and HIV infection should be
performed 12 weeks after the assault. If positive, testing of the
sera collected at the initial examination will assist in
determining whether the infection antedated the assault.  Prophylaxis  Although not all
experts agree, most patients probably benefit
from prophylaxis because a) follow-up of patients who have been
sexually assaulted can be difficult, and b) patients may be
reassured if offered treatment or prophylaxis for possible
infection. The following prophylactic measures address the more
common micro- organisms:  
    HBV vaccination (see HEPATITIS B).  
    Antimicrobial therapy: empiric regimen for chlamydial,
    gonococcal,  and  trichomonal  infections  and  for  BV.   Recommended  Regimen  
Ceftriaxone 125 mg IM in a single dose
PLUS
Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose
PLUS
Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  2  times  a  day  for  7  days.   NOTE:  For  patients  requiring
alternative treatments, see the
appropriate  sections  of  this  report  addressing  those  agents.   Other  Management
Considerations  At the initial examination and, as indicated, at follow-up
examinations, patients should be counseled regarding the following:
  
    Symptoms of STDs and the need for immediate examination if
    symptoms occur, and  
    Use of condoms for sexual intercourse until STD prophylactic
    treatment  is  completed.   Risk  for  Acquiring  HIV  Infection   Although  HIV-antibody
seroconversion has been reported among
persons whose only known risk factor was sexual assault or sexual
abuse, the risk for acquiring HIV infection through sexual assault
is minimal in most instances. Although the overall rate of
transmission of HIV from an HIV-infected person during a single act
of heterosexual intercourse is thought to be low ( less than 1%),
this risk depends on many factors. Prophylactic treatment for HIV
is not known to be effective and is not generally recommended in
this situation. However, all persons should be offered HIV
counseling  and  testing  after  the  assault.   Raising  the  issue  of  the  potential  for  HIV
infection during
the initial medical evaluation may add to the acute psychological
stress the patient may be experiencing because of the assault. An
alternative is to address the issue at the 2-week follow-up
appointment when the patient may be better able to receive this
information and give informed consent for HIV testing. All persons
electing to be tested for HIV should receive pretest and posttest
counseling.  Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children  Recommendations in this report are
limited to the
identification and treatment of sexually transmitted infections.
Management of the psychosocial and legal aspects of the sexual
assault or abuse of children are important, but are beyond the
scope  of  these  recommendations.   The  identification  of  sexually  transmissible  agents
among
children beyond the neonatal period suggests sexual abuse. However,
there are exceptions; for example, rectal or genital infection with
C. trachomatis among young children may be the result of
perinatally acquired infection and may persist for as long as 3
years. In addition, BV and genital mycoplasmas have been identified
among children who have been abused and among those who have not
been abused. A finding of genital warts, although suggestive of
assault, is not specific for sexual abuse without other evidence.
When the only evidence of sexual abuse is the isolation of an
organism or the detection of antibodies to a sexually transmissible
agent, findings should be confirmed and the implications carefully
considered.  Evaluation for Sexually Transmitted Infections  Examinations of children for
sexual assault or abuse should be
conducted so as to minimize trauma to the child. The decision to
evaluate the child for STDs must be made on an individual basis.
Situations involving a high risk for STDs and a strong indication
for testing include the following:  
    A suspected offender is known to have an STD or to be at high
    risk for STDs (e.g., multiple partners or past history of STD),  
    The child has symptoms or signs of an STD,  
    There is a high STD prevalence in the community.
    Obtaining the indicated specimens requires skill to avoid
    psychological and physical trauma to the child. The clinical
    manifestations of some sexually transmitted infections are
    different among children when compared with adults. Examinations
    and specimen collection should be conducted by practitioners who
    have experience and training in the evaluation of abused or
    assaulted children.  A principal purpose of the examination is to obtain evidence
of an infection that is likely to have been sexually transmitted.
However, because of the legal and psychosocial consequences of a
false-positive diagnosis, only tests with high specificities should
be used. Additional cost and time are justified to obtain such
tests.  The scheduling of examinations should depend on the history of
assault or abuse. If initial exposure is recent, infectious agents
acquired through the exposure may not have produced sufficient
concentrations of organisms to result in positive tests. A
follow-up visit approximately 2 weeks after the last sexual
exposure should include a repeat physical examination and
collection of additional specimens. To allow sufficient time for
antibody to develop, another follow-up visit approximately 12 weeks
after the last sexual exposure also is necessary to collect sera.
A single examination may be sufficient if the child was abused for
an extended period of time, or if the last suspected episode of
abuse took place some time before the child received the medical
evaluation.  The following recommendation for scheduling examinations is a
general guide. The exact timing and nature of follow-up contacts
should be determined on an individual basis and should be
considerate of the patient's psychological and social needs.
Compliance with follow-up appointments may be improved when law
enforcement  personnel  or  child  protective  services  are  involved.   Initial  and  2-Week
Examinations  During the initial examination and 2-week follow-up
examination (if indicated), the following should be performed:  
    Cultures for N. gonorrhoeae specimens collected from the
    pharynx and anus in both sexes, the vagina in girls, and the
    urethra in boys. Cervical specimens are not recommended for
    prepubertal girls. For boys, a meatal specimen of urethral
    discharge is an adequate substitute for an intraurethral swab
    specimen when discharge is present. Only standard culture systems
    for the isolation of N. gonorrhoeae should be used. All presumptive
    isolates of N. gonorrhoeae should be confirmed by at least two
    tests that involve different principles (e.g., biochemical, enzyme
    substrate, or serologic methods). Isolates should be preserved in
    case additional or repeated testing is needed.  
    Cultures for C. trachomatis from specimens collected from the
    anus in both sexes and from the vagina in girls. Limited
    information suggests that the likelihood of recovering chlamydia
    from the urethra of prepubertal boys is too low to justify the
    trauma involved in obtaining an intraurethral specimen. A urethral
    specimen should be obtained if urethral discharge is present.
    Pharyngeal specimens for C. trachomatis also are not recommended
    for either sex because the yield is low, perinatally acquired
    infection may persist beyond infancy, and culture systems in some
    laboratories do not distinguish between C. trachomatis and C.
    pneumoniae.  Only standard culture systems for the isolation of C.
trachomatis should be used. The isolation of C. trachomatis should
be confirmed by microscopic identification of inclusions by
staining with fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal antibody specific
for C. trachomatis. Isolates should be preserved. Nonculture tests
for chlamydia are not sufficiently specific for use in
circumstances involving possible child abuse or assault.  
    Culture and wet mount of a vaginal swab specimen for T.
    vaginalis infection. The presence of clue cells in the wet mount
    suggests BV among children with vaginal discharge. The significance
    of clue cells or other indicators of BV as an indicator of sexual
    exposure is unclear. The clinical significance of clue cells or
    other indicators of BV in the absence of vaginal discharge also is
    not clear.  
    Collection of a serum sample to be preserved for subsequent
    analysis if follow-up serologic tests are positive. If the last
    sexual exposure occurred greater than 8 weeks before the initial
    examination, sera should be tested immediately for antibody to
    sexually transmitted agents. Agents for which suitable tests are
    available include T. pallidum, HIV, and HBV. The choice of agents
    for serologic tests should be made on a case-by-case basis (see
    Examination  12  Weeks  After  Assault).   Examination  12  Weeks  After  Assault   An
examination approximately 12 weeks after the last suspected
sexual exposure is recommended to allow time for antibodies to
infectious agents to develop. Serologic tests for the agents listed
below should be considered:  
    T. pallidum,  
    HIV,  
    HBV.
    The prevalence of these infections varies greatly among
    communities, and depends upon whether risk factors are known to be
    present in the abuser or assailant. Also, results of HBV tests must
    be interpreted carefully, because HBV may be transmitted by
    nonsexual modes as well as sexually. The choice of tests must be
    made on a case-by-case basis.  Presumptive Treatment  There are few data upon
which to establish the risk of a
child's acquiring a sexually transmitted infection as a result of
sexual abuse. The risk is believed to be low in most circumstances,
although documentation to support this position is inadequate.  Presumptive treatment
for children who have been sexually
assaulted or abused is not widely recommended because girls appear
to be at lower risk for ascending infection than adolescent or
adult women, and regular follow-up can usually be assured. However,
some children or their parents or guardians may be very concerned
about the possibility of contracting an STD, even if the risk is
perceived by the health-care practitioner to be low. Addressing
patient concerns may be an appropriate indication for presumptive
treatment  in  some  settings.   Reporting   Every  state,  the  District  of  Columbia,  Puerto
Rico, Guam, the
Virgin Islands, and American Samoa have laws that require the
reporting of child abuse. The exact requirements vary from state to
state but, generally, if there is reasonable cause to suspect child
abuse, it must be reported. Health-care providers should contact
their state or local child protective service agency about child
abuse reporting requirements in their areas.  References 
    CDC. Sexually Transmitted Diseases Clinical Practice Guidelines,
    1991. 
    CDC. Technical guidance on HIV counseling. MMWR 1993;42(RR-2):8-
 
    American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetrics
    and Gynecology (ACOG). Guidelines for Perinatal Care, third
    edition, 1992. 
    Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, Report of the U.S.
    Preventive Services Task Force. Williams and Wilkins:Baltimore,
    MD., 1989. 
    CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and management of
    Chlamydia trachomatis infections, 1993. MMWR 1993;42(RR-12):1-39. 
    CDC. Testing for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus type
    2 in the United States. MMWR 1992;41(RR-12):1-9. 
    CDC. Purified protein derivative (PPD-tuberculin anergy) and HIV
    infection: Guidelines for anergy testing and management of anergic
    persons at risk of tuberculosis. MMWR 1991;40 (RR-5):27-33. 
    CDC. The use of preventive therapy for tuberculous infection in
    the United States. MMWR 1990;39(RR-8):6-8. 
    CDC. Management of persons exposed to multidrug-resistant
    tuberculosis. MMWR 1992;41(RR-11):59-71. 
    Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
    Practices (ACIP): Use of vaccines and immune globulins in persons
    with altered immunocompetence. MMWR 1993;42(RR-4):1-18. 
    CDC. Recommendations for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis
    carinii pneumonia for adults and adolescents infected with human
    immunodeficiency virus. MMWR 1992;41(RR-4):1-11. 
    CDC. Guidelines for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii
    pneumonia for children infected with human immunodeficiency virus.
    MMWR 1991;40(RR-2):1-13. 
    Committee on Infectious Diseases, American Academy of
    Pediatrics. Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 22nd
    edition, 1991. 
    Beall GN. Penicillins. In: Saxon A, moderator. Immediate
    hypersensitivity reactions to beta lactam antibiotics. Ann Intern
    Med 1987;107:204-15. 
    Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin
    test (Table). N Engl J Med 1985:312;1229-32. 
    National Cancer Institute Workshop. The 1988 Bethesda System
    for reporting cervical/vaginal cytological diagnoses. JAMA
    1989;262:931-4. 
    CDC. Hepatitis B virus: A comprehensive strategy for
    eliminating transmission in the United States through universal
    childhood vaccination, Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
    Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(RR-13):1-25. 
        * A woman treated with a regimen other than those recommended for
        treatment of syphilis (for pregnant women or otherwise) in these
        guidelines should be considered untreated. 
        ** In the immediate newborn period, interpretation of CSF test
        results may be difficult; normal values vary with gestational age
        and are higher in preterm infants.  Other causes of elevated values
        also should be considered when an infant is being evaluated for
        congenital syphilis.  Though values as high as 25 white blood
        cells(WBC)/mm3 and 150 mg protein/dL occur among normal neonates,
        some experts recommend that lower values (5 WBC/mm3 and 40 mg/dL)
        be considered the upper limits of normal.  The infant should be
        treated if test results cannot exclude infection. 
        *** The absence of a fourfold greater titer for an infant cannot be
        used as evidence against congenital syphilis. 
        # Reprinted with permission from G.N. Beall in Annals of Internal
        Medicine. 
        ## Aged penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants.
        Penicillin G should be freshly prepared or should come from a
        fresh-frozen source. 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
    CDC. Sexually Transmitted Diseases Clinical Practice Guidelines,
    1991.  
    CDC. Technical guidance on HIV counseling. MMWR 1993;42(RR-2):8-
   
    American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetrics
    and Gynecology (ACOG). Guidelines for Perinatal Care, third
    edition, 1992.  
    Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, Report of the U.S.
    Preventive Services Task Force. Williams and Wilkins:Baltimore,
    MD., 1989.  
    CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and management of
    Chlamydia trachomatis infections, 1993. MMWR 1993;42(RR-12):1-39.  
    CDC. Testing for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus type
    2 in the United States. MMWR 1992;41(RR-12):1-9.  
    CDC. Purified protein derivative (PPD-tuberculin anergy) and HIV
    infection: Guidelines for anergy testing and management of anergic
    persons at risk of tuberculosis. MMWR 1991;40 (RR-5):27-33.  
    CDC. The use of preventive therapy for tuberculous infection in
    the United States. MMWR 1990;39(RR-8):6-8.  
    CDC. Management of persons exposed to multidrug-resistant
    tuberculosis. MMWR 1992;41(RR-11):59-71.  
    Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
    Practices (ACIP): Use of vaccines and immune globulins in persons
    with altered immunocompetence. MMWR 1993;42(RR-4):1-18.  
    CDC. Recommendations for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis
    carinii pneumonia for adults and adolescents infected with human
    immunodeficiency virus. MMWR 1992;41(RR-4):1-11.  
    CDC. Guidelines for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis carinii
    pneumonia for children infected with human immunodeficiency virus.
    MMWR 1991;40(RR-2):1-13.  
    Committee on Infectious Diseases, American Academy of
    Pediatrics. Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 22nd
    edition, 1991.  
    Beall GN. Penicillins. In: Saxon A, moderator. Immediate
    hypersensitivity reactions to beta lactam antibiotics. Ann Intern
    Med 1987;107:204-15.  
    Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin
    test (Table). N Engl J Med 1985:312;1229-32.  
    National Cancer Institute Workshop. The 1988 Bethesda System
    for reporting cervical/vaginal cytological diagnoses. JAMA
    1989;262:931-4.  
    CDC. Hepatitis B virus: A comprehensive strategy for
    eliminating transmission in the United States through universal
    childhood vaccination, Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
    Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(RR-13):1-25.  
        * A woman treated with a regimen other than those recommended for
        treatment of syphilis (for pregnant women or otherwise) in these
        guidelines should be considered untreated. 
        ** In the immediate newborn period, interpretation of CSF test
        results may be difficult; normal values vary with gestational age
        and are higher in preterm infants.  Other causes of elevated values
        also should be considered when an infant is being evaluated for
        congenital syphilis.  Though values as high as 25 white blood
        cells(WBC)/mm3 and 150 mg protein/dL occur among normal neonates,
        some experts recommend that lower values (5 WBC/mm3 and 40 mg/dL)
        be considered the upper limits of normal.  The infant should be
        treated if test results cannot exclude infection. 
        *** The absence of a fourfold greater titer for an infant cannot be
        used as evidence against congenital syphilis. 
        # Reprinted with permission from G.N. Beall in Annals of Internal
        Medicine. 
        ## Aged penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants.
        Penicillin G should be freshly prepared or should come from a
        fresh-frozen source. 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        ** In the immediate newborn period, interpretation of CSF test
        results may be difficult; normal values vary with gestational age
        and are higher in preterm infants.  Other causes of elevated values
        also should be considered when an infant is being evaluated for
        congenital syphilis.  Though values as high as 25 white blood
        cells(WBC)/mm3 and 150 mg protein/dL occur among normal neonates,
        some experts recommend that lower values (5 WBC/mm3 and 40 mg/dL)
        be considered the upper limits of normal.  The infant should be
        treated if test results cannot exclude infection. 
        *** The absence of a fourfold greater titer for an infant cannot be
        used as evidence against congenital syphilis. 
        # Reprinted with permission from G.N. Beall in Annals of Internal
        Medicine. 
        ## Aged penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants.
        Penicillin G should be freshly prepared or should come from a
        fresh-frozen source. 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        *** The absence of a fourfold greater titer for an infant cannot be
        used as evidence against congenital syphilis. 
        # Reprinted with permission from G.N. Beall in Annals of Internal
        Medicine. 
        ## Aged penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants.
        Penicillin G should be freshly prepared or should come from a
        fresh-frozen source. 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        # Reprinted with permission from G.N. Beall in Annals of Internal
        Medicine. 
        ## Aged penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants.
        Penicillin G should be freshly prepared or should come from a
        fresh-frozen source. 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        ## Aged penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants.
        Penicillin G should be freshly prepared or should come from a
        fresh-frozen source. 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        ### Azithromycin 1 g in a single dose, according to manufacturer's
        data, is equivalent to doxycycline. However, this study has not
        been published in a peer-reviewed journal. For a discussion
        comparing azithromycin and doxycyline, refer to Chlamydial
        Infections. 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        @ These creams and suppositories are oil-based and may weaken latex
        condoms and diaphragms. Refer to product labeling for further
        information. 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        @@ Over-the-counter (OTC) preparations. 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
        @@@ The 1988 Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal
 Cytologic
        Diagnoses introduced the new terms low-grade squamous
        intraepithelial lesion (SIL) and high-grade SIL. Low-grade SIL
        encompasses cellular changes associated with HPV and mild
        dysplasia/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN 1). High grade
        SIL includes moderate dysplasia/CIN 2, severe dysplasia/CIN 3, and
        carcinoma in situ (CIS)/CIN3 (16<|>) Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Oral desensitization protocol for patients with a positive skin test (15) *
====================================================
==========================================
Penicillin V
 suspension        Amount &                              Cumulative
   dose +         (units/mL)      mL        Units       dose (units)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
     1              1,000         0.1          100              100
     2              1,000         0.2          200              300
     3              1,000         0.4          400              700
     4              1,000         0.8          800            1,500
     5              1,000         1.6        1,600            3,100
     6              1,000         3.2        3,200            6,300
     7              1,000         6.4        6,400           12,700
     8             10,000         1.2       12,000           24,700
     9             10,000         2.4       24,000           48,700
    10             10,000         4.8       48,000           96,700
    11             80,000         1.0       80,000          176,700
    12             80,000         2.0      160,000          336,700
    13             80,000         4.0      320,000          656,700
    14             80,000         8.0      640,000        1,296,700
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Observation period: 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin.
* Reprinted with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine.
+  Interval  between  doses,  15  minutes;  elapsed  time,  3  hours  and  45  minutes;
cumulative dose,
  1.3 million units.
& The specific amount of drug was diluted in approximately 30 mL of water and then
adminis-
  tered orally.
====================================================
==========================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00023296.htm
