Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Health officials develop a case definition to identify which ill
persons will be classified as part of the outbreak. Case definitions should be sensitive
enough to include all cases, and specific enough to only identify the cases involved in
the outbreak. Case definitions may include details about: There might be several case
definitions  during  an  outbreak  investigation,  each  with  a  different  purpose.  For
example, one case definition might be for confirmed illnesses and another for probable
illnesses. The number of illnesses that meet the case definition is called the case count.
As the investigation proceeds with more information about the illnesses and outbreak,
the case definition will be further refined to include compatible symptoms, laboratory
confirmation,  and  onset  dates.  It  is  important  to  document  the  case  definition
development  throughout  the  investigation.  The  Council  of  State  and  Territorial
Epidemiologists (CSTE) has developed case definitions for many waterborne pathogens
based  on  uniform  criteria  used  to  define  a  disease  for  public  health  surveillance  that
can  be  reviewed  on  the  National  Notifiable  Disease  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS)
website.  These  case  definitions  may  be  helpful  in  determining  if  a  case  is  confirmed,
probable,  or  suspected  in  an  outbreak.  Case  Definition  Example  Setting:  Time:  Onset
between Jan 2012-Dec 2012 Geographic Range: Residents of State A or State B Clinical
Description: A gastrointestinal illness characterized by diarrhea and one or more of the
following:  diarrhea  duration  of  72  hours  or  more,  abdominal  cramping,  vomiting,  or
anorexia.  Laboratory  Criteria  for  Diagnosis  Confirmed:  Evidence  of  Cryptosporidium
organisms or DNA in stool, intestinal fluid, tissue samples, biopsy specimens, or other
biological  sample  by  certain  laboratory  methods  with  a  high  positive  predictive  value
(PPV),  e.g.,  Probable:  The  detection  of  Cryptosporidium  antigen  by  a  screening  test
method, such as immunochromatographic card/rapid card test; or a laboratory test of
unknown method. Case Classification Probable: A case with supportive laboratory test
results  for  Cryptosporidium  spp.  infection  using  a  method  listed  in  the  probable
laboratory  criteria.  When  the  diagnostic  test  method  on  a  laboratory  test  result  for
cryptosporidiosis cannot be determined, the case can only be classified as probable, OR
A  case  that  meets  the  clinical  criteria  and  is  epidemiologically  linked  to  a  confirmed
case. Confirmed: A case that is diagnosed with Cryptosporidium spp. infection based on
laboratory testing using a method listed in the confirmed criteria. Comments Persons
who  have  a  diarrheal  illness  and  are  epidemiologically  linked  to  a  probable  case
because
 that
 individual
 was
 only
 diagnosed
 with
 cryptosporidiosis
 by
 an
immunocard/rapid test/or unknown test method cannot be classified as probable cases.
These epi-links can be considered suspect cases only. At the beginning of an outbreak
investigation, it is important to identify as many potential cases as defined by the case
definition as possible to guide determination of a common source or sources. The first
illnesses that are recognized can be only a small part of the total outbreak. Identifying
more persons who are ill is integral to understanding the magnitude, timing, severity,
and  possible  sources  of  the  outbreak  for  public  health  officials.  Using  the  case
definition, investigators search for more illnesses related to the outbreak by: To receive
updates  highlighting  our  recent  work  to  prevent  infectious  disease,  enter  your  email
address:
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/emergency/waterborne-disease-outbreak-investigation-toolkit/define-c
ases.html
