Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  2019  Viral  Hepatitis  Surveillance  Report  is  published  by  the
Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB
Prevention,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC),  U.S.  Department  of
Health and Human Services, Atlanta, Georgia. Data are presented for the cases of viral
hepatitis  infection  from  1  January  2019  through  31  December  2019.  All  material
contained in this report is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without
special permission; however, citation as to source is appreciated. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Viral Hepatitis Surveillance 2019. Atlanta: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; 2021. Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver most often
caused by a virus. In the US, the most common types of viral hepatitis are hepatitis A,
B,  and  C.  While  each  can  produce  similar  symptoms,  each  hepatitis  virus  affects  the
liver differently, has different routes of transmission and infection, and typically affects
different  populations.  Fortunately,  effective  vaccines  are  available  to  help  prevent
hepatitis A and hepatitis B. Although no vaccine is available for hepatitis C, life-saving
treatment can cure the virus. Learn more about the different viral hepatitis types. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) collects, analyzes, and disseminates
viral  hepatitis  surveillance  data.  Each  week,  staff  at  health  departments  submit  case
reports of viral hepatitis to CDC through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance
System  (NNDSS).  The  annual  surveillance  report,  published  by  the  Division  of  Viral
Hepatitis, summarizes information about reported cases of hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and
hepatitis C and deaths with any of these hepatitides listed as a cause of death in CDC’s
National Vital Statistics System (NVSS). For health department staff to report cases of
viral hepatitis to CDC, they must have systems and processes in place that ensure each
case is detected. Because of varying state laws, resources, and infrastructure, not all
health  departments  report  all  cases  of  acute  or  chronic  viral  hepatitis  to  CDC.  This
section  provides  a  graphical  representation  of  acute  viral  hepatitis  cases  reported  in
2019. Click here to view the Hepatitis A Surveillance Report for 2019 Click here to view
the  Hepatitis  B  Surveillance  Report  for  2019  Click  here  to  view  the  Hepatitis  C
Surveillance  Report  for  2019  Download  the  full  2019  report  in  Portable  Document
Format [PDF – 9 MB] View a summary table of reported acute viral hepatitis cases and
estimated infections Full Set of Downloadable 2019 Report Figures and Tables [PPT – 2
MB] Summary of Viral Hepatitis Acute Infections Figures [PPT – 221 KB] Outcome data
on  infants  born  to  persons  with  hepatitis  B  virus  infection  are  reported  by  the  CDC
Perinatal  Hepatitis  B  Prevention  Program  (PHBPP),  which  funds  64  jurisdictions  to
identify  pregnant  persons  infected  with  hepatitis  B  virus  and  to  case-manage  their
infants to improve receipt of post-exposure prophylaxis… Outcome data on infants born
to persons with hepatitis B virus infection are reported by the CDC Perinatal Hepatitis B
Prevention Program (PHBPP), which funds 64 jurisdictions to identify pregnant persons
infected with hepatitis B virus and to case-manage their infants to improve receipt of
post-exposure prophylaxis…
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2019surveillance/index.htm
