Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. The CDC ScoreCard is a tool to help employers assess whether
their  health  promotion  programs  are  based  on  the  best  evidence  for   improving
employees’  health  and  wellness.  Available  for  Download  [PDF  –  624  KB]  Millions  of
Americans get food at work each day. Improving access to healthy food and beverages
at the worksite to improve diet is a key component of a workplace nutrition program.
People  who  eat  a  healthy  diet  live  longer  and  are  at  lower  risk  for  serious  health
problems   such  as  heart  disease,  type  2  diabetes,  and  obesity.  For  those  with  these
conditions,  healthy  eating  can  help  manage  them  and  prevent  complications.  44%  of
employers have a comprehensive workplace nutrition programs including policies and
environmental  support  strategies.  47%  of  employers  have  a  policy  strategy  (e.g.,
healthy foods at meetings or subsidies) to improve healthy food and beverage access
and availability as part of their worksite nutrition program. On average, employers have
57%, or 8 of 14 Nutrition ScoreCard strategies in place. a Evidence-based practices (i.e.,
programs, policies, environmental supports, and benefits) in the CDC Worksite Health
ScoreCard  have  a  weighted  score  from  1  to  3  points.  The  score  is  derived  from  the
strategy’s  impact  on  population  health  outcomes  and  the  strength  of  the  supporting
scientific evidence. b Percentages are based on 480 ScoreCard submissions in 2020. c
Percentages  are  based  on  359  ScoreCard  submissions  from  employers  who  reported
providing  places  to  purchase  food  and  beverages  in  2020.  To  receive  email  updates
about Workplace Health Promotion, enter your email address:
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/workplacehealthpromotion/data-surveillance/scorecard-2020-employer-nutrition.htm
l
