A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Management  of  Potentially  Infectious
Exposures  and  Illnesses  from  the  Infection  Control  in  Healthcare  Personnel:
Infrastructure and Routine Practices for Occupational Infection Prevention and Control
Services (2019) guideline. HCP can be exposed to potentially infectious blood, tissues,
secretions, other body fluids, contaminated medical supplies, devices, and equipment,
environmental  surfaces,  or  air  in  healthcare  settings.  Mechanisms  of  occupational
exposures  include  percutaneous  injuries  such  as  needlesticks,  mucous  membrane  or
non-intact skin contact via splashes or sprays, and inhalation of aerosols. HCP can also
be  exposed  to  infectious  diseases  in  the  community  and  risk  transmitting  them  to
others  at  work.  Appropriate  management  of  potentially  infectious  exposures  and
illnesses  among  HCP  can  prevent  the  development  and  transmission  of  infections.
Effective  management  of  exposures  and  illnesses  includes  promptly  assessing
exposures  and  diagnosing  illness,  monitoring  for  the  development  of  signs  and
symptoms of disease, and providing appropriate postexposure or illness management.
Providing  exposure  and  illness  management  services  also  affords  the  opportunity  for
counseling to address HCP concerns about issues such as potential infection, adverse
effects  of  postexposure  prophylaxis,  and  work  restrictions.  A  substantial  number  of
potentially  infectious  exposures  occur  in  the  workplace,  despite  longstanding
regulations and guidelines in place for their prevention1234, and providing timely and
effective  exposure  management  services  can  be  challenging.  Bloodborne  pathogen
exposures  among  HCP  subpopulations,  including  trainees,  technicians,  surgeons,
medical staff, and nurses, are significantly underreported567. Time constraints, fear of
reprimand,  lack  of  information  on  how  to  report  exposures,  and  cost  coverage  of
exposure  management  have  been  identified  as  factors  in  not  reporting  exposures6.
While many HCP may be guaranteed cost coverage for job-related exposure and illness
by workers' compensation laws, not all HCP, such as volunteers and trainees, may have
this  benefit.  Off-site  services  can  be  a  barrier  to  accessing  care  if  they  are
inconveniently located. When timeliness is critical for provision of prophylaxis or expert
consultation  and  management  (see  Expert  consultation  and  management  services),
such as after a needlestick injury from an HIV-infected source, off-site services may not
be sufficient. Identifying whether an exposure to an infectious disease has occurred can
be  challenging  and  depends  upon  eliciting  the  circumstances  of  the  (sometimes
remote) exposure incident, including where, when, and how the exposure occurred, the
duration  and  extent  of  the  exposure,  and  whether  appropriate  PPE  was  used  and
functioned  correctly.  Some  guidelines  provide  disease-specific  guidance  on  how  to
determine  if  an  occupational  exposure  has  occurred89.  Efficient  management  of  HCP
exposures  can  benefit  from  procedures  that  streamline  and  enable  HCP  exposure
reporting  and  service  access.  Patient  care  processes  are  an  important  aspect  of  HCP
exposure management. For example, some HCO request patients to sign an advance
release  that  allows  for  bloodborne  pathogen  testing  should  an  HCP  exposure  occur
during  the  course  of  their  care.  Treatment  and  containment  of  infectious  illnesses  in
HCP  can  protect  patients  and  coworkers  from  infection10.  Occupationally-  and
community-acquired  infections  can  both  be  of  concern.  A  prominent  issue  is
"presenteeism;"  that  is,  HCP  reporting  to  work  when  sick11.  Whether  because  of
individual  work  ethic,  local  culture  (e.g.,  unwillingness  to  disappoint  colleagues),  or
financial pressures such as a lack of paid sick leave or policies that combine sick leave
and  vacation  days,  presenteeism  puts  others  at  risk.  Eliciting  reasons  for  HCP
presenteeism  may  inform  methods  to  reduce  the  problem.  Developing  policies  that
discourage  presenteeism  can  be  challenging,  as  contractual  staff  employers  and
self-employed HCP may have different rules about missing work. Federal requirements
affect  the  delivery  of  exposure  or  illness  management  services.  Affected  services
include: Additional state and local requirements may also apply to exposure and illness
management  services.  The  capacity  for  providing  exposure  and  illness  management
services  varies  by  OHS.  Depending  upon  clinical  circumstances,  expert  consultation
may be appropriate for managing exposures to infections or illnesses such as HIV 8and
hepatitis  C1516.  OHS  locations  and  healthcare  settings  may  not  have  such  experts
available  on-site,  and  arranging  for  consultation  can  require  advanced  planning.
Methods  to  facilitate  expert  consultation  include  standing  agreements  with  on-site  or
contracted  experts  and  the  use  of  decision  support  resources,  such  as  telemedicine
services  and  accessing  exposure  and  illness  management  guidelines  or  protocols
electronically1718.  Work  restrictions  exclude  potentially  infectious  HCP  from  the
workplace  or  specifically  from  patient  contact  to  prevent  transmission  of  infectious
diseases. Work restrictions may also be implemented when HCP are at increased risk
for  infection,  such  as  restricting  susceptible  HCP  contact  with  patients  with  varicella
zoster  when  immune  HCP  are  available19.  Exclusion  can  be  based  on  time,  or
evaluation for clearance to return to work, depending on the infection. Reluctance to
report  exposures  and  illnesses  and  concerns  regarding  missed  work  can  make  work
restrictions difficult to implement. Staffing limitations can also affect implementation of
work restrictions. Alternative work options that minimize risk to others (e.g., telework
for infectious workers), and utilizing paid sick leave days or job-protected leave (e.g.,
provided by the FMLA14) may reduce the negative impacts of work restrictions. When
OHS  detects  an  outbreak  among  HCP,  internal  coordination  with  other  HCO
departments,  such  as  IPC  services,  is  essential,  as  is  notification  of  the  appropriate
public health authorities20. When HCP testing is required, clinical laboratory personnel
are  part  of  the  response  planning  process1121.  OHS  can  also  inform  post-outbreak
assessments  to  identify  options  for  preventing  future  outbreaks22.  All  states  and
territories have requirements for reporting selected infections or infectious conditions in
persons  to  health  departments2324.  Reporting  of  notifiable  infections  can  hasten
identification of chains of transmission and outbreaks and facilitate health department
assistance with notifying contacts. Adverse events due to medical devices or equipment
can  result  in  HCP  exposure  to  infectious  diseases  (e.g.,  sharps  injuries),  and  devices
involved in such exposures due to a quality problem or other issues can be reported to
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) MedWatch database25. Reporting to the
FDA MedWatch Database is voluntary, but serves to identify device-related hazards that
might warrant review. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety
to help reduce the risk of infections among healthcare workers, patients, and visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/healthcare-personnel-infrastructure-routine-practices/exposure
-managment.html
