Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Learn about simple ways you can support your child before,
during and after shots. Take a moment to read about how you can prepare before your
visit, and review any vaccine information provided by your child’s doctor.  If you want to
do  additional  research,  use  CDC’s  vaccines  for  parents  web  site.  Tasting  something
sweet can help reduce your little one’s pain response. If your child is two years of age
or  younger,  ask  your  child’s  doctor  to  give  your  child  a  sweet  solution  of  sucrose  or
glucose one to two minutes before the shot. Even a very small amount can help reduce
pain during shots. Breastfeeding can be a great way to calm and relax your baby, as it
can  help  distract  him  or  her  and  provide  comforting  close  contact.  Additionally,
breastmilk has a slight sweetness, which can help reduce your child’s pain during shots.
Ask your child’s doctor for a pain-relieving ointment, which blocks pain signals from the
skin. Because the ointment takes time to work, ask about it before your next well-child
visit. Or, request a cooling spray (vapocoolant), which is applied on your child’s arm or
leg right before the shot. Using an ointment or cooling spray may reduce your and your
child’s stress during a well-check visit. Kids are smart, so take time to explain in simple
terms what to expect.  Explain that your child may feel a little pinch and it will go away
very fast. Use words like “pressure” or “poke” rather than “pain” or “shot.” Even if your
baby can’t understand your words, your calm voice will be reassuring. Remain upbeat
and relaxed before, during, and especially after shots. Bring anything your child finds
comforting,  like  a  favorite  toy,  blanket,  or  book,  to  help  them  focus  on  something
pleasant. Make sure to check with your doctor before bringing items into the room with
you. Right before the shot, call your child’s name, sing your child’s favorite song, tell a
story, or just act plain silly to pull your child’s attention away from the shot giver. Keep
the distraction going after the vaccine is given. If your child is older, you can take deep
breaths with them to help “blow out” the pain. Have them imagine the pain is leaving
their mouth as they breathe out. Tell a story or point out interesting things in the room
to help create distractions. Calm young infants by swaddling them. Hugs, cuddles and
soft  whispers  can  help  soothe  older  babies  after  a  shot.  Your  child  may  have  mild
reactions,  such  as  pain  and  swelling  where  the  shot  was  given  or  a  fever;  these  are
common and will soon go away.  Contact your child’s doctor if anything concerns you.   
Watch the video, what you should expect when your child is vaccinated. See also
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/parents/visit/less-stressful.html
