Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) Part 1: Immunization of Infants, Children, and Adolescents 
 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
Eric E. Mast, MD1, Harold S. Margolis, 
MD,1 Anthony E. Fiore, MD,1 Edward W. Brink, 
MD,2 Susan T. Goldstein, 
MD,1 Susan A. Wang, MD,1 Linda A. 
Moyer,1 Beth P. Bell, MD,1 Miriam J. Alter, 
PhD1
1Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for Infectious Diseases, 
2Immunization Services Division, National Immunization Program
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD, Director, Division of Viral Hepatitis, 
John W. Ward, MD, Director;  and the National Immunization Program, Anne Schuchat,
MD, Director, Immunization Services Division, Lance 
E. Rodewald, MD, Director. 
 Corresponding preparer: Eric E. Mast, MD, Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center
for Infectious Diseases, 1600 Clifton Road, NE, MS 
G-37,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:  404-371-5460;  Fax:  404-371-5221;  E-mail:
emast@cdc.gov.
Summary
 This  report  is  the  first  of  a  two-part  statement  from  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) 
that updates the strategy to eliminate hepatitis B virus (HBV) transmission in the United
States. The report provides 
updated recommendations to improve prevention of perinatal and early childhood HBV
transmission, including implementation 
of  universal  infant  vaccination  beginning  at  birth,  and  to  increase  vaccine  coverage
among previously unvaccinated children 
and  adolescents.  Strategies  to  enhance  implementation  of  the  recommendations
include 1) establishing standing orders 
for  administration  of  hepatitis  B  vaccination  beginning  at  birth;  2)  instituting  delivery
hospital policies and procedures and 
case  management  programs  to  improve  identification  of  and  administration  of
immunoprophylaxis to infants born to mothers 
who 
are hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) positive and to mothers with unknown HBsAg
status at the time of delivery; and 
3)  implementing  vaccination  record  reviews  for  all  children  aged  11--12  years  and
children and adolescents aged <19 years 
who  were  born  in  countries  with  intermediate  and  high  levels  of  HBV  endemicity,
adopting hepatitis B vaccine requirements 
for school entry, and integrating hepatitis B vaccination services into settings that serve
adolescents. The second part of the 
ACIP  statement,  which  will  include  updated  recommendations  and  strategies  to
increase hepatitis B vaccination of adults, will 
be published separately.
Strategy to Eliminate Hepatitis B Virus Transmission
  Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a bloodborne and sexually transmitted virus. Rates of new
infection and acute disease are 
highest among adults, but chronic infection is more likely to occur in persons infected
as infants or young children. Before hepatitis 
B vaccination programs became routine in the United States, an estimated 30%--40% of
chronic 
infections are believed to have resulted from perinatal or early childhood transmission,
even though <10% of reported cases of hepatitis B occurred 
in children aged <10 years (1). Chronically infected persons are at increased lifetime
risk for cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and also serve as the main reservoir for continued HBV
transmission.
 Hepatitis B vaccination is the most effective measure to prevent HBV infection and its
consequences. Since they were 
first issued in 1982, recommendations for hepatitis B vaccination have evolved into a
comprehensive strategy to eliminate 
HBV transmission in the United States (2--6) 
(Box 1). A primary focus of this strategy is universal vaccination of 
infants to prevent early childhood HBV infection and to eventually protect adolescents
and adults from infection. Other components 
include routine screening of all pregnant women for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
and postexposure immunoprophylaxis 
of infants born to HBsAg-positive women, vaccination of children and adolescents who
were not previously vaccinated, 
and vaccination of unvaccinated adults at increased risk for infection.
 To date, the immunization strategy has been implemented with considerable success.
Recent estimates indicate that >95% 
of pregnant women are tested for HBsAg, and case management has been effective in
ensuring high levels of initiation 
and 
 
 
completion  of  postexposure  immunoprophylaxis  among  identified  infants  born  to
HBsAg-positive women 
(7).  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  has  been  successfully  integrated  into  the  childhood  vaccine
schedule, and infant vaccine coverage levels are 
now  equivalent  to  those  of  other  vaccines  in  the  childhood  schedule.  During
1990--2004, incidence of acute hepatitis B in 
the United States declined 75%. The greatest decline (94%) occurred among children
and adolescents, coincident with an 
increase in hepatitis B vaccine coverage. As of 2004, among U.S. children aged 19--35
months, >92% had been fully vaccinated with 
3  doses  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  (8).  This  success  can  be  attributed  in  part  to  the
established infrastructure for vaccine delivery 
to children and to federal support for perinatal hepatitis B prevention programs.
 Vaccine  coverage  among  adolescents  has  also  increased  substantially.  Preliminary
data demonstrate that 50%--60% 
of  adolescents  aged  13--15  years  have  records  indicating  vaccination  (with  3  doses)
against hepatitis B (CDC, unpublished 
data,  2003).  As  of  November  2005,  a  total  of  34  states  require  vaccination  for
middle-school entry 
(9).  Certain  programs  provide  hepatitis  B  vaccine  to  youth  who  engage  in  behaviors
that place them at high risk for HBV infection (i.e., injection-drug 
use, having more than one sex partner, and male sexual activity with other males), and
adolescent hepatitis B vaccination 
is included as a Health Plan Employer Data Information Set (HEDIS) measure 
(10).
 Despite these successes, challenges remain. Even with 
improvements in the management of pregnant women, 
only approximately 50% of expected births to HBsAg-positive women are identified (on
the basis of application of 
racial/ethnic-specific  HBsAg  prevalence  estimates  to  U.S.  natality  data)  for  case
management, which maximizes timely delivery 
of postexposure immunoprophylaxis (11; CDC, unpublished data, 2004). The need for
proper management of women 
without prenatal care, including HBsAg testing at the time of admission for delivery and
administration of the first dose of vaccine 
to  infants  <12  hours  of  birth,  is  underscored  by  the  higher  prevalence  of  HBsAg
seropositivity among these women than 
among women who are screened prenatally (12). Even when maternal HBsAg testing
does occur, certain infants of 
HBsAg-positive  mothers  do  not  receive  postexposure  immunoprophylaxis  because  of
testing errors and lapses in reporting of test results 
(13), and infants of women with unknown HBsAg status at the time of delivery often do
not receive a birth dose of vaccine 
(14).  Birth  dose  coverage  in  2004  was  only  46%  (National  Immunization  Survey,
unpublished data, 2004), and coverage has 
not returned to levels from before July 1999 (54%), when recommendations were made
to temporarily suspend administration 
of  hepatitis  B  vaccines  at  birth  until  vaccines  that  do  not  contain  thimerosal  as  a
preservative became available 
(15). Among adolescents, efforts to prevent HBV transmission are hampered by the low
rate of health-care visits in this age group 
compared  with  that  of  young  children  and  the  frequency  of  initiation  of  high-risk
behaviors.
 To address these remaining challenges and accelerate progress toward elimination of
HBV transmission in the United States, 
the  ACIP  has  updated  the  hepatitis  B  immunization  recommendations  for  infants,
children, and adolescents and supplemented 
the  recommendations  with  strategies  for  implementation.  The  recommendations  and
implementation strategies address prevention 
of  perinatal  and  early  childhood  transmission  and  routine  vaccination  of  children  and
adolescents. A main focus is on 
universal  infant  vaccination  beginning  at  birth,  which  provides  a  "safety  net"  for
prevention of perinatal infection, prevents early 
childhood
 infections,
 facilitates
 implementation
 of
 universal
 vaccination
recommendations, and prevents infections in adolescents 
and  adults.  The  second  part  of  the  ACIP  statement,  which  includes  updated
recommendations and implementation strategies 
to  increase  hepatitis  B  vaccination  among  unvaccinated  adults,  will  be  published
separately 
(16).
Major Updates to the Recommendations
 This report provides updated recommendations and 
approaches to address challenges in implementing the strategy 
to  eliminate  HBV  transmission  in  the  United  States.  These  include  the  following
measures:
 HBV is a 42-nm DNA virus classified in the 
Hepadnaviridae family. The liver is the primary site of HBV replication. After 
a  susceptible  person  is  exposed,  the  virus  enters  the  liver  via  the  bloodstream;  no
evidence exists indicating that the 
virus replicates at mucosal surfaces. HBV infection can produce either asymptomatic or
symptomatic infection. The 
average incubation period is 90 days (range: 60--150 days) from 
exposure to onset of jaundice and 60 days (range: 40--90 days) 
from exposure to onset of abnormal serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels 
(17,18).
 The onset of acute disease is usually insidious. Infants and young children (aged <10
years) are typically asymptomatic 
(19). When present, clinical symptoms and signs might 
include anorexia, malaise, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and 
jaundice.  Extrahepatic  manifestations  of  disease  (e.g.,  skin  rashes,  arthralgias,  and
arthritis) also can occur 
(20).  The  fatality  rate  among  persons  with  reported  acute  hepatitis  B  is  0.5%--1.5%,
with highest rates in adults aged >60 years 
(21).
 Although the consequences of acute hepatitis B can be 
severe, the majority of serious sequelae associated with HBV 
disease  occur  in  persons  who  are  chronically  infected.  Persons  with  chronic  infection
also serve as the major reservoir for 
continued HBV transmission. Chronic infection occurs in approximately 90% of infected
infants, 30% of infected children aged 
<5 years, and <5% of infected persons aged 
>5 years, with continuing viral replication in the liver and persistent viremia 
(19,22--24).
 Primary
 infections
 also
 become
 chronic
 more
 frequently
 in
immunosuppressed persons (e.g., hemodialysis patients 
and persons with human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection) 
(23,25,26). On the basis of data from follow-up studies 
of persons infected with HBV as infants or young children, approximately 25% of those
with chronic infection die 
prematurely  from  cirrhosis  or  liver  cancer;  the  majority  remain  asymptomatic  until
onset of cirrhosis or end-stage liver disease 
(27--29).
 No  specific  treatment  exists  for  acute  hepatitis  B.  Persons  who  have  chronic  HBV
infection require medical evaluation 
and  regular  monitoring  (30,31).  Therapeutic  agents  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA) for treatment 
of  chronic  hepatitis  B  can  achieve  sustained  suppression  of  HBV  replication  and
remission of liver disease in certain persons 
(31). Periodic screening with alfa fetoprotein or imaging studies has been demonstrated
to enhance early detection of HCC 
(31).  Chronically  infected  persons  with  HCC  have  been  reported  to  have  experienced
long-term survival after resection or 
ablation  of  small  HCCs,  and  persons  who  were  screened  had  a  substantial  survival
advantage compared with historic controls 
(31).
 Reinfection  or  reactivation  of  latent  HBV  infection  has  been  reported  among  certain
groups of immunosuppressed 
persons,  including  renal  transplant  recipients,  HIV-infected  patients,  bone  marrow
transplant recipients, and patients 
receiving chemotherapy (32--35). The frequency with which this phenomenon occurs is
unknown.
Interpretation of Serologic Markers of HBV Infection
 The antigens and antibodies associated with HBV infection include HBsAg and antibody
to HBsAg (anti-HBs), hepatitis 
B  core  antigen  (HBcAg)  and  antibody  to  HBcAg  (anti-HBc),  and  hepatitis  B  e  antigen
(HBeAg) and antibody to HBeAg 
(anti-HBe). At least one serologic marker is present during the different phases of HBV
infection 
(Table 1) (18,36). Serologic assays are commercially available for all markers 
except HBcAg because no free HBcAg circulates in blood.
 The presence of a confirmed HBsAg result is indicative of ongoing HBV infection. All
HBsAg-positive persons should 
be considered infectious. In newly infected persons, HBsAg is the only serologic marker
detected during the first 3--5 weeks 
after infection, and it persists for variable periods at very low levels. The average time
from exposure to detection of HBsAg is 
30  days  (range:  6--60  days)  (17,18).  Highly  sensitive  single-sample  nucleic  acid  tests
can detect HBV DNA in the serum of 
an infected person 10--20 days before detection of HBsAg 
(37). Transient HBsAg positivity has been reported for up to 18 
days after vaccination and is clinically insignificant 
(38,39).
 Anti-HBc  appears  at  the  onset  of  symptoms  or  liver  test  abnormalities  in  acute  HBV
infection and persists for life. Acute 
or recently acquired infection can be distinguished by the presence of the IgM class of
anti-HBc, which is detected at the onset 
of acute hepatitis B and persists for up to 6 months if the disease resolves. In patients
who develop chronic hepatitis B, IgM 
anti-HBc can persist at low levels during viral replication and can result in positive tests
for IgM anti-HBc 
(40). In addition, false-positive IgM anti-HBc test results can occur. Because the positive
predictive value is low in asymptomatic persons, 
for diagnosis of acute hepatitis B, testing for IgM anti-HBc should be limited to persons
with clinical evidence of acute 
hepatitis or an epidemiologic link to a case.
 In persons who recover from HBV infection, HBsAg is eliminated from the blood, usually
within 3--4 months, and 
anti-HBs  develops  during  convalescence.  The  presence  of  anti-HBs  typically  indicates
immunity from HBV infection. Infection 
or  immunization  with  one  genotype  of  HBV  confers  immunity  to  all  genotypes.  In
addition, anti-HBs can be detected for 
several months after hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) administration. The majority of
persons who recover from 
natural infection will be positive for both anti-HBs and anti-HBc, whereas persons who
respond to hepatitis B vaccine have only 
anti-HBs.  In  persons  who  become  chronically  infected,  HBsAg  and  anti-HBc  persist,
typically for life. HBsAg will 
become undetectable in approximately 0.5%--2% of chronically infected persons yearly,
and anti-HBs will occur in the majority 
of these persons (41--44).
 In  certain  persons,  the  only  HBV  serologic  marker  detected  in  serum  is  anti-HBc.
Isolated anti-HBc can occur after 
HBV  infection  among  persons  who  have  recovered  but  whose  anti-HBs  levels  have
waned or among persons in whom 
anti-HBs  failed  to  occur.  Persons  in  the  latter  category  include  those  with  circulating
HBsAg levels not detectable by commercial 
assays. These persons are unlikely to be infectious except 
under circumstances in which they are the source for direct 
percutaneous exposure of susceptible recipients to substantial quantities of virus (e.g.,
through blood transfusion or following 
liver transplantation) (45). HBV DNA has been detected in the blood of <5% of persons
with isolated anti-HBc 
(46). Typically, the frequency of isolated anti-HBc relates directly to the prevalence of
HBV infection in the population. In populations with 
a high prevalence of HBV infection, isolated anti-HBc likely indicates previous infection,
with loss of anti-HBs. For persons 
in populations with a low prevalence of HBV infection, an isolated anti-HBc result often
represents a false-positive reaction. 
The majority of these persons have a primary anti-HBs response after a 3-dose series of
hepatitis B vaccine 
(47,48).  Infants  who  are  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers  and  who  do  not  become
infected might have detectable anti-HBc for 
<24 months after birth from passively transferred maternal antibody.
 HBeAg can be detected in the serum of persons with acute or chronic HBV infection.
The presence of HBeAg 
correlates with viral replication and high levels of virus (i.e., high infectivity) 
(49,50). Anti-HBe correlates with the loss of 
replicating virus and with lower levels of virus, although reversion to HBeAg positivity
has been observed 
(44).
Epidemiology of HBV Infection
 
Transmission
 HBV is transmitted by percutaneous (i.e., puncture through the skin) or mucosal (i.e.,
direct contact with 
mucous membranes) exposure to infectious blood or to body fluids that contain blood.
All HBsAg-positive persons are infectious, 
but those who are also HBeAg positive are more infectious 
because their blood contains high titers of HBV (typically 
107--109 virions/mL) 
(49,50). Although HBsAg has been detected in multiple body fluids, only serum, semen,
and saliva have 
been  demonstrated  to  be  infectious  (51,52).  HBV  is  comparatively  stable  in  the
environment and remains viable for 
>7 days on environmental surfaces at room temperature 
(53). HBV at concentrations of 
102--3  virions/mL  can  be  present  on  environmental  surfaces  in  the  absence  of  any
visible blood and still cause transmission 
(53,54).
 For  infants  and  children,  the  two  primary  sources  of  HBV  infection  are  perinatal
transmission from infected mothers 
and horizontal transmission from infected household contacts. Adolescents are at risk
for HBV infection primarily through 
high-risk sexual activity (i.e., sex with more than one partner and male sexual activity
with other males) and injection-drug use 
(21). Transmission of HBV via transfusion of blood and plasma-derived products is rare
because of donor screening for HBsAg 
and viral inactivation procedures.
 For a newborn infant whose mother is positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg, the risk for
chronic HBV infection is 
70%--90% by age 6 months in the absence of postexposure immunoprophylaxis 
(55--57). For infants of women who are 
HBsAg positive but HBeAg negative, the risk for chronic 
infection is <10% in the absence of postexposure immunoprophylaxis 
(58--60).  Rare  cases  of  fulminant  hepatitis  B  among  perinatally  infected  infants  also
have been reported 
(61,62). Studies suggest that breastfeeding by an 
HBsAg-positive mother does not increase the risk for acquisition of HBV infection in the
infant 
(63).
 Children  who  are  not  infected  at  birth  remain  at  risk  from  long-term  interpersonal
contact with their infected mothers. 
In one study, 38% of infants who were born to 
HBsAg-positive mothers and who were not infected perinatally 
became infected by age 4 years (64). In addition, children living with any chronically
infected persons are at risk for 
becoming infected through percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood or infectious
body fluids (e.g., sharing a toothbrush, contact with exudates 
from
 dermatologic
 lesions,
 contact
 with
 HBsAg-contaminated
 surfaces).
 HBV
transmission rates to susceptible household 
contacts 
of chronically infected persons have varied (range: 14%--60%) 
(65,66). High rates of infection also have been reported 
among unvaccinated long-term residents of institutions for the mentally handicapped 
(67,68),  and,  in  rare  instances,  person-to-person  transmission  has  been  reported  in
child care settings 
(69,70).
 
Incidence
 During 1990--2004, overall incidence of reported acute hepatitis B declined 75%, from
8.5 to 2.1 per 100,000 
population.  The  most  dramatic  declines  occurred  in  the  cohort  of  children  to  whom
recommendations for routine infant and 
adolescent  vaccination  have  applied.  Incidence  among  children  aged  <12  years  and
adolescents aged 12--19 years 
declined 94%, from 1.1 to 0.36 and 6.1 to 2.8 per 100,000 population, respectively 
(Figure 2). Since implementation of routine 
childhood  immunization,  an  estimated  6,800  perinatal  infections  and  an  additional
18,700 infections during the first 10 years of 
life have been prevented annually in the United States 
(71).
 Although  infections  in  infants  and  children  aged  <10  years  represented  <10%  of  all
HBV infections before 
implementation  of  childhood  immunization  programs,  childhood  infections  resulted  in
an estimated 30%--40% of the chronic 
HBV infections among persons who acquired their infections in the United States 
(1). In two population-based studies 
conducted  among  Asian/Pacific  Islander  children  who  were  born  in  the  United  States
before perinatal hepatitis B prevention 
programs were widely implemented, 61%--66% of the chronic HBV infections occurred
in children born to HBsAg-negative 
mothers  (72,73).  A  substantial  proportion  of  these  chronic  infections  would  not  have
been prevented by a selective program 
of identification and immunization of only infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers.
 In addition to declines in incidence among all age groups, racial disparities in hepatitis
B incidence among children 
have  been  substantially  reduced  (Figure  3).  The  reduction  of  the  disparity  between
Asian/Pacific Islander and other children 
is  consistent  with  recent  observations  noting  a  decline  in  seroprevalence  of  HBV
infection after successful implementation 
of routine hepatitis B vaccination among Asians who have recently immigrated to the
United States 
(74,75).  However,  as  hepatitis  B  incidence  has  declined  among  U.S.-born  children,
unvaccinated foreign-born children account for a 
high proportion of infections. During 2001--2002, of 
19 children born after 1991 in whom acute hepatitis B had been 
verified, eight (42%) were foreign born (76).
 
Prevalence
 In the U.S. population, the overall age-adjusted prevalence of HBV infection (including
persons with chronic infection 
and those with previous infection) was 4.9% in the third 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES 
III,  1988--1994)  (77).  Foreign-born  persons  (particularly  Asian/Pacific  Islanders)  who
have emigrated from countries in 
which HBV is endemic (Figure 1 and Box 2) contribute disproportionately to the burden
of chronic HBV infection in the 
United  States.  The  prevalence  of  chronic  HBV  infection  among  foreign-born  persons
immigrating to the United States from 
Central  and  Southeast  Asia,  the  Middle  East,  and  Africa  varies  (range:  5%--15%)  and
reflects the patterns of HBV infection in 
the countries and regions of origin for these persons. During 1994--2003, approximately
40,000 immigrants with chronic 
HBV infection were admitted annually to the United States for permanent residence 
(78; CDC, unpublished data, 2005).
Prophylaxis Against HBV Infection
Hepatitis B Vaccine
 HBsAg is the antigen used for hepatitis B vaccination 
(79,80). Vaccine antigen can be purified from the plasma of 
persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  or  produced  by  recombinant  DNA  technology.
Vaccines available in the United States 
use recombinant DNA technology to express HBsAg in yeast, which is then purified from
the cells by biochemical and 
biophysical separation techniques (81,82). Hepatitis B vaccines licensed in the United
States are formulated to contain 
10--40  µg  of  HBsAg  protein/mL.  Since  March  2000,  hepatitis  B  vaccines  produced  for
distribution in the United States do not 
contain  thimerosal  as  a  preservative  or  contain  only  a  trace  amount  (<1.0  mcg
mercury/mL) from the manufacturing process 
(83,84).
 Hepatitis  B  vaccine  is  available  as  a  single-antigen  formulation  and  also  in  fixed
combination with other vaccines. 
Two single-antigen vaccines are available in the United States: Recombivax 
HB® (Merck & Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, 
New Jersey) and Engerix-B® (GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium). Of the
three licensed combination vaccines, 
one (Twinrix® [GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium]) is used for vaccination
of adults, and two 
(Comvax® [Merck & 
Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, New Jersey] and 
Pediarix® [GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium]) are used 
for vaccination of infants and young children. Twinrix contains recombinant HBsAg and
inactivated hepatitis A 
virus. Comvax contains recombinant HBsAg and Haemophilus 
influenzae type b (Hib) polyribosylribitol phosphate conjugated to 
Neisseria meningitidis outer membrane protein complex. Pediarix contains recombinant
HBsAg, diphtheria and tetanus toxoids 
and acellular pertussis adsorbed (DTaP), and inactivated poliovirus (IPV).
HBIG
 HBIG provides passively acquired anti-HBs and temporary protection (i.e., 3--6 months)
when administered in 
standard  doses.  HBIG  is  typically  used  as  an  adjunct  to  hepatitis  B  vaccine  for
postexposure immunoprophylaxis to prevent 
HBV infection. HBIG administered alone is the primary means of protection after an HBV
exposure for nonresponders to 
hepatitis B vaccination.
 HBIG is prepared from the plasma of donors with high concentrations of anti-HBs. The
plasma is screened to 
eliminate  donors  who  are  positive  for  HBsAg,  antibodies  to  HIV  and  hepatitis  C  virus
(HCV), and HCV RNA. In addition, 
proper manufacturing techniques for HBIG inactivate viruses (e.g., HBV, HCV, and HIV)
from the final product 
(85,86). No evidence exists that HBV, HCV, or HIV ever has been transmitted by HBIG
commercially available in the United 
States.  HBIG  that  is  commercially  available  in  the  United  States  does  not  contain
thimerosal.
Vaccination Schedules and Results of Vaccination
Preexposure Vaccination
 
Infants and Children
 Primary vaccination consists of >3 intramuscular doses of hepatitis B vaccine 
(Table 2). Vaccine schedules for infants and children 
(Tables 3--5) are determined on the basis of immunogenicity 
data and the need to integrate hepatitis B vaccine into 
a harmonized childhood vaccination schedule. Although not all possible schedules for
each product have been evaluated 
in  clinical  trials,  available  licensed  formulations  for  both  single-antigen  vaccines
produce high (>95%) levels of 
seroprotection among infants and children when administered 
in multiple schedules (87--91).
 The immunogenicity of the combined hepatitis B-Hib conjugate vaccine (Comvax) and
the combined hepatitis 
B-DTaP-IPV  vaccine  (Pediarix)  is  equivalent  to  that  of  their  individual  antigens
administered separately. However, these 
vaccines  cannot  be  administered  to  infants  aged  <6  weeks;  only  single-antigen
hepatitis B vaccine may be used for the birth dose. 
Use of 4-dose hepatitis B vaccine schedules, including schedules with a birth dose, has
not increased vaccine reactogenicity 
(92,93). Anti-HBs responses after a 3-dose series of hepatitis B-containing combination
vaccines among infants who were 
previously vaccinated at birth with single-antigen hepatitis B vaccine are comparable to
those observed after a 3-dose series 
of combination vaccine without a birth dose 
(93).
 
Birth Dose
 Hepatitis B vaccine can be administered soon after birth with only minimal decrease in
immunogenicity, compared 
with administration at older ages, and no decrease in protective efficacy 
(87). Administration of a birth dose of hepatitis B 
vaccine is required for effective postexposure 
immuno-prophylaxis to prevent perinatal HBV infection. Although 
infants who require postexposure immunoprophylaxis should be identified by maternal
HBsAg testing, administering a birth dose to infants 
even without HBIG serves as a "safety net" to prevent perinatal infection among infants
born to HBsAg-positive mothers who 
are not identified because of errors in maternal HBsAg testing or failures in reporting of
test results 
(13). The birth dose also provides early protection to infants at risk for infection after
the perinatal period. Administration of a birth dose has 
been  associated  with  higher  rates  of  on-time  completion  of  the  hepatitis  B  vaccine
series 
(15,94).  In  certain  populations,  the  birth  dose  has  been  associated  with  improved
completion rates for all other infant vaccines 
(95), although findings have not been consistent 
(15,94).
 
Adolescents
 Recommended
 vaccination
 schedules
 for
 adolescents
 balance
 available
immunogenicity data with the need to 
achieve compliance with vaccination in this age group (Tables 2 and 
5). Both licensed single-antigen hepatitis B vaccines 
administered  intramuscularly  at  0,  1,  and  6  months  produce  a  >95%  sero-protection
rate in adolescents. Equivalent seroprotection rates 
are achieved among adolescents vaccinated at 0, 1--2, and 4 months and 0, 12, and 24
months. The adult (10 
µg)  dose  of  Recombivax-HB  administered  in  a  2-dose  schedule  to  children  and
adolescents aged 11--15 years at 0 and 4--6 
months produces antibody levels equivalent to those obtained with the 
5-µg dose administered on a 3-dose schedule 
(96,97). However, no data on long-term antibody persistence or protection are available
for 2-dose schedules. No combination 
vaccines  containing  hepatitis  B  vaccine  antigen  are  approved  for  use  in  adolescents
aged 11--17 years.
 
Nonstandard Vaccine Schedules
 No apparent effect on immunogenicity has been documented when minimum spacing
of doses is not achieved 
precisely.  Increasing  the  interval  between  the  first  2  doses  has  little  effect  on
immunogenicity or final antibody concentration 
(98--100).  The  third  dose  confers  the  maximum  level  of  seroprotection  but  acts
primarily as a booster and appears to provide optimal 
long-term protection (101). Longer intervals between the last 2 doses result in higher
final antibody levels but might increase the 
risk  for  acquisition  of  HBV  infection  among  persons  who  have  a  delayed  response  to
vaccination. No differences 
in  immunogenicity  have  been  observed  when  1  or  2  doses  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine
produced by one manufacturer are followed 
by doses from a different manufacturer (102).
 
Response to Revaccination
 A study of infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers who did not respond to a primary
vaccine series indicated that all 
those not infected with HBV responded satisfactorily to a 
repeat 3-dose revaccination series (103). No data suggest that 
children who have no detectable antibody after 6 doses of vaccine would benefit from
additional doses.
 
Groups Requiring Different Vaccination Doses or Schedules
 Preterm infants. Preterm infants weighing <2,000 g at birth have a decreased response
to hepatitis B vaccine 
administered before age 1 month (104--106). By age 1 month, medically stable preterm
infants, regardless of initial birth weight 
or  gestational  age,  have  a  response  to  vaccination  that  is  comparable  to  that  of
full-term infants 
(107--110).
 Hemodialysis patients and other immunocompromised persons. 
Although  data  concerning  the  response  of  pediatric  hemodialysis  patients  to
vaccination  with  standard  pediatric  doses  are  lacking,  protective  levels  of  antibody
occur in 
75%--97% of those who receive higher dosages 
(20-µg) on either the 3- or the 4-dose 
schedule  (111--114).  Humoral  response  to  hepatitis  B  vaccination  is  also  reduced  in
other children and adolescents who are immunocompromised 
(e.g., hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, patients undergoing chemotherapy,
and HIV-infected persons) 
(115--119).  Modified  dosing  regimens,  including  a  doubling  of  the  standard  antigen
dose or administration of additional doses, 
might increase response rates (120). However, data on response to these alternative
vaccination schedules are limited 
(121).
 
Immune Memory
 Anti-HBs  is  the  only  easily  measurable  correlate  of  vaccine-induced  protection.
Immunocompetent persons who achieve 
anti-HBs  concentrations  >10  mIU/mL  after  preexposure  vaccination  have  virtually
complete protection against both acute disease 
and chronic infection even if anti-HBs concentrations 
subsequently decline to <10 mIU/mL 
(122--125).  Although  immunogenicity  is  lower  among  immunocompromised  persons,
those who achieve and maintain a protective antibody response before 
exposure to HBV have a high level of protection from infection.
 After primary immunization with hepatitis B vaccine, anti-HBs 
concentrations decline rapidly within the first year and 
more slowly thereafter. Among children who respond to a primary vaccine series with
antibody levels 
>10 mIU/mL, 15%--50% have low or undetectable 
concentrations of anti-HBs (anti-HBs loss) 5--15 years after vaccination 
(126--130). The persistence of detectable anti-HBs after vaccination, in the 
absence of exposure to HBV, depends on the level of postvaccination 
antibody concentration.
 Despite  declines  in  anti-HBs  to  <10  mIU/mL,  nearly  all  vaccinated  persons  are  still
protected against HBV infection. 
The  mechanism  for  continued  vaccine-induced  protection  is  thought  to  be  the
preservation of immune memory through 
selective  expansion  and  differentiation  of  clones  of  antigen-specific  B  and  T
lymphocytes 
(131). Persistence of vaccine-induced 
immune 
memory among persons who responded to a primary childhood vaccine series 13--23
years earlier but then had levels of 
anti-HBs  below  10  mIU/mL  has  been  demonstrated  by  an  anamnestic  increase  in
anti-HBs levels in 67%--76% of these persons 
2--4 weeks after administration of an additional vaccine dose 
(132,133). Although direct measurement of immune memory 
is not yet possible, these data indicate that a high proportion of vaccine recipients 
retain immune memory and would develop an anti-HBs 
response upon exposure to HBV.
 Studies of cohorts of immunocompetent persons vaccinated as children or infants also
indicate that, despite anti-HBs 
loss years after immunization, nearly all vaccinated persons who respond to a primary
series remain protected from HBV 
infection.  No  clinical  cases  of  hepatitis  B  have  been  observed  in  follow-up  studies
conducted 15--20 years after vaccination 
among immunocompetent vaccinated persons with antibody levels 
>10 mIU/mL. Certain studies have documented 
breakthrough infections (detected by the presence of anti-HBc or HBV DNA) in a limited
percentage of vaccinated persons 
(130,131), but these infections are usually transient and 
asymptomatic; chronic infections have been documented only rarely 
(134). Breakthrough infections resulting in chronic 
infection have been observed only among vaccinated infants born to 
HBsAg-positive women.
 Limited  data  are  available  on  the  duration  of  immune  memory  after  hepatitis  B
vaccination in 
immunocompromised  persons  (e.g.,  HIV-infected  patients,  dialysis  patients,  patients
undergoing chemotherapy, or hematopoietic stem 
cell transplant patients). No clinically important HBV infections have been documented
among immunocompromised 
persons who maintain protective levels of anti-HBs. In studies of long-term protection
among HIV-infected persons, 
breakthrough  infections  occurring  after  a  decline  in  anti-HBs  concentrations  to  <10
mIU/mL have been transient and asymptomatic 
(135).  However,  among  hemodialysis  patients  who  respond  to  the  vaccine,  clinically
significant HBV infection has been 
documented in persons who have not maintained anti-HBs concentrations of 
>10 mIU/mL (136).
Postexposure Prophylaxis
 Both passive-active postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) with HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine
and active PEP with hepatitis 
B  vaccine  alone  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  highly  effective  in  preventing
transmission after exposure to HBV 
(137--140). HBIG alone has also been demonstrated to be effective in preventing HBV
transmission 
(141--144), but with the availability of hepatitis B vaccine, HBIG typically is used as an
adjunct to vaccination.
 The major determinant of the effectiveness of PEP is early administration of the initial
dose of vaccine. The effectiveness 
of PEP diminishes the longer it is initiated after exposure 
(17,145,146). Studies are limited on the maximum interval 
after  exposure  during  which  PEP  is  effective,  but  the  interval  is  unlikely  to  exceed  7
days for perinatal 
(147) and needlestick (140--142) exposures and 14 days for sexual exposures 
(122, 138,139,143,144).
 No data are available on the efficacy of HBsAg-containing combination vaccines when
used to complete the vaccine series 
for  PEP,  but  the  efficacy  of  combination  vaccines  is  expected  to  be  similar  to  that  of
single-antigen vaccines because the 
HBsAg component induces a comparable anti-HBs response.
 
Perinatal HBV Exposure
 Passive-active PEP. PEP with hepatitis B vaccine and HBIG administered 12--24 hours
after birth, followed by 
completion  of  a  3-dose  vaccine  series,  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  85%--95%
effective in preventing acute and chronic HBV infection 
in infants born to women who are positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg 
(137). Although clinical trials have evaluated the 
efficacy  of  passive-active  PEP  with  hepatitis  B  vaccine  and  HBIG  administered  only
within 24 hours of birth, studies of 
passive  immunoprophylaxis  have  demonstrated  that  HBIG  provided  protection  when
administered as late as 72 hours after 
exposure.  The  majority  of  clinical  trials  have  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  passive-active
PEP when the second vaccine dose was 
administered  at  age  1  month  (137).  Administration  of  HBIG  plus  vaccine  at  birth,  1
month, and 6 months and at birth, 2 months, and 
6  months  has  demonstrated  comparable  efficacy  in  prevention  of  acute  and  chronic
infection among infants born to 
women  who  were  both  HBsAg  and  HBeAg  positive  (Cladd  E.  Stevens,  MD,  New  York
Blood Center, personal 
communication, 1994).
 Infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive/HBeAg-negative  mothers  who  receive  passive-active
PEP with HBIG and hepatitis 
B vaccine should have the same high degree of protection as infants born to women
who are HBsAg positive/HBeAg 
positive.  However,  the  efficacy  of  this  regimen  has  not  been  examined  in  controlled
clinical trials because the low infection rate 
would require an unattainable sample size.
 Active PEP. Active PEP with hepatitis B vaccine alone (i.e., without HBIG) is frequently
used in certain remote areas 
(e.g., Alaska and the Pacific Islands) where implementation of 
maternal HBsAg testing is difficult because no access exists to 
a laboratory. In randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials, administration of hepatitis
B vaccine in a 3- or 4-dose 
schedule  without  HBIG  beginning  <12  hours  after  birth  has  been  demonstrated  to
prevent 70%--95% of perinatal HBV 
infections among infants born to women who are positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg 
(58,148--152). Population-based studies in 
areas  with  a  high  endemicity  of  HBV  infection  have  demonstrated  that  active
postexposure vaccination is highly effective 
in preventing infection when the first dose is administered soon after birth, the second
at age 1--2 months, and the third at 
age 6--8 months (153--155).
Vaccine Safety
 Hepatitis B vaccines have been demonstrated to be safe when administered to infants,
children, adolescents, and 
adults. Since 1982, an estimated >60 million adolescents and adults and >40 million
infants and children have been vaccinated in 
the United States.
Vaccine Reactogenicity
 The most frequently reported side effects among persons receiving hepatitis B vaccine
are pain at the injection 
site (3%--29%) and fever >99.9° F (>37.7° C) (1%--6%) 
(156,157). However, in placebo-controlled studies, these side 
effects were reported no more frequently among persons 
receiving hepatitis B vaccine than among persons receiving placebo 
(87). Administration of hepatitis B vaccine soon after birth has not been associated with
an increased rate of elevated 
temperatures or microbiologic evaluations for possible sepsis in the first 21 days of life 
(158).
Adverse Events
 A causal association has been established between receipt of hepatitis B vaccine and
anaphylaxis 
(159). On the basis of data from the Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD) project, the 
estimated incidence of anaphylaxis among children and adolescents 
who received hepatitis B vaccine is one case per 1.1 million vaccine doses distributed
(95% confidence interval = 0.1--3.9) 
(160).
 Early  postlicensure  surveillance  of  adverse  events  suggested  a  possible  association
between Guillain-Barré syndrome 
and receipt of the first dose of plasma-derived hepatitis B vaccine among U.S. adults 
(161). However, in a subsequent analysis of Guillain-Barré syndrome cases reported to
CDC, FDA, and vaccine manufacturers, among an estimated 2.5 million 
adults who received >1 dose of recombinant hepatitis B vaccine during 1986--1990, the
rate of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome occurring after hepatitis B vaccination did not exceed the background rate
among unvaccinated persons (CDC, 
unpublished  data,  1992).  A  review  by  persons  with  clinical  expertise  concluded  that
evidence was insufficient to reject or accept a 
causal association between Guillain-Barré syndrome and hepatitis B vaccination 
(159,162).
 Multiple  sclerosis  (MS)  has  not  been  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination  among
children. However, one retrospective 
case-control study (163,164) reported an association between hepatitis B vaccine and
MS among adults. Multiple other 
studies (165--168) have demonstrated no association between hepatitis B vaccine and
MS. Reviews of these data by panels of 
persons with clinical expertise have favored rejection of a causal association between
hepatitis B vaccination and MS 
(169,170).
 Chronic  illnesses  that  have  been  reported  in  rare  instances  after  hepatitis  B
vaccination include chronic fatigue 
syndrome  (171),  neurologic  disorders  (e.g.,  leukoencephalitis,  optic  neuritis,  and
transverse myelitis) 
(172--174), rheumatoid arthritis 
(175,176), type 1 diabetes (177), and autoimmune disease 
(178). No evidence of a causal association between these 
conditions or other chronic illnesses and hepatitis B vaccine has been demonstrated 
(159,169,170,179--182).
 Reported  episodes  of  alopecia  (hair  loss)  after  rechallenge  with  hepatitis  B  vaccine
suggest that vaccination might, in 
rare cases, trigger episodes of alopecia 
(183). However, a population-based study determined no statistically 
significant association between alopecia and hepatitis B vaccine 
(184).
 No evidence exists of a causal association between hepatitis B vaccination, including
administration of the birth dose, 
and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) or other causes of death during the first year
of life 
(185--187).  Infant  death  rates,  including  rates  of  SIDS,  declined  substantially  in  the
United States during the 1990s, coincident with an increase in 
infant 
hepatitis B vaccination coverage from <1% to >90% and implementation of efforts to
reduce SIDS through infant 
sleep positioning and separation from other persons in bed 
(188).
 The safety of hepatitis B vaccine and other vaccines is 
assessed continuously through ongoing monitoring of data from VSD, 
the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System (VAERS), and other surveillance systems.
Any adverse events after vaccination should 
be reported to VAERS; report forms and assistance are available from CDC at telephone
1-800-822-7967 or at
http://www.vaers.hhs.gov.
Contraindications and Precautions
 Hepatitis B vaccination is contraindicated for persons with a history of hypersensitivity
to yeast or to any 
vaccine  component  (92,189--191).  Despite  a  theoretic  risk  for  allergic  reaction  to
vaccination in persons with allergy to 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast), no evidence exists that documents adverse
reactions after vaccination of persons with a history of 
yeast allergy.
 Persons  with  a  history  of  serious  adverse  events  (e.g.,  anaphylaxis)  after  receipt  of
hepatitis B vaccine should 
not  receive  additional  doses.  As  with  other  vaccines,  vaccination  of  persons  with
moderate or severe acute illness, with or 
without fever, should be deferred until the acute phase of the illness resolves 
(192). Vaccination is not contraindicated in persons with a history of 
MS, Guillain-Barré syndrome, autoimmune disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosis
or rheumatoid arthritis), or other 
chronic diseases.
 Pregnancy is not a contraindication to vaccination. Limited data indicate no apparent
risk for adverse events to 
developing fetuses when hepatitis B vaccine is administered to pregnant women 
(193). Current vaccines contain noninfectious 
HBsAg and should cause no risk to the fetus.
Future Considerations
 Implementation  of  the  recommendations  and  strategies  in  this  document  should
ultimately lead to the elimination of 
HBV transmission in the United States. New information will have implications for this
effort, and adjustments and changes 
are expected to occur.
Long-Term Protection and Booster Doses 
 Studies are needed to assess long-term protection after vaccination and the possible
need for booster doses of vaccine. 
The longest follow-up studies of vaccine protection have been conducted in populations
with an initially high endemicity of 
HBV infection (i.e., >8% prevalence of chronic infection) 
(130). Implementation of hepatitis B vaccination programs in 
populations with a high endemicity of HBV infection has resulted in virtual elimination
of new HBV infections by providing 
vaccine-induced  immunity  to  susceptible  persons.  In  these  populations,  ongoing
exposure of vaccinated persons to persons with chronic HBV infection might complicate
future efforts to assess long-term hepatitis B vaccine efficacy. Assessment of efficacy
provided 
by hepatitis B immunization after 15--20 years will require studies among populations
that continue to have exposures to 
HBsAg-positive  persons  (e.g.,  communities  of  immigrants  from  highly  endemic
countries, populations of 
injection-drug users, or health-care workers) and studies among populations with a low
prevalence of infection.
Immunization Escape Mutants
 Mutations in the S gene of HBV can lead to conformational changes in the 
a determinant of the HBsAg protein, which 
is  the  major  target  for  neutralizing  anti-HBs.  These  variants  have  been  detected  in
humans infected with HBV, and concern 
has  been  expressed  that  these  variants  might  replicate  in  the  presence  of
vaccine-induced anti-HBs or anti-HBs contained 
in  HBIG  (194,195).  Although  no  evidence  suggests  that  S  gene  immunization  escape
mutants pose a threat to existing 
programs using hepatitis B vaccines (196), further studies and enhanced surveillance to
detect the emergence of these variants are 
high priorities for monitoring the effectiveness of current vaccination strategies.
Recommendations for Hepatitis B Vaccination of Infants, Children, 
and Adolescents
 This section outlines updated ACIP recommendations and associated implementation
strategies for hepatitis B 
vaccination  of  infants,  children,  and  adolescents.  These  recommendations  have  been
summarized 
(Box 3).
Prevention of Perinatal HBV Infection and Management of Pregnant Women
 
Recommendations
 Prenatal HBsAg Testing
 
Management of Infants Born to Women Who Are HBsAg Positive
 
Management of Infants Born to Women with Unknown HBsAg Status
 
Vaccination of Pregnant Women
 
Implementation
 Delivery Hospital Policies and Procedures
 
Case-Management Programs to Prevent Perinatal HBV Infection
 
Recommendations
 
Implementation
 
Recommendations
 
Implementation
 Acknowledgments
 Review of this report was provided by the following persons: R. Palmer Beasley, MD,
School of Public Health, University of 
Texas  Health  Science  Center  at  Houston,  Houston,  Texas;  F.  Blaine  Hollinger,  MD,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Neal 
A.  Halsey,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  Bloomberg  School  of  Public  Health  and  Johns  Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 
and Craig N. Shapiro, MD, Office of Global Health Affairs, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Washington, DC. 
Allison  Greenspan,  MPH,  Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  Infectious
Diseases, CDC, provided vital assistance in the 
preparation of this report. 
References
 Terms and Abbreviations Used in This Report    
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
Membership List, June 2005
 Chairman:  Myron  J.  Levin,  MD,  Professor  of  Pediatrics  and  Medicine,  University  of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado.
 Executive  Secretary:  Larry  Pickering,  MD,  National  Immunization  Program,  CDC,
Atlanta, Georgia.
 Members:  Jon  S.  Abramson,  MD,  Wake  Forest  University  School  of  Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Ban Mishu Allos, MD, 
Vanderbilt  University  School  of  Medicine,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  Guthrie  S.  Birkhead,
MD, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York; 
Judith Campbell, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Reginald Finger, MD,
Focus on the Family, Colorado Springs, Colorado; Janet 
Gildsdorf,  MD,  University  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan;  Tracy  Lieu,  MD,  Harvard
Pilgrim Health Care and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston,  Massachusetts;  Edgar  Marcuse,  MD,  Children's  Hospital  and  Regional  Medical
Center, Seattle, Washington; Julia Morita, MD, Chicago Department 
of  Health,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Gregory  Poland,  MD,  Mayo  Clinic  College  of  Medicine,
Rochester, Minnesota; John B. Salamone, National Italian 
American  Foundation,  Washington,  DC;  Patricia  Stinchfield,  Children's  Hospital  and
Clinics, St. Paul, Minnesota; John J. Treanor, MD, University of 
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York; Robin Womeodu, MD,
University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center, Memphis, Tennessee.
 Ex-Officio  Members:  James  E.  Cheek,  MD,  Indian  Health  Service,  Albuquerque,  New
Mexico; Wayne Hachey, DO, Department of Defense, 
Falls  Church,  Virginia;  Geoffrey  S.  Evans,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Bruce Gellin, MD, National 
Vaccine  Program  Office,  Washington,  DC;  Linda  Murphy,  Centers  for  Medicare  and
Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; George T. Curlin, MD, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Norman Baylor, MD, Food and Drug
Administration, Bethesda, Maryland; Kristin Lee Nichol, 
MD, Department of Veterans Affairs, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
 Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians, Jonathan Temte, MD,
Clarence, New York, and Richard Clover, MD, 
Louisville, Kentucky; American Academy of Pediatrics, Margaret Rennels, MD, Baltimore,
Maryland, and Carol Baker, MD, Houston, Texas; America's 
Health  Insurance  Plans,  Andrea  Gelzer,  MD,  Hartford,  Connecticut;  American  College
Health Association, James C. Turner, MD, Charlottesville, 
Virginia;  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  Stanley  Gall,  MD,
Louisville, Kentucky; American College of Physicians, Kathleen Neuzil, 
MD,  Seattle,  Washington;  American  Medical  Association,  Litjen  Tan,  PhD,  Chicago,
Illinois; American Pharmacists Association, Stephan L. Foster, 
PharmD, Memphis, Tennessee; Association of Teachers of Preventive Medicine, W. Paul
McKinney, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Biotechnology 
Industry  Organization,  Clement  Lewin,  PhD,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Canadian
National Advisory Committee on Immunization, Monica Naus, 
MD,  Vancouver,  British  Columbia;  Health-Care  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory
Committee, Steve Gordon, MD, Cleveland, Ohio; Infectious 
Diseases Society of America, Samuel L. Katz, MD, Durham, North Carolina, and William
Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; London Department of 
Health,  David  M.  Salisbury,  MD,  London,  United  Kingdom;  National  Association  of
County and City Health Officials, Nancy Bennett, MD, Rochester, 
New York; National Coalition for Adult Immunization, David A. Neumann, PhD, Bethesda,
Maryland; National Immunization Council and Child 
Health  Program,  Mexico,  Romeo  Rodriguez,  Mexico  City,  Mexico;  National  Medical
Association, Dennis A. Brooks, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; 
National  Vaccine  Advisory  Committee,  Charles  Helms,  MD,  PhD,  Iowa  City,  Iowa;
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, Damian A. 
Braga,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania,  and  Peter  Paradiso,  PhD,  Collegeville,  Pennsylvania;
and Society for Adolescent Medicine, Amy Middleman, MD, 
Houston, Texas.
 
 ACIP Hepatitis Vaccines Working Group
 Chair: Tracy Lieu, MD, Boston, Massachusetts.
 Members: Jon Abramson, MD, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Beth Bell, MD, Atlanta,
Georgia; James E. Cheek, MD, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico;  Anthony  Fiore,  MD,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Stephen  Feinstone,  MD,  Bethesda,
Maryland; Robert Frenck, MD, Torrance, California; Stanley Gall, 
MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Janet Gildsdorf, MD, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Steve Gordon, MD,
Cleveland, Ohio; Samuel L. Katz, MD, Durham, 
North  Carolina;  Edgar  Marcuse,  MD,  Seattle,  Washington;  Ban  Mishu  Allos,  MD,
Nashville, Tennessee; Eric Mast, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; Julia Morita, 
MD, Chicago, Illinois; William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; Deborah Wexler, MD,
St. Paul, Minnesota.
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 12/15/2005
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5416a1.htm
