A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Introduction  from  the  Guidelines  for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).  The  health-care
environment  contains  a  diverse  population  of  microorganisms,  but  only  a  few  are
significant  pathogens  for  susceptible  humans.  Microorganisms  are  present  in  great
numbers  in  moist,  organic  environments,  but  some  also  can  persist  under  dry
conditions. Although pathogenic microorganisms can be detected in air and water and
on  fomites,  assessing  their  role  in  causing  infection  and  disease  is  difficult.11  Only  a
few reports clearly delineate a "cause and effect" with respect to the environment and
in particular, housekeeping surfaces. Eight criteria are used to evaluate the strength of
evidence  for  an  environmental  source  or  means  of  transmission  of  infectious  agents
(Box  2).11,  12Applying  these  criteria  to  disease  investigations  allows  scientists  to
assess the contribution of the environment to disease transmission. An example of this
application  is  the  identification  of  a  pathogen  (e.g.,  vancomycin-resistant  enterococci
[VRE]) on an environmental surface during an outbreak. The presence of the pathogen
does not establish its causal role; its transmission from source to host could be through
indirect  means  (e.g.,  via  hand  transferal).11  The  surface,  therefore,  would  be
considered one of a number of potential reservoirs for the pathogen, but not the "de
facto"  source  of  exposure.  An  understanding  of  how  infection  occurs  after  exposure,
based on the principles of the "chain of infection," is also important in evaluating the
contribution  of  the  environment  to  health-care  associated  disease.13  All  of  the
components  of  the  "chain"  must  be  operational  for  infection  to  occur  (Box  3).  The
presence  of  the  susceptible  host  is  one  of  these  components  that  underscores  the
importance of the health-care environment and opportunistic pathogens on fomites and
in  air  and  water.  As  a  result  of  advances  in  medical  technology  and  therapies  (e.g.,
cytotoxic  chemotherapy  and  transplantation  medicine),  more  patients  are  becoming
immunocompromised in the course of treatment and are therefore at increased risk for
acquiring health-care associated opportunistic infections. Trends in health-care delivery
(e.g.,  early  discharge  of  patients  from  acute  care  facilities)  also  are  changing  the
distribution of patient populations and increasing the number of immunocompromised
persons  in  nonacute-care  hospitals.  According  to  the  American  Hospital  Association
(AHA),  in  1998,  the  number  of  hospitals  in  the  United  States  totaled  6,021;  these
hospitals had a total of 1,013,000 beds,14representing a 5.5% decrease in the number
of  acute-care  facilities  and  a  10.2%  decrease  in  the  number  of  beds  over  the  5-year
period 1994–1998.14 In addition, the total average daily number of patients receiving
care in U.S. acute-care hospitals in 1998 was 662,000 (65.4%) – 36.5% less than the
1978  average  of  1,042,000.14  As  the  number  of  acute-care  hospitals  declines,  the
length  of  stay  in  these  facilities  is  concurrently  decreasing,  particularly  for
immunocompetent patients. Those patients remaining in acute-care facilities are likely
to  be  those  requiring  extensive  medical  interventions  who  therefore  at  high  risk  for
opportunistic  infection.  The  growing  population  of  severely  immunocompromised
patients  is  at  odds  with  demands  on  the  health-care  industry  to  remain  viable  in  the
marketplace;  to  incorporate  modern  equipment,  new  diagnostic  procedures,  and  new
treatments; and to construct new facilities. Increasing numbers of health-care facilities
are  likely  to  be  faced  with  construction  in  the  near  future  as  hospitals  consolidate  to
reduce costs, defer care to ambulatory centers and satellite clinics, and try to create
more  "home-like"  acute-care  settings.  In  1998,  approximately  75%  of  health-care
associated construction projects focused on renovation of existing outpatient facilities
or the building of such facilities;15 the number of projects associated with outpatient
health  care  rose  by  17%  from  1998  through  1999.16  An  aging  population  is  also
creating  increasing  demand  for  assisted-living  facilities  and  skilled  nursing  centers.
Construction of assisted-living facilities in 1998 increased 49% from the previous year,
with 138 projects completed at a cost of $703 million.16 Overall, from 1998 to 1999,
health-care  associated  construction  costs  increased  by  28.5%,  from  $11.56  billion  to
$14.86  billion.16  Environmental  disturbances  associated  with  construction  activities
near  health-care  facilities  pose  airborne  and  waterborne  disease  threats  risks  for  the
substantial number of patients who are at risk for health-care associated opportunistic
infections.  The  increasing  age  of  hospitals  and  other  health-care  facilities  is  also
generating ongoing need for repair and remediation work (e.g., installing wiring for new
information  systems,  removing  old  sinks,  and  repairing  elevator  shafts)  that  can
introduce or increase contamination of the air and water in patient-care environments.
Aging  equipment,  deferred  maintenance,  and  natural  disasters  provide  additional
mechanisms for the entry of environmental pathogens into high-risk patient-care areas.
Architects,  engineers,  construction  contractors,  environmental  health  scientists,  and
industrial  hygienists  historically  have  directed  the  design  and  function  of  hospitals'
physical  plants.  Increasingly,  however,  because  of  the  growth  in  the  number  of
susceptible  patients  and  the  increase  in  construction  projects,  the  involvement  of
hospital  epidemiologists  and  infection-control  professionals  is  required.  These  experts
help  make  plans  for  building,  maintaining,  and  renovating  health-care  facilities  to
ensure  that  the  adverse  impact  of  the  environment  on  the  incidence  of  health-care
associated infections is minimal. The following are examples of adverse outcomes that
could  have  been  prevented  had  such  experts  been  involved  in  the  planning  process:
The  purpose  of  this  guideline  is  to  provide  useful  information  for  both  health-care
professionals  and  engineers  in  efforts  to  provide  a  safe  environment  in  which  quality
health  care  may  be  provided  to  patients.  The  recommendations  herein  provide
guidance to minimize the risk for and prevent transmission of pathogens in the indoor
environment.  *  These  criteria  are  listed  in  order  of  strength  of  evidence.  +  Adapted
from references 11 and 12. * Adapted from reference 13. CDC provides information on
infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/introduction.html
