A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Some people think of measles as just a little rash and fever that clear up in a few days.
But measles can cause serious health complications, especially in children younger than
5 years old. Measles is highly contagious. If one person has it, up to 9 out of 10 people
nearby  will  become  infected  if  they  are  not  protected.  The  best  protection  against
measles  is  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  (MMR)  vaccine.  MMR  vaccine  provides
long-lasting protection against all strains of measles. Measles symptoms appear 7 to 14
days  after  contact  with  the  virus.  Common  measles  symptoms  include:  Measles  can
cause serious health complications, especially in children younger than 5 years of age.
Common complications are ear infections and diarrhea. Serious complications include
pneumonia and encephalitis. Anyone who is not protected against measles is at risk. 
Measles was declared eliminated from the United States in 2000. However, measles is
still common in many parts of the world. Every year, measles is brought into the United
States  by  unvaccinated  travelers  who  get  measles  while  they  are  in  other  countries.
These  travelers  are  mostly  Americans  and  sometimes  international  visitors.  Some
people are a higher risk of experiencing severe complications from measles.   Measles
is  very  contagious.  It  spreads  through  the  air  when  an  infected  person  coughs  or
sneezes. You can get measles just by being in a room where a person with measles has
been. This can happen even up to 2 hours after that person has left.  Protect yourself
with the vaccine. The best way to protect against measles is with the measles, mumps,
and rubella (MMR) vaccine. MMR is safe and effective. Two doses of MMR vaccine are
about 97% effective at preventing measles; one dose is about 93% effective.  Prevent
measles  and  talk  to  your  healthcare  provider  about  the  MMR  vaccine,  especially  if
planning to travel. Measles Graphics, Videos, and Other Resources Measles is one of the
most contagious diseases and can be dangerous in babies and young children. The best
protection  against  measles  is  the  MMR  vaccine.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/measles/about/index.html
