A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Adverse childhood experiences, or ACEs,
are  potentially  traumatic  events  that  occur  in  childhood  (0-17  years).  Examples
include:1  Also included are aspects of the child’s environment that can undermine their
sense of safety, stability, and bonding. Examples can include growing up in a household
with:1  The examples above are not a complete list of adverse experiences. Many other
traumatic experiences could impact health and well-being. This can include not having
enough  food  to  eat,  experiencing  homelessness  or  unstable  housing,  or  experiencing
discrimination.23456  ACEs  are  common.  About  64%  of  adults  in  the  United  States
reported they had experienced at least one type of ACE before age 18. Nearly one in six
(17.3%) adults reported they had experienced four or more types of ACEs.7 Preventing
ACEs could potentially reduce many health conditions. Estimates show up to 1.9 million
heart  disease  cases  and  21  million  depression  cases  potentially  could  have  been
avoided by preventing ACEs.1 Some people are at greater risk of experiencing one or
more ACEs than others. While all children are at risk of ACEs, numerous studies show
inequities in such experiences. These inequalities are linked to the historical, social, and
economic  environments  in  which  some  families  live.  56ACEs  were  highest  among
females,  non-Hispanic  American  Indian  or  Alaska  Native  adults,  and  adults  who  are
unemployed  or  unable  to  work.7  ACEs  are  costly.  ACEs-related  health  consequences
cost an estimated economic burden of $748 billion annually in Bermuda, Canada, and
the United States.8 ACEs can have lasting effects on health and well-being in childhood
and  life  opportunities  well  into  adulthood.9  Life  opportunities  include  things  like
education and job potential. These experiences can increase the risks of injury, sexually
transmitted infections, and involvement in sex trafficking. They can also increase risks
for  maternal  and  child  health  problems  including  teen  pregnancy,  pregnancy
complications,  and  fetal  death.  Also  included  are  a  range  of  chronic  diseases  and
leading
 causes
 of
 death,
 such
 as
 cancer,
 diabetes,
 heart
 disease,
 and
suicide.11011121314151617 ACEs and associated social determinants of health, such
as  living  in  under-resourced  or  racially  segregated  neighborhoods,  can  cause  toxic
stress. Toxic stress, or extended or prolonged stress, from ACEs can negatively affect
children’s  brain  development,  immune  systems,  and  stress-response  systems.  These
changes  can  affect  children’s  attention,  decision-making,  and  learning.18  Children
growing  up  with  toxic  stress  may  have  difficulty  forming  healthy  and  stable
relationships. They may also have unstable work histories as adults and struggle with
finances, jobs, and depression throughout life. 18These effects can also be passed on to
their own children.192021 Some children may face further exposure to toxic stress from
historical  and  ongoing  traumas.  These  historical  and  ongoing  traumas  refer  to
experiences  of  racial  discrimination  or  the  impacts  of  poverty  resulting  from  limited
educational  and  economic  opportunities.16  Adverse  childhood  experiences  can  be
prevented. Certain factors may increase or decrease the risk of experiencing adverse
childhood
 experiences.
 
 Preventing
 adverse
 childhood
 experiences
 requires
understanding  and  addressing  the  factors  that  put  people  at  risk  for  or  protect  them
from violence.  Creating safe, stable, nurturing relationships and environments for all
children can prevent ACEs and help all children reach their full potential. We all have a
role to play.  ACEs can have a tremendous impact on lifelong health and opportunity.
CDC  works  to  understand  ACEs  and  prevent  them.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/aces/about/index.html
