A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Body  lice  are  parasites,  or  insects,  that
feed on human blood. Body lice can spread disease. They live and lay eggs on clothing
and bedding used by infested people. Adult body lice are small, only 2.3 – 3.6 mm in
length  (about  the  size  of  a  sesame  seed).  Improved  hygiene  and  access  to  regular
changes  of  clean  clothes  is  the  only  treatment  needed  for  body  lice  infestations;
however, in some cases peduculicides are recommended. Body lice can spread disease
(epidemic typhus, Bartonella quintana infection, and epidemic relapsing fever). Intense
itching  (pruritus)  and  rash  caused  by  an  allergic  reaction  to  louse  bites  are  common
symptoms of body lice infestation. As with other lice infestations, intense itching leads
to scratching which can cause sores and secondary bacterial infection of the skin. When
body lice infestation lasts long, heavily bitten areas of the skin can become thickened
and darkened, particularly in the mid-section of the body (waist, groin, upper thighs).
Body lice exist worldwide but usually affect people who live in crowded conditions. They
affect  people  without  access  to  regular  bathing  and  clean  clothes.  They  can  spread
quickly  in:  Body  lice  spread  through  direct  contact  with  a  person  who  has  body  lice.
They can also spread through contact with clothing, beds, or linens that have been in
contact  with  a  person  infested  with  lice.  However,  in  the  United  States,  actual
infestation  with  body  lice  tends  to  occur  only  in  people  who  do  not  have  access  to
housing, regular bathing, or clean clothes. Nits (lice eggs) take 6 – 9 days to hatch. Nits
are tiny (0.8 – 0.3 mm) and hard to see; they can be confused for dandruff. Nymphs
(newly hatched lice) are about the size of a pinhead and take about a week to grow into
adults.  Adult  lice  are  about  the  size  of  a  sesame  seed,  have  six  legs,  and  are  tan  to
grayish white. Adult females can lay up to eight nits per day. Adult lice need to feed on
blood several times each day; without blood meals, the louse will die within 1 – 2 days
off the host. Dogs, cats, and other pets do not spread human lice. Take these steps to
help prevent and control the spread of body lice: You can diagnose body lice infestation
by finding eggs and crawling lice in the seams of clothing. Sometimes you can see a
body  louse  crawling  or  feeding  on  the  skin.  Although  body  lice  and  nits  can  be  large
enough to see with the naked eye, a magnifying lens may help to find crawling lice or
eggs. See a healthcare provider if you are unsure about an infestation. You can treat a
body  lice  infestation  by  improving  personal  hygiene.  Bathe  and  change  into  clean
clothes at least once a week. Wash clothing, bedding, and towels used by the person
infested with lice using hot water (at least 130°F) and machine dry using the hot cycle.
Pediculicide, a medicine that can kill lice, is sometimes used for treatment. If prescribed
a pediculicide, apply it exactly as directed on the bottle or by your healthcare provider.
However, a pediculicide is generally not necessary if hygiene is maintained and items
are machine washed appropriately at least once a week. Lice are parasites, or insects,
found on people's heads and bodies, including the pubic area. Human lice survive by
feeding on human blood. Infestation or infested person means that a person has lice.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/lice/about/body-lice.html
