Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Two vaccines containing varicella virus are licensed for use in
the United States. Both vaccines contain live, attenuated varicella-zoster virus derived
from  the  Oka  strain.  Single-antigen  vaccine  and  MMRV  vaccine  can  be  used  for  the
routine 2-dose varicella vaccination. For the first dose, CDC recommends that MMR and
varicella vaccines be given separately in children 12 through 47 months old unless the
parent or caregiver expresses a preference for MMRV vaccine.  For the second dose of
measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella vaccines at any age (15 months–12 years) and
for the first dose at age ≥48 months, use of MMRV vaccine generally is preferred over
separate injections of MMR and varicella vaccines. Both vaccines may be given at the
same time as other vaccines for children age 12 through 15 months and age 4 through
6 years. For more information on the two vaccines for varicella, see MMR & Varicella
Vaccines or MMRV Vaccine: Discussing Options with Parents. For package inserts, see
Varivax® and ProQuad®. One dose Two doses In Children with HIV-infection It is not
known how long a vaccinated person is protected against varicella. But, live vaccines in
general provide long-lasting immunity.  1Vázquez M, LaRussa PS, Gershon AA, Niccolai
LM,  Muehlenbein  CE,  Steinberg  SP,  Shapiro  ED.  Effectiveness  over  time  of  varicella
vaccine. JAMA. 2004 Feb 18;291(7):851-5  2Kuter B, Matthews H, Shinefield H, Black S,
Dennehy P, Watson B, et al. Ten year follow-up of healthy children who received one or
two injections of varicella vaccine. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2004;23:132–7  3Marin M, Marti
M,  Kambhampati  A,  Jeram  S,  Seward  JF.  Varicella  vaccine  effectiveness  worldwide:  a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2016;137:1-10.  Top of Page
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/hcp/about-vaccine.html
