A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Scabies is caused by the human itch mite
(Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis). The microscopic scabies mite burrows into the upper
layer  of  the  skin  where  it  lives  and  lays  its  eggs.  Scabies  can  spread  quickly  under
crowded conditions where close body and skin contact is frequent.  The most common
symptoms of scabies are intense itching and a pimple-like skin rash. The most common
symptoms  of  scabies  are  intense  itching,  especially  at  night,  and  a  pimple-like  skin
rash. Common areas on body where symptoms occur include: You may see tiny burrows
on the skin, caused by the female mite tunneling just beneath the surface of the skin.
Infants and very young children often experience a rash on the head, face, neck, palms,
and soles of the feet. Scabies is a common condition found worldwide. It can spread to
anyone  through  close,  personal,  often  skin-to-skin  contact.  Scabies  can  spread  easily
under crowded conditions where close body and skin contact is frequent. Places where
scabies  outbreaks  more  commonly  occur  include:  You  can  get  scabies  by  When  a
person is infested with scabies mites the first time, symptoms typically take 4 – 8 weeks
to develop. However, a person with an infestation can transmit scabies even if they do
not have symptoms. To prevent scabies, avoid direct skin-to-skin contact with a person
who has scabies. Avoid sharing items such as clothing or bedding used by a person who
has scabies. To control the spread of scabies, treat all household members and close
contacts  at  the  same  time  as  the  person  with  scabies.  This  should  help  to  prevent
possible  re-exposure  and  reinfestation.  Wash  all  clothing,  towels,  and  bedding  used
next  to  the  skin  during  the  three  days  before  starting  treatment.  Items  should  be
machine  washed  using  hot  water  (temperatures  in  excess  of  50°C  or  122°F  for  10
minutes will kill mites and eggs), dried on the hot cycle, or dry-cleaned. Seal items you
can't wash or dry-clean in a closed plastic bag for several days to a week. Scabies mites
generally do not survive more than two to three days away from human skin. Children
and  adults  can  usually  return  to  childcare,  school,  or  work  the  day  after  treatment.  
Your healthcare professional can sometimes diagnose scabies based on physical exam
findings and history but will likely try to confirm scabies by finding the mite, mite eggs,
or  feces  (scybala).  They  may  scrape  your  skin  or  use  the  tip  of  a  needle  to  carefully
remove  the  mite  from  the  end  of  its  burrow.  The  sample  is  examined  under  a
microscope to confirm scabies.  A person can still have scabies even if mites, eggs, or
feces are not found. Fewer than 10 – 15 mites may be present on an infected person
who  is  otherwise  healthy.  The  first  time  a  person  gets  scabies  they  usually  have  no
symptoms at the beginning. Symptoms can take four to eight weeks to develop after
infestation; however, people can still spread scabies during this time.  If you suspect
you have scabies, seek medical attention. Your healthcare professional can prescribe a
cream, lotion, or pill that kills scabies mites.  To prevent the spread of scabies Scabies
mites  generally  do  not  survive  more  than  two  to  three  days  away  from  human  skin.
Products used to treat scabies (scabicides) kill scabies mites; some also kill mite eggs.
Scabicides  require  a  doctor's  prescription.  No  non-prescription  products  have  been
tested and approved to treat scabies. Carefully follow the instructions contained in the
box or on the label. Scabicide lotion or cream should be applied to all areas of the body
from the neck down to the feet and toes. For infants and children, the lotion or cream
should be applied to their entire head and neck as well as the rest of the body. Only
permethrin or sulfur ointment may be used in infants. The lotion or cream should be
applied to a clean body and left on for the recommended time before washing it off. 
The itching of scabies is due to a hypersensitivity reaction (allergy) to mites and their
feces, so itching may continue for several weeks after treatment even if all the mites
and eggs are killed. However, if itching still is present two to four weeks after treatment
or if new burrows or pimple-like rash appear, retreatment may be necessary. Scabies is
an  infestation  of  the  skin  by  a  human  itch  mite.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/scabies/about/index.html
