A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Head lice, or Pediculus humanus capitis,
are parasitic insects that feed on human blood. You can find them mostly on your head,
but also on your eyebrows and eyelashes. Adult head lice are roughly 2 – 3 mm long
(about the size of a sesame seed). Both over-the-counter and prescription medications
are available to treat head lice in your hair (infestation). People with head lice may not
have  symptoms,  particularly  with  a  first  infestation  or  when  an  infestation  is  light.
Itching (pruritus) is the most common symptom of head lice infestation. It is caused by
an allergic reaction to louse bites. It may take four to six weeks for itching to appear the
first time a person has head lice. Other symptoms may include the following: Head lice
do not transmit any disease and therefore are not considered a health hazard. In the
United  States,  infestation  with  head  lice  is  most  common  among  preschool-  and
elementary school-age children and their household members and caretakers. There is
not  reliable  data  on  how  many  people  get  head  lice  each  year  in  the  United  States;
however, an estimated 6 – 12 million infestations occur each year in the United States
among children 3 – 11 years of age. Some studies suggest that girls get head lice more
often  than  boys,  probably  due  to  more  frequent  head-to-head  contact.  In  the  United
States,  infestation  with  head  lice  is  much  less  common  among  African  American
persons than among persons of other races. The head louse found most frequently in
the United States may have claws that are better adapted for grasping the shape and
width of some types of hair, but not others. Head lice mainly spread by direct contact
with the hair of a person infested with lice. Head lice move by crawling; they cannot
hop or fly. Adult lice can live on a person's head for about 30 days. However, they will
die within two days if they fall off a person and cannot feed. Adult female head lice are
usually larger than males and can lay about six eggs each day. Nits (lice eggs) cannot
hatch and usually die within a week if they are not kept at the same temperature as
those found close to the scalp. Nits take about a week (range 6 – 9 days) to hatch into
nymphs  (young  lice).  Nymphs  look  similar  to  adult  lice  but  are  very  small  (size  of  a
pinhead); they take about seven days to mature into adult lice. The most common way
to get head lice is by head-to-head contact with a person who already has head lice.
This contact can be common among children playing at places like school or the home.
Getting head lice is not related to cleanliness of you or your environment. Although not
as  common,  head  lice  may  spread  by:  Contracting  lice  from  a  wig  or  hairpiece  is
extremely unlikely. Especially if the wig or hairpiece hasn't been worn in the past 48
hours by a person with head lice. Head lice can survive under water for several hours
but are unlikely to spread in a swimming pool. Chlorine levels in pool water do not kill
head lice. Animals do not get or spread head lice. Take these steps to help prevent and
control the spread of head lice: To help control a head lice outbreak in a community,
school,  or  camp,  teach  children  to  avoid  activities  that  may  spread  head  lice.  For
example, teach children to Misdiagnosis of head lice infestation is common. Finding a
live nymph (baby louse) or adult louse on the scalp or hair is the best way to diagnose a
head lice infestation. Because adult and nymph lice are very small, move quickly, and
avoid light, they may be difficult to find. A fine-toothed louse comb may help you find
lice. If you do not see crawling lice, look for nits attached firmly within ¼ inch of the
base of hair shafts. You will often see nits on hair behind the ears and near the back of
the neck. Nits that are attached more than ¼ inch from the base of the hair shaft are
almost  always  hatched  or  dead.  Although  head  lice  and  nits  can  be  visible  with  the
naked  eye,  a  magnifying  lens  may  help  to  find  crawling  lice  or  nits.  Nits  are  often
confused with other particles found in hair such as dandruff, hair spray droplets, and
dirt particles. If you do not see nymphs or adults, and the only nits found are more than
¼  inch  from  the  scalp,  then  the  infestation  is  probably  old  and  does  not  need
treatment. Lice are parasites, or insects, found on people's heads and bodies, including
the pubic area. Human lice survive by feeding on human blood. Infestation or infested
person  means  that  a  person  has  lice.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/lice/about/head-lice.html
