A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Several  bacteria  can  cause  meningitis.  Leading  U.S.  causes  include:  Mycobacterium
tuberculosis,  which  causes  tuberculosis  or  TB,  is  a  less  common  cause.  People  with
bacterial  meningitis  usually  have  typical  meningitis  symptoms.  Complications  can
include seizures, coma, and death. Many of these bacteria are associated with another
serious  illness,  sepsis.  Certain  factors  increase  a  person's  risk  for  getting  bacterial
meningitis. Some causes are more likely to affect certain age groups: Certain medical
conditions,  medications,  and  surgical  procedures  put  people  at  increased  risk,
including: Infectious diseases tend to spread where large groups of people gather. For
example, college campuses have reported outbreaks of meningococcal disease, caused
by  N.  meningitidis.  Travelers  may  be  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  
Travelers  should  also  avoid  being  with  known  TB  patients  in  crowded,  enclosed
environments.  L.  monocytogenes  can  spread  through  food,  while  the  bacteria  shown
below  spread  from  one  person  to  another.  Vaccines  are  the  most  effective  way  to
protect against certain types of bacterial meningitis.  There are vaccines for 4 types of
bacteria that can cause meningitis. All but the last are widely used in the United States.
Pregnant  women  should  talk  to  their  healthcare  provider  about  getting  screened  for
group B Streptococcus. Healthcare providers give antibiotics (during labor) to women
who test positive. This helps prevent passing the bacteria to their babies. Sometimes
antibiotics can help prevent people from getting sick if they were around someone with
bacterial meningitis. Healthcare providers and health departments decide who should
get these preventive antibiotics. There are laboratory tests for meningitis. Healthcare
providers treat bacterial meningitis with antibiotics. It's important to start treatment as
soon  as  possible.  Bacteria,  viruses,  parasites,  and  fungi  can  all  cause  meningitis.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/meningitis/about/bacterial-meningitis.html
