Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is a disease caused by a
virus  named  SARS-CoV-2.  It  can  be  very  contagious  and  spreads  quickly.  Over  one
million  people  have  died  from  COVID-19  in  the  United  States.  COVID-19  most  often
causes  respiratory  symptoms  that  can  feel  much  like  a  cold,  the  flu,  or  pneumonia.
COVID-19 may attack more than your lungs and respiratory system. Other parts of your
body  may  also  be  affected  by  the  disease.  Most  people  with  COVID-19  have  mild
symptoms,  but  some  people  become  severely  ill.  Some  people  including  those  with
minor or no symptoms will develop Post-COVID Conditions – also called “Long COVID.”
COVID-19  spreads  when  an  infected  person  breathes  out  droplets  and  very  small
particles  that  contain  the  virus.  Other  people  can  breathe  in  these  droplets  and
particles,  or  these  droplets  and  particles  can  land  on  their  eyes,  nose,  or  mouth.  In
some  circumstances,  these  droplets  may  contaminate  surfaces  they  touch.  Anyone
infected with COVID-19 can spread it, even if they do NOT have symptoms. The risk of
animals  spreading  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19  to  people  is  low.  The  virus  can
spread  from  people  to  animals  during  close  contact.  People  with  suspected  or
confirmed  COVID-19  should  avoid  contact  with  animals.  Antibodies  are  proteins  your
immune system makes to help fight infection and protect you from getting sick in the
future. A positive antibody test result can help identify someone who has had COVID-19
in  the  past  or  has  been  vaccinated  against  COVID-19.  Studies  show  that  people  who
have  antibodies  from  an  infection  with  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19  can  improve
their level of protection by getting vaccinated. Some people are more likely than others
to  get  very  sick  if  they  get  COVID-19.  This  includes  people  who  are  older,  are
immunocompromised (have a weakened immune system), have certain disabilities, or
have underlying health conditions. Understanding your COVID-19 risk and the risks that
might affect others can help you make decisions to protect yourself and others. There
are  many  actions  you  can  take  to  help  protect  you,  your  household,  and  your
community from COVID-19. CDC’s Respiratory Virus Guidance provides actions you can
take to help protect yourself and others from health risks caused by respiratory viruses,
including  COVID-19.  These  actions  include  steps  you  can  take  to  lower  the  risk  of
COVID-19 transmission (catching and spreading COVID-19) and lower the risk of severe
illness  if  you  get  sick.  CDC  recommends  that  you  Masks,  physical  distancing,  and
tests  can  provide  additional  layers  of  protection.  Viruses  are  constantly  changing,
including the virus that causes COVID-19. These changes occur over time and can lead
to new strains of the virus or variants of COVID-19. Slowing the spread of the virus, by
protecting  yourself  and  others,  can  help  slow  new  variants  from  developing.  CDC  is
working with state and local public health officials to monitor the spread of all variants,
including Omicron. Search for and find historical COVID-19 pages and files. Please note
the  content  on  these  pages  and  files  is  no  longer  being  updated  and  may  be  out  of
date. To receive email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/your-health/about-covid-19.html
