A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 One Health is a collaborative, multisectoral, and transdisciplinary approach — working
at the local, regional, national, and global levels — with the goal of achieving optimal
health outcomes recognizing the interconnection between people, animals, plants, and
their shared environment. One Health is an approach that recognizes that the health of
people is closely connected to the health of animals and our shared environment. One
Health is not new, but it has become more important in recent years. This is because
many  factors  have  changed  interactions  between  people,  animals,  plants,  and  our
environment. These changes have led to the spread of existing or known (endemic) and
new  or  emerging  zoonotic  diseases,  which  are  diseases  that  can  spread  between
animals and people. Every year, millions of people and animals around the world are
affected  by  zoonotic  diseases.  Examples  of  zoonotic  diseases  include:  Similar  to
humans, animals are also at risk of getting sick from some diseases and environmental
hazards. Because of this, they can sometimes serve as early warning signs of potential
human illness. For example, birds often die of West Nile virus before people in the same
area  get  sick  with  West  Nile  virus  infection.  One  Health  issues  include  emerging,
re-emerging, and endemic zoonotic diseases, neglected tropical diseases, vector-borne
diseases,  antimicrobial  resistance,  food  safety  and  food  security,  environmental
contamination, climate change and other health threats shared by people, animals, and
the environment. For example: Even the fields of chronic disease, mental health, injury,
occupational  health,  and  noncommunicable  diseases  can  benefit  from  a  One  Health
approach involving collaboration across disciplines and sectors. One Health is gaining
recognition in the United States and globally as an effective way to fight health issues
at  the  human-animal-environment  interface,  including  zoonotic  diseases.  CDC  uses  a
One Health approach by involving experts in human, animal, environmental health, and
other relevant disciplines and sectors in monitoring and controlling public health threats
and  to  learn  about  how  diseases  spread  among  people,  animals,  plants,  and  the
environment. Successful public health interventions require the cooperation of human,
animal,  and  environmental  health  partners.  Professionals  in  human  health  (doctors,
nurses,  public  health  practitioners,  epidemiologists),  animal  health  (veterinarians,
paraprofessionals, agricultural workers), environment (ecologists, wildlife experts), and
other  areas  of  expertise  need  to  communicate,  collaborate  on,  and  coordinate
activities.  Other  relevant  players  in  a  One  Health  approach  could  include  law
enforcement,  policymakers,  agriculture,  communities,  and  even  pet  owners.  No  one
person,  organization,  or  sector  can  address  issues  at  the  animal-human-environment
interface  alone.  The  One  Health  approach  can:  By  promoting  collaboration  across  all
sectors,  a  One  Health  approach  can  achieve  the  best  health  outcomes  for  people,
animals,  and  plants  in  a  shared  environment.  CDC’s  One  Health  Office  leads  the
agency’s  One  Health  efforts  in  the  United  States  and  supports  One  Health  activities
worldwide. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/one-health/about/index.html
