A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Anaplasmosis is a disease caused by the bacteria A. phagocytophilum. These bacteria
are spread to people by tick bites primarily from: People with anaplasmosis will often
have fever, headache, chills, and muscle aches. Doxycycline is the drug of choice for
adults and children of all ages with anaplasmosis. Signs and symptoms of anaplasmosis
typically begin within 1–2 weeks after the bite of an infected tick, however many people
do not remember being bitten.
 See your healthcare provider if you become ill after being bitten by a tick or have been
in areas where ticks live. Ticks commonly live in the woods or in areas with high brush.
Early signs and symptoms (days 1-5) are usually mild or moderate and may include: If
treatment is delayed or if there are other medical conditions present, anaplasmosis can
cause  severe  illness.  Prompt  treatment  can  reduce  your  risk  of  developing  severe
illness.  Signs  and  symptoms  of  severe  (late  stage)  illness  can  include:   People  with
weakened immune systems are at risk for severe illness. This includes people receiving
some  cancer  treatments,  individuals  with  advanced  HIV  infection,  prior  organ
transplants,  or  people  taking  some  medications.  Anaplasmosis  is  a  tickborne  disease
caused by the bacteria A. phagocytophilum.  A. phagocytophilum is primarily spread to
people by the bite of an infected tick.
In the United States, the bacteria are carried by the: 
In  rare  cases,  A.  phagocytophilum  has  been  spread  by  blood  transfusion.
Anaplasmosis  is  most  commonly  reported  in  the  Northeastern  and  upper  Midwestern
states. There is no vaccine to prevent anaplasmosis. Prevent illness by preventing tick
bites, preventing ticks on your pets, and preventing ticks in your yard. Your healthcare
provider  can  order  certain  blood  tests  to  look  for  evidence  of  anaplasmosis  or  other
illnesses that cause similar symptoms.
 Test results may take several weeks.
 If  your  healthcare  provider  thinks  you  have  anaplasmosis,  they  should  prescribe
antibiotics while waiting for test results to return. Anaplasmosis is caused by Anaplasma
phagocytophilum spread to people by the bite of an infected tick. Languages Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/anaplasmosis/about/index.html
