A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Whooping cough is a respiratory illness caused by a type of bacteria called Bordetella
pertussis. The disease is only found in humans. Whooping cough bacteria attach to the
cilia  (tiny,  hair-like  extensions)  that  line  part  of  the  upper  respiratory  system.  The
bacteria release toxins (poisons), which damage the cilia and cause airways to swell.
Symptoms  of  whooping  cough  can  vary  for  people  based  on  their  age  and  if  they've
been vaccinated or not. Age and underlying medical conditions can increase someone's
risk for getting a severe case of whooping cough. It's especially important to prevent
these people from getting sick. Babies younger than 1 year old are at greatest risk for
getting  whooping  cough  and  having  severe  complications  from  it.  People  with
pre-existing  health  conditions  that  may  be  worsened  by  whooping  cough  are  at  high
risk for developing a severe infection. Some conditions that could be made worse by
whooping  cough  include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  The  bacteria  that  cause  whooping
cough  spread  easily  from  person  to  person  through  the  air.  When  a  person  with
whooping  cough  sneezes  or  coughs,  they  release  small  particles  with  the  bacteria  in
them. Other people can then breathe in the bacteria.  These bacteria can spread when
people spend a lot of time together or share breathing space. People can spread the
bacteria  from  the  start  of  symptoms  and  for  at  least  2  weeks  after  coughing  begins.
Taking  antibiotics  early  in  the  illness  may  shorten  the  amount  of  time  someone's
contagious.  Some  people  have  mild  symptoms  and  don't  know  they  have  whooping
cough, but they can still spread the bacteria to others. Many babies who get whooping
cough are infected by older siblings, parents, or caregivers who don't know they have
it.   The  best  way  to  prevent  whooping  cough  is  to  get vaccinated.  CDC  recommends
whooping  cough  vaccination  for  everyone.  Preventive  antibiotics  are  also  known  as
postexposure  antimicrobial  prophylaxis  (PEP).  These  are  medicines  given  to  someone
who  has  been  exposed  to  harmful  bacteria  to  help  prevent  them  from  getting  sick.
Some people should receive antibiotics to prevent them from getting sick if they have
been around someone with whooping cough.  If you've been exposed to someone with
whooping  cough,  talk  to  a  healthcare  provider  about  preventive  antibiotics.  A
healthcare provider or health department generally decides who should get preventive
antibiotics.  CDC  recommends  practicing  good  hygiene  to  help  prevent  the  spread  of
bacteria  and  viruses  that  can  cause  many  respiratory  illnesses.  People  who've  had
whooping cough have some immunity to future whooping cough infections. However,
getting sick with whooping cough doesn't provide lifelong protection. Whooping cough
can be difficult to diagnose because the signs and symptoms are often similar to other
respiratory illnesses. It can be helpful to know if you've been in contact with someone
who has whooping cough. Healthcare providers can diagnose whooping cough by doing
a  It's  very  important  to  treat  whooping  cough  early,  before  coughing  fits  begin.
Healthcare providers generally treat whooping cough with antibiotics. Further treatment
in  the  hospital  may  be  required  if  symptoms  are  serious.  Communication  and  print
resources about whooping cough Pertussis, also known as whooping cough, can cause
serious  illness  in  people  of  all  ages  but  is  most  dangerous  for  babies.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/about/index.html
