A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. AR happens when germs like bacteria and
fungi  develop  the  ability  to  defeat  the  drugs  designed  to  kill  them.  That  means  the
germs  are  not  killed  and  continue  to  grow.  Resistant  infections  can  be  difficult,  and
sometimes impossible, to treat. When Clostridioides difficile—a germ (bacterium) that is
not typically resistant to antibiotics but can cause deadly diarrhea and inflammation of
the colon and is associated with antimicrobial use—is added to these, the U.S. toll of all
the threats in the report exceeds 3 million infections and 48,000 deaths. Bacteria and
fungi  do  not  have  to  be  resistant  to  every  antibiotic  or  antifungal  to  be  dangerous.
Resistance  to  even  one  antibiotic  or  antifungal  drug  can  mean  serious  problems.  For
example: If antibiotics and antifungals lose their effectiveness, then we lose the ability
to treat infections and control these public health threats.  AR is a naturally occurring
process. However, increases in antimicrobial resistance are driven by a combination of
germs exposed to antibiotics and antifungals, and the spread of those germs and their
resistance  mechanisms.  Antibiotics  and  antifungals  kill  some  germs  that  cause
infections,  but  they  also  kill  helpful  germs  that  protect  our  body  from  infection.
Antimicrobial resistance accelerates when antibiotics and antifungals pressure bacteria
and  fungi  to  adapt.  The antimicrobial-resistant germs survive,  multiply  and  spread  to
other germs. These surviving germs have resistance traits in their DNA that can spread
to  other  germs.  To  survive,  germs  can  develop  defense  strategies  against  antibiotics
and antifungals called resistance mechanisms. DNA tells the germ how to make specific
proteins,  which  determine  the  germ's  resistance  mechanisms.  Bacteria  and  fungi  can
carry genes for many types of resistance.  Alarmingly, antimicrobial-resistant germs can
share  their  resistance  mechanisms  with  other  germs  that  have  not  been  exposed  to
antibiotics or antifungals. This table gives a few examples of defense strategies used to
resist the effects of antibiotics or antifungals. Example: Gram-negative bacteria have an
outer layer (membrane) that protects them from their environment. These bacteria can
use  this  membrane  to  selectively  keep  antibiotic  drugs  from  entering.  Example:
Some  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  bacteria  can  produce  pumps  to  get  rid  of  several
different
 important
 antibiotic
 drugs,
 including
 fluoroquinolones,
 beta-lactams,
chloramphenicol,  and  trimethoprim.  Example:  Some  Candida  species  produce  pumps
that  get  rid  of  azoles  such  as  fluconazole.  Example:  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  bacteria
produce  enzymes  called  carbapenemases,  which  break  down  carbapenem  drugs  and
most other beta-lactam drugs. Example: Escherichia coli bacteria with the mcr-1 gene
can add a compound to the outside of the cell wall so that the drug colistin cannot latch
onto  it.  Example:  Aspergillus  fumigatus  changes  the  cyp1A  gene  so  that  triazoles
cannot bind to the protein. Example: Some Staphylococcus aureus bacteria can bypass
the  drug  effects  of  trimethoprim.  Antimicrobial  resistance  is  one  of  the  world's  most
urgent  public  health  problems  because  it:  Stopping  the  spread  of  antimicrobial
resistance is crucial.  We all have a role to play, from travelers, animal owners and care
givers  to  patients  and  healthcare  providers.   Antimicrobial  resistance  happens  when
germs  like  bacteria  and  fungi  can  defeat  the  drugs  designed  to  kill  them.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance/about/index.html
