Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. DT= diphtheria toxoid- and tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine
DTaP  =  diphtheria  toxoid-,  tetanus  toxoid-,  and  acellular  pertussis-containing  vaccine
Td  =  tetanus  toxoid-  and  diphtheria  toxoid-containing  vaccine  CDC  recommends  a
series of DTaP for children aged <7 years. For children aged <7 years who develop a
contraindication  to  pertussis-containing  vaccines,  CDC  previously  recommended  DT
instead  of DTaP.  Sanofi  Pasteur,  historically  the sole licensed  DT  manufacturer in  the
United States, discontinued the vaccine in late 2022. Currently, there’s no licensed DT
available  in  the  United  States.  The  current  Td  supply  is  adequate.  The  anticipated
increase  in  Td  use  is  relatively  small,  considering  the  rarity  of  developing  a
contraindication  to  pertussis-containing  vaccine.  There’s  only  one  contraindication
specific to the pertussis component in DTaP: encephalopathy. Encephalopathy, within 7
days  of  vaccination,  is  a  contraindication  when  it’s  not  attributable  to  another
identifiable cause. Experts don’t know the exact number of people who experience this
adverse  reaction,  but  data  suggest  it’s  extremely  rare.  A  family  history  of  a
contraindication or reaction to pertussis-containing vaccines isn’t a contraindication for
young children to receive DTaP. Healthcare providers can request a consultation from
CDC’s  Clinical  Immunization  Safety  Assessment  service.  Td  contains  a  lower  dose
(approximately 1/12th the amount) of diphtheria toxoid compared to DT. The impact of
this  lower  dose  on  the  protection  provided  against  diphtheria  in  young  children  is
uncertain. Available evidence suggests young children who receive Td in place of DTaP
may have sub-optimal protection against diphtheria.1-7 No available data evaluate Td
effectiveness  against  diphtheria  when  used  as  part  of  a  primary  series  in  young
children. Several studies have looked at low-dose, diphtheria toxoid-containing vaccines
used for a booster dose in children aged <7 years. Available data demonstrated mixed
findings  regarding  the  level  of  protective  diphtheria  antibody  generated.2,3,4  Limited
data are available on the use of Td for primary vaccination of older children and adults.
Available  data  suggest  that  low-dose  diphtheria  toxoid-containing  vaccines  may  not
reliably  generate  a  protective  diphtheria  response.5,6,7  CDC  recommends  young
children  receive  DTaP  as  the  first  dose  in  the  diphtheria,  tetanus,  and  pertussis
childhood  vaccination  series.  CDC  recommends  this  dose  at  2  months  of  age.  Keep
reading:
 Diphtheria,
 Tetanus,
 and
 Pertussis
 Vaccine
 Recommendations
 CDC
recommends  continued  use  of  DTaP  unless  a  contraindication  to  pertussis-containing
vaccines  develops.  For  young  children  with  a  contraindication  to  pertussis-containing
vaccines, vaccine providers may administer Td for all recommended remaining doses in
place of DTaP. Counsel concerned parents about:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/dtap-tdap-td/hcp/td-offlabel.html
