A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. In 1989 – 1991, a measles epidemic in the
United  States  resulted  in  tens  of  thousands  of  cases  of  measles  and  hundreds  of
deaths.  When  this  epidemic  was  investigated,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention (CDC) found that more than half of the children who had measles had not
been  vaccinated  against  measles,  even  though  many  of  them  had  seen  a  healthcare
provider123. Cost of the vaccine was found to be a primary reason for children going
unvaccinated even in families with a regular health care provider. In response to this
measles epidemic, Congress passed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) on
August  10,  1993,  creating  the  VFC  Program.  The  VFC  Program  became  operational
October  1,  1994.  Known  as  Section  1928  of  the  Social  Security  Act,  the  Vaccines  for
Children  Program  is  an  entitlement  program  (a  right  granted  by  law)  for  eligible
children,  ages  18  and  younger.  The  program  was  an  unprecedented  approach  to
improving  vaccine  availability  nationwide  by  providing  vaccine  at  no  cost  to  VFC
Program-eligible children through VFC Program enrolled public and private health care
providers. Additional information on the history and benefits of the VFC Program. The
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approves funding for the VFC Program, then
allocates the funds through the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) to CDC.
After receiving the funds, CDC buys the vaccines at a discount and distributes them to
VFC  Program  providers  at  the  direction  of  awardees  (i.e.,  the  61  state,  local,  and
territorial  immunization  programs  who  receive  operational  funding  from  the  CDC  to
implement  and  oversee  their  VFC  Programs).  The  legislation  for  the  VFC  Program
provides  general  guidance  for  VFC  Program  policy  development—including  eligibility,
provider recruitment, and considerations for negotiating contracts with manufacturers.
The  goal  of  the  VFC  Program  is  to  ensure  that  a  VFC  Program-eligible  child  does  not
contract a vaccine-preventable disease because of their parent or guardian's inability to
pay  for  the  vaccine.  As  a  primary  driver  of  health  equity  in  public  health,  the  VFC
Program supports improved immunization coverage levels among eligible children by:
The Vaccines for Children (VFC) Program provides vaccines to children whose parents
or  guardians  may  not  be  able  to  afford  them.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines-for-children/about/index.html
