A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  We  love  our  pets.  Many  of  us  have  pet
dogs and cats, while some of us have pet reptiles, birds, rabbits, or other companion
animals. It's important to know that pets can sometimes carry germs, even if they look
clean and healthy. Pets, like people, naturally carry bacteria and other tiny living things
in their guts or other parts of their body. Most of the bacteria don't cause illness, and
some are actually helpful. But some bacteria can be harmful to pets or people. Pet food
and  treats  can  sometimes  be  contaminated  with  germs  too.  These  germs  can  easily
spread to your pet items, like bowls, toys, or crates, and make your pets or your family
sick. The good news is you can help keep everyone healthy by cleaning and disinfecting
pet  items  regularly.  Cleaning  physically  removes  dirt  and  germs  from  surfaces  using
soap or detergent, while disinfecting kills germs on surfaces using chemicals. Cleaning
is usually good enough for most pet items, while disinfecting is an additional step you
can  take  in  some  situations.  One  easy  way  to  remember  how  often  to  clean  and
disinfect your pet items is to do so as often as your own items. For items that can't be
cleaned, like non-refillable catnip toys, throw them away when they look dirty. You can
clean more often if needed, especially if the pet item looks dirty or smells bad. Most pet
items  have  cleaning  instructions  on  the  packaging  or  tags.  Follow  the  cleaning
instructions. For pet items without cleaning instructions, you can use these methods:
Following instructions exactly will ensure that you kill germs and stay safe around the
disinfectants. For dog and cat bowls and toys that you are washing by hand, you can
wash them in the kitchen sink. Cat poop can sometimes contain a parasite (a type of
germ) called Toxoplasma gondii, which can cause a disease called toxoplasmosis. The
parasite can get into your body when you swallow it. This can happen when you touch
your mouth with unwashed hands after handling cat poop or items contaminated by cat
poop. For most people and cats, the parasite does not cause illness. However, it can
cause severe illness in people with weakened immune systems, and pregnant people
infected with the parasite can pass the infection to their unborn child, which can result
in  birth  defects.  If  you  have  a  weakened  immune  system,  or  if  you  are  pregnant  or
planning to get pregnant: Cleaning and Disinfecting Pet Supplies Diseases can spread
between animals and people. Learn how to stay healthy around pets and other animals.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthy-pets/about/cleaning-and-disinfecting-pet-supplies.html
