A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Surveillance is the term for tracking illness
and injury. Waterborne disease surveillance provides information that can help prevent
future  disease  and  outbreaks  while  providing  important  information  on  how  germs,
chemicals, or toxins spread, and which types of water are linked to people getting sick. 
Although  we  enjoy  safe  drinking  and  recreational  water  in  the  United  States,
waterborne  diseases  still  pose  a  threat  to  our  health  and  productivity.  Water
contaminated  with  germs,  chemicals,  or  toxins  can  lead  to  waterborne  illness  if  you
drink it, breathe it in, or it touches your skin, eyes, ears, or other mucous membranes.
By  collecting  data  on  the  types  of  water,  water  systems,  settings,  and  agents  (what
spreads  the  disease)  that  are  linked  to  waterborne  illness,  we  improve  our
understanding  of  waterborne  illnesses  and  can  better  guide  prevention  efforts.
Outbreak investigations help us learn more about the causes of outbreaks. Officials can
learn what germs are causing waterborne illness, what types of water are involved, and
what groups of people become ill. This knowledge can be used to control an outbreak
and prevent additional illnesses. Outbreak surveillance enables public health agencies
to  learn  lessons  from  these  investigations  to  develop  recommendations  on  how  to
prevent  similar  outbreaks  from  happening  in  the  future.  Many  of  the  germs  that  are
spread by water can also be spread in other ways, including by eating contaminated
food or by contact with an ill person or animal. People come in contact with water often
each day, making it even harder to know which exposure might have made a person
sick. Finally, it can take several days or even weeks to become ill after being exposed
to  a  germ,  making  it  difficult  to  pinpoint  the  place  and  time  of  exposure.  Without  an
outbreak investigation, it can be difficult or impossible to link illnesses to water. When a
group of people become ill at the same time, an investigation that collects information
on  timing  and  location  of  exposures  and  illnesses  (known  as  an  epidemiologic
investigation)  can  help  determine  where  and  when  the  outbreak  started  and  what
caused it. An outbreak investigation can sometimes identify a direct link between the
illnesses  and  contaminated  water  and  might  identify  the  type  of  water,  systems,  or
settings involved. This information is difficult to gather outside of an outbreak (such as
with individual infections). For an event to be defined as a waterborne disease outbreak
Public health officials have been tracking waterborne disease in the United States for
more  than  100  years.  CDC  has  been  overseeing  national  waterborne  disease  and
outbreak  tracking  since  1971.  Surveillance  data  help  guide  efforts  to  reduce  and
prevent  future  outbreaks.  Waterborne  disease  surveillance  data  have  supported
national efforts to develop drinking water regulations and have provided guidance for
recreational water activities, such as CDC's Healthy Swimming program. The national
Waterborne  Disease  and  Outbreak  Surveillance  System  (WBDOSS)  collects  data  on
waterborne disease and outbreaks associated with recreational water, drinking water,
and environmental and undetermined exposures to water. The system collects data on
the  number  of  outbreak-associated  illnesses,  hospitalizations,  and  deaths;  agents;
implicated  types  of  water;  water  systems;  and  water  settings.  WBDOSS  also  collects
information on single cases of waterborne illness caused by certain types of chemicals
or  germs.  Public  health  officials  investigate  outbreaks  to  control  them,  to  prevent
additional  illnesses,  and  to  learn  how  to  prevent  similar  outbreaks  from  happening.
Anyone who suspects an outbreak is occurring should contact their local or state health
department. The 8 steps in an outbreak investigation are: Several steps may happen at
the  same  time  in  an  outbreak  investigation.  Once  a  waterborne  disease  outbreak
investigation  ends,  public  health  departments  report  outbreaks  to  WBDOSS.
Waterborne  disease  outbreaks  became  nationally  notifiable  in  the  United  States  in
2009. Public health agencies in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, U.S. territories,
and  Freely  Associated  States  have  primary  responsibility  for  identifying  and
investigating  waterborne  outbreaks  and  reporting  outbreaks  voluntarily  to  CDC.  From
1971 to 2008, outbreaks were reported using a paper form. Since 2009, outbreaks have
been  reported  electronically  through  CDC's  National  Outbreak  Reporting  System
(NORS).  See  also  Agricultural  Water  Outbreak  Investigation  Tools.  The  National
Outbreak Reporting System (NORS) is a web-based platform used by local, state, and
territorial health departments in the United States to report all waterborne, foodborne,
and enteric (intestinal) disease outbreaks to CDC. Nearly 100,000 people in the United
States  get  sick  from  foodborne,  waterborne,  and  enteric  illness  outbreaks  each  year,
according  to  information  reported  in  NORS.  Use  NORS  Dashboard  to  explore  national
surveillance data from outbreaks and learn more about what causes these outbreaks,
how  often  they  occur,  and  where  they  occur.  Waterborne  disease  and  outbreak
surveillance provides important information on how germs, chemicals, or toxins spread,
and  which  types  of  water  are  linked  to  people  getting  sick.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthy-water-data/about/index.html
