A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Meningococcal disease is a name for any infection caused by bacteria called Neisseria
meningitidis. The two most common types of meningococcal infections are meningitis
and  bloodstream  infections.  With  meningococcal  meningitis,  the  bacteria  infect  the
lining  of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  and  cause  swelling.  With  a  meningococcal
bloodstream infection, the bacteria enter the blood and damage the walls of the blood
vessels.  This  causes  bleeding  in  the  skin  and  organs.  Symptoms  are  different  for
meningococcal meningitis and bloodstream infections. However, both are very serious
and  can  be  deadly.  Many  factors  affect  someone's  risk  for  meningococcal  disease,
including  age  and  certain  medical  conditions  and  medicines.  N.  meningitidis  are
bacteria that can live in the back of the nose and throat. About 1 in 10 people have
these  bacteria  in  their  throat  and  aren't  sick.  Sometimes  the  bacteria  move  to  other
parts of the body and cause infection. People spread meningococcal bacteria to others
by sharing respiratory and throat secretions (saliva or spit). Generally, it takes close or
lengthy contact to spread the bacteria.  They aren't as contagious as germs that cause
the common cold or the flu.  The best way to prevent meningococcal disease is to get
vaccinated.  CDC  recommends  meningococcal  vaccination  for   Close  contacts  of
someone with meningococcal disease should receive antibiotics to prevent them from
getting sick. A healthcare provider or health department generally decides who should
get preventive antibiotics. Although rare, people can get meningococcal disease more
than once. People who get meningococcal disease twice should get tested to see if they
have  an  underlying  immune  deficiency  (weakened  immune  system).  Meningococcal
disease can be difficult to diagnose because the signs and symptoms are often similar
to other illnesses.  Healthcare providers who suspect meningococcal disease will collect
samples of blood or cerebrospinal fluid (fluid near the spinal cord). They then send the
samples  to  a  lab  for  testing.  If  bacteria  are  in  the  samples,  laboratory  workers  can
culture (grow) them. This helps healthcare providers know what's causing the infection
and which antibiotic will work best.  Other tests can sometimes detect and identify the
bacteria  if  the  cultures  don't.  Healthcare  providers  treat  meningococcal  disease  with
antibiotics. A patient will get antibiotics right away if a healthcare provider thinks they
have  meningococcal  disease.  Antibiotics  help  reduce  the  risk  of  dying.  Depending  on
how  serious  the  infection  is,  people  with  meningococcal  disease  may  need  other
treatments,  including:  Meningitis  Meningococcal  disease  is  an  uncommon  but  serious
illness  that  causes  meningitis  and  bloodstream  infections.  It  can  be  deadly,  but
vaccines  help  prevent  it.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/about/index.html
