A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Controlling  exposures  to  hazards  in  the
workplace  is  vital  to  protecting  workers.  The  hierarchy  of  controls  is  a  way  of
determining  which  actions  will  best  control  exposures.   The  hierarchy  of  controls  has
five levels of actions to reduce or remove hazards. The preferred order of action based
on  general  effectiveness  is:  Using  this  hierarchy  can  lower  worker  exposures  and
reduce risk of illness or injury. Elimination removes the hazard at the source. This could
include  changing  the  work  process  to  stop  using  a  toxic  chemical,  heavy  object,  or
sharp  tool.  It  is  the  preferred  solution  to  protect  workers  because  no  exposure  can
occur. Substitution is using a safer alternative to the source of the hazard. An example
is  using  plant-based  printing  inks  as  a  substitute  for  solvent-based  inks.  When
considering  a  substitute,  it's  important  to  compare  the  potential  new  risks  of  the
substitute  to  the  original  risks.  This  review  should  consider  how  the  substitute  will
combine with other agents in the workplace. Effective substitutes reduce the potential
for harmful effects and do not create new risks. Elimination and substitution can be the
most difficult actions to adopt into an existing process. These methods are best used at
the design or development stage of a work process, place, or tool. At the development
stage, elimination and substitution may be the simplest and cheapest option. Another
good opportunity to use elimination and substitution is when selecting new equipment
or  procedures.  Prevention  through  Design  is  an  approach  to  proactively  include
prevention when designing work equipment, tools, operations, and spaces. Engineering
controls reduce or prevent hazards from coming into contact with workers. Engineering
controls can include modifying equipment or the workspace, using protective barriers,
ventilation,  and  more.  The  NIOSH  Engineering  Controls  Database  has  examples  of
published  engineering  control  research  findings.  The  most  effective  engineering
controls:  Engineering  controls  can  cost  more  upfront  than  administrative  controls  or
PPE. However, long-term operating costs tend to be lower, especially when protecting
multiple workers. In addition, engineering controls can save money in other areas of the
work process or facility operation. Administrative controls establish work practices that
reduce the duration, frequency, or intensity of exposure to hazards. This may include:
PPE  is  equipment  worn  to  minimize  exposure  to  hazards.  Examples  of  PPE  include
gloves, safety glasses, hearing protection, hard hats, and respirators. When employees
use  PPE,  employers  should  implement  a  PPE  program.  While  elements  of  the  PPE
program  depend  on  the  work  process  and  the  identified  PPE,  the  program  should
include: Employers should not rely on PPE alone to control hazards when other effective
control  options  are  available.  PPE  can  be  effective,  but  only  when  workers  use  it
correctly  and  consistently.  PPE  might  seem  to  be  less  expensive  than  other  controls,
but can be costly over time. This is especially true when used for multiple workers on a
daily basis. When other control methods are unable to reduce the hazardous exposure
to safe levels, employers must provide PPE. This includes: Administrative controls and
PPE require significant and ongoing effort by workers and their supervisors. They are
useful when employers are in the process of implementing other control methods from
the hierarchy. Additionally, administrative controls and PPE are often applied to existing
processes where hazards are not well controlled. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 established NIOSH as a research
agency focused on the study of worker safety and health, and empowering employers
and  workers  to  create  safe  and  healthy  workplaces.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/hierarchy-of-controls/about/index.html
