A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Parvovirus B19 infection usually causes no
symptoms  or  mild  illness,  such  as  cold-like  symptoms,  rashes  and  joint  pains.  In
individuals with blood disorders or a weakened immune system, infection can cause a
low  blood  count.  Infection  during  pregnancy  can  sometimes  lead  to  additional
complications.  Some people who get infected with this virus will have no symptoms.
When  symptoms  of  parvovirus  B19  infection  occur,  they  are  usually  mild  and  may
include  the  following:  The  clinical  presentation  most  often  associated  with  parvovirus
B19 infection is a red rash on the face, also called a "slapped cheek" rash. This is also
known as Fifths Disease (or Erythema Infectiosum). This rash typically appears a few
days after the fever or cold-like symptoms. It is more common in children than adults.
Parvovirus B19 infection can also cause a general rash on the chest, back, buttocks, or
arms  and  legs.  The  rash  may  be  itchy.  It  usually  goes  away  in  7  to  10  days  but  can
come and go for several weeks. As it starts to go away, it may look lacy. Infection with
parvovirus  B19  can  lead  to  pain  and  swelling  in  the  joints,  called  polyarthopathy
syndrome. This is more common in adults and children and is most common in women.
Adults may experience joint pain without other symptoms. Joints are affected on both
sides, usually in the hands, feet and knees. The joint pain usually lasts 1 to 3 weeks but
can  last  for  months  or  longer.  It  usually  goes  away  without  any  long-term  problems.
Parvovirus  B19  infection  is  usually  mild  for  children  and  adults  who  are  otherwise
healthy. However, for some people, it can cause serious health complications affecting
the nerves, joints, or blood system.  Parvovirus B19 has been shown to cause a severe
drop  in  blood  count  (anemia)  in  some  patients  with  certain  blood  disorders  or  with  a
weakened  immune  system.  You  may  be  at  increased  risk  for  complications  from  a
parvovirus B19 infection if you have one or more of these health conditions:
 If you get a parvovirus B19 infection during pregnancy, the virus could spread to the
baby.  This  is  not  common  but  could  cause  a  miscarriage.  See  'Parvovirus  B19  in
Pregnancy' for further information. In special circumstances, your healthcare provider
may  test  your  blood  for  parvovirus  antibodies.  The  test  will  determine  if  you  are
susceptible  or  possibly  immune  to  parvovirus  B19  infection  or  if  you  were  recently
infected. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have any questions about whether you
should get tested. Parvovirus B19 infections are usually mild and will go away on their
own.  Children  and  adults  who  are  otherwise  healthy  usually  recover  completely.  
Treatment  usually  involves  relieving  symptoms,  such  as  fever,  itching,  and  joint  pain
and  swelling.  For  persons  who  develop  a  low  blood  count,  treatment  may  include
supportive care, blood products, and other specialized therapies.  Languages Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/parvovirus-b19/about/index.html
