A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Pubic lice are parasitic insects that feed on
human blood. They are short and crab-like and look very different from head and body
lice. Pubic lice typically attach to hair in the pubic area. Adult pubic lice are 1.1–1.8 mm
in length (size of a pencil tip). Either over-the-counter or prescription medications can
treat pubic lice infestations. Infestation or infested person means that a person has lice.
Signs and symptoms of pubic lice include: Pubic lice do not transmit disease. However,
you could get sores and a bacterial infection from intense scratching. Anyone can get
pubic lice. Pubic lice usually spread through sexual contact and are most common in
adults.  You  usually  get  pubic  lice  from  intimate,  person-to-person  contact,  usually
sexual contact. Occasionally pubic lice can spread by clothing, bedding, or (very rarely)
using a toilet seat that was just used by a person infested with public lice. Adult pubic
lice are found only on humans and require blood to survive. They will die within 24 – 48
hours without a blood meal. Female adult pubic lice lay about 30 eggs during their 3 –
4-week life span. Eggs hatch after about a week. Nymphs (newly hatched lice) mature
into adults over 6 to 9 days. Animals do not get or spread pubic lice. Pubic lice found on
the head or eyelashes of children may be an indication of sexual exposure or abuse.
The following are steps that can help prevent and control the spread of pubic ("crab")
lice: Pubic lice infestation is diagnosed by finding a "crab" louse or nits on hair in the
pubic  region  or,  less  commonly,  elsewhere  on  the  body.  These  areas  include  the
eyebrows, eyelashes, beard, mustache, armpit, groin, torso, scalp, or anus. Pubic lice
are short and crab-like; they appear very different from head and body lice (I.e., they
are  broader  and  flatter  than  other  lice).  Although  pubic  lice  and  nits  can  be  large
enough to see with the naked eye, a magnifying lens may help to see them. Lice found
on the head generally are head lice, not pubic lice. If you are unsure about infestation
or  if  treatment  is  not  successful,  see  a  healthcare  provider  for  a  diagnosis.  Consider
getting tested for other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). You can treat pubic lice
with  a  lice-killing  lotion  containing  1%  permethrin  or  a  mousse  containing  pyrethrins
and  piperonyl  butoxide.  These  products  are  available  over-the-counter  without  a
prescription at a local drug store or pharmacy. These medications are safe and effective
when used exactly according to the instructions in the package or on the label. Lice are
parasites,  or  insects,  found  on  people's  heads  and  bodies,  including  the  pubic  area.
Human lice survive by feeding on human blood. Infestation or infested person means
that  a  person  has  lice.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/lice/about/pubic-lice.html
