A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Abstract  from  the  Guidelines  for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).  Although  the
environment  serves  as  a  reservoir  for  a  variety  of  microorganisms,  it  is  rarely
implicated  in  disease  transmission  except  in  the  immunocompromised  population.
Inadvertent exposures to environmental opportunistic pathogens (e.g., Aspergillus spp.
and  Legionella  spp.)  or  airborne  pathogens  (e.g.,  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  and
varicella-zoster  virus)  may  result  in  infections  with  significant  morbidity  and/or
mortality. Lack of adherence to established standards and guidance (e.g., water quality
in dialysis, proper ventilation for specialized care areas such as operating rooms, and
proper  use  of  disinfectants)  can  result  in  adverse  patient  outcomes  in  health-care
facilities. The objective is to develop an environmental infection-control guideline that
reviews  and  reaffirms  strategies  for  the  prevention  of  environmentally-mediated
infections, particularly among health-care workers and immunocompromised patients.
The recommendations are evidence-based whenever possible. The contributors to this
guideline  reviewed  predominantly  English-language  articles  identified  from  MEDLINE
literature  searches,  bibliographies  from  published  articles,  and  infection-control
textbooks.  Articles  dealing  with  outbreaks  of  infection  due  to  environmental
opportunistic microorganisms and epidemiological- or laboratory experimental studies
were  reviewed.  Current  editions  of  guidelines  and  standards  from  organizations  (i.e.,
American  Institute  of  Architects  [AIA],  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Medical
Instrumentation  [AAMI],  and  American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigeration,  and
Air-Conditioning Engineers [ASHRAE]) were consulted. Relevant regulations from federal
agencies  (i.e.,  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA];  U.S.  Department  of  Labor,
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  [OSHA];  U.S.  Environmental  Protection
Agency [EPA]; and U.S. Department of Justice) were reviewed. Some topics did not have
well-designed,  prospective  studies  nor  reports  of  outbreak  investigations.  Expert
opinions  and  experience  were  consulted  in  these  instances.  Reports  of  outbreak
investigations,  epidemiological  assessment  of  outbreak  investigations  with  control
strategies,  and  in  vitro  environmental  studies  were  assessed.  Many  of  the
recommendations are derived from empiric engineering concepts and reflect industry
standards.  A  few  of  the  infection-control  measures  proposed  cannot  be  rigorously
studied  for  ethical  or  logistical  reasons.  Infections  caused  by  the  microorganisms
described in this guideline are rare events, and the effect of these recommendations on
infection  rates  in  a  facility  may  not  be  readily  measurable.  Therefore,  the  following
steps  to  measure  performance  are  suggested  to  evaluate  these  recommendations:
Infection-control  strategies  and  engineering  controls,  when  consistently  implemented,
are  effective  in  preventing  opportunistic,  environmentally-related  infections  in
immunocompromised  populations.  Adherence  to  proper  use  of  disinfectants,  proper
maintenance  of  medical  equipment  that  uses  water  (e.g.,  automated  endoscope
reprocessors  and  hydrotherapy  equipment),  water-quality  standards  for  hemodialysis,
and  proper  ventilation  standards  for  specialized  care  environments  (i.e.,  airborne
infection isolation [AII], protective environment [PE], and operating rooms [ORs]), and
prompt  management  of  water  intrusion  into  facility  structural  elements  will  minimize
health-care  associated  infection  risks  and  reduce  the  frequency  of  pseudo-outbreaks.
Routine  environmental  sampling  is  not  advised  except  in  the  few  situations  where
sampling is directed by epidemiologic principles and results can be applied directly to
infection  control  decisions,  and  for  water  quality  determinations  in  hemodialysis.
Continued  compliance  with  existing  environmental  infection  control  measures  will
decrease  the  risk  of  health-care  associated  infections  among  patients,  especially  the
immunocompromised, and health-care workers. CDC provides information on infection
control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare
workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language
Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-infection-control-guidelines/abstract.html
