Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for  Immunization  Updated
August 1, 2023 Printer friendly version [21 pages] Major changes to the best practice
guidance in this section include 1) enhancement of the definition of a “precaution” to
include any condition that might confuse diagnostic accuracy and 2) recommendation
to vaccinate during a hospitalization if a patient is not acutely moderately or severely
ill.  National  standards  for  pediatric  vaccination  practices  have  been  established  and
include  descriptions  of  valid  contraindications  and  precautions  to  vaccination  (2).
Persons  who  administer  vaccines  should  screen  patients  for  contraindications  and
precautions  to  the  vaccine  before  each  dose  of  vaccine  is  administered  (Table  4-1).
Screening  is  facilitated  by  consistent  use  of  screening  questionnaires,  which  are
available  from  certain  state  vaccination  programs  and  other  sources  (e.g.,  the
Immunization  Action  Coalition).  Contraindications  (conditions  in  a  recipient  that
increases  the  risk  for  a  serious  adverse  reaction)  to  vaccination  are  conditions  under
which vaccines should not be administered. Because the majority of contraindications
are temporary, vaccinations often can be administered later when the condition leading
to  a  contraindication  no  longer  exists.  A  vaccine  should  not  be  administered  when  a
contraindication  is  present;  for  example,  MMR  vaccine  should  not  be  administered  to
severely immunocompromised persons (1). However, certain conditions are commonly
misperceived  as  contraindications  (i.e.,  are  not  valid  reasons  to  defer  vaccination).
Severely immunocompromised persons generally should not receive live vaccines (3).
Because  of  the  theoretical  risk  to  the  fetus,  women  known  to  be  pregnant  generally
should  not  receive  live,  attenuated  virus  vaccines  (4).  Persons  who  experienced
encephalopathy
 within
 7
 days
 after
 administration
 of
 a
 previous
 dose
 of
pertussis-containing  vaccine  not  attributable  to  another  identifiable  cause  should  not
receive additional doses of a vaccine that contains pertussis (4, 5). Severe Combined
Immunodeficiency  (SCID)  disease  and  a  history  of  intussusception  are  both
contraindications to the receipt of rotavirus vaccines (6). A precaution is a condition in a
recipient  that  might  increase  the  risk  for  a  serious  adverse  reaction,  might  cause
diagnostic  confusion,  or  might  compromise  the  ability  of  the  vaccine  to  produce
immunity  (e.g.,  administering  measles  vaccine  to  a  person  with  passive  immunity  to
measles  from  a  blood  transfusion  administered  up  to  7  months  prior)  (7).  A  person
might  experience  a  more  severe  reaction  to  the  vaccine  than  would  have  otherwise
been expected; however, the risk for this happening is less than the risk expected with
a  contraindication.  In  general,  vaccinations  should  be  deferred  when  a  precaution  is
present. However, a vaccination might be indicated in the presence of a precaution if
the benefit of protection from the vaccine outweighs the risk for an adverse reaction.
The  presence  of  a  moderate  or  severe  acute  illness  with  or  without  a  fever  is  a
precaution to administration of all vaccines (Table 4-1). The decision to administer or
delay vaccination because of a current or recent acute illness depends on the severity
of  symptoms  and  etiology  of  the  condition.  The  safety  and  efficacy  of  vaccinating
persons who have mild illnesses have been documented (8-11). Vaccination should be
deferred  for  persons  with  a  moderate  or  severe  acute  illness.  This  precaution  avoids
causing  diagnostic  confusion  between  manifestations  of  the  underlying  illness  and
possible adverse effects of vaccination or superimposing adverse effects of the vaccine
on  the  underlying  illness.  After  they  are  screened  for  contraindications,  persons  with
moderate or severe acute illness should be vaccinated as soon as the acute illness has
improved.  Studies  indicate  that  failure  to  vaccinate  children  with  minor  illnesses  can
impede  vaccination  efforts  (12–14).  Among  persons  whose  compliance  with  medical
care cannot be ensured, use of every opportunity to administer appropriate vaccines is
critical.  Hospitalization  should  be  used  as  an  opportunity  to  provide  recommended
vaccinations.  Health-care  facilities  are  held  to  standards  of  offering  influenza  vaccine
for  hospitalized  patients,  so  providers  are  incentivized  to  vaccinate  these  patients  at
some  point  during  hospitalization  (15).  Likewise,  patients  admitted  for  elective
procedures  will  not  be  acutely  ill  during  all  times  during  their  hospitalization.  Most
studies that have explored the effect of surgery or anesthesia on the immune system
were observational, included only infants and children, and were small and indirect, in
that they did not look at the immune effect on the response to vaccination specifically
(16-35).  They  do  not  provide  convincing  evidence  that  recent  anesthesia  or  surgery
significantly
 affect
 response
 to
 vaccines.
 Current,
 recent,
 or
 upcoming
anesthesia/surgery/hospitalization  is  not  a  contraindication  to  vaccination,  but  certain
factors
 might
 lead
 a
 provider
 to
 consider
 current,
 recent,
 or
 upcoming
anesthesia/surgery/hospitalization  as  a  precaution  (16-35).  Efforts  should  be  made  to
ensure  vaccine  administration  during  the  hospitalization  or  at  discharge.  For  patients
who are deemed moderately or severely ill throughout the hospitalization, vaccination
should  occur  at  the  earliest  opportunity  (i.e.,  during  immediate  post-hospitalization
follow-up care, including home or office visits) when patients’ clinical symptoms have
improved. A personal or family history of seizures is a precaution for MMRV vaccination;
this  is  because  a  recent  study  found  an  increased  risk  for  febrile  seizures  in  children
12-23  months  who  receive  MMRV  compared  with  MMR  and  varicella  vaccine  (36).
Clinicians  or  other  health-care  providers  might  misperceive  certain  conditions  or
circumstances  as  valid  contraindications  or  precautions  to  vaccination  when  they
actually  do  not  preclude  vaccination  (2)  (Table  4-2).  These  misperceptions  result  in
missed  opportunities  to  administer  recommended  vaccines  (37).  Routine  physical
examinations and procedures (e.g., measuring temperatures) are not prerequisites for
vaccinating persons who appear to be healthy. The provider should ask the parent or
guardian if the child is ill. If the child has a moderate or severe illness, the vaccination
should be postponed.   Encephalopathy (e.g., coma, decreased level of consciousness, 
prolonged  seizures),  not  attributable  to  another  identifiable  cause,  within  7  days  of
administration of previous dose of DTP or DTaP Hypersensitivity to yeast Age <6 weeks
Preterm  birth  (MenACWY-CRM)(i)  Pregnancy  Known  severe  immunodeficiency  (e.g.,
from
 hematologic
 and
 solid
 tumors,
 receipt
 of
 chemotherapy,
 congenital
immunodeficiency,  long-term  immunosuppressive  therapy(c)  or  patients  with  HIV
infection
 who
 are
 severely
 immunocompromised)
 Family
 history
 of
 altered
immunocompetence(m)  History  of  thrombocytopenia  or  thrombocytopenic  purpura
Need  for  tuberculin  skin  testing  or  interferon-gamma  release  assay  (IGRA)  testing(l)
Moderate or severe acute illness with or without fever SCID History of intussusception
Moderate  or  severe  acute  illness  with  or  without  fever  Encephalopathy  (e.g.,  coma,
decreased  level  of  consciousness,   prolonged  seizures),  not  attributable  to  another
identifiable  cause,  within  7  days  of  administration  of  previous  dose  of  DTP,  DTaP,  or
Tdap  Progressive  or  unstable  neurological  disorder,  uncontrolled  seizures,  or
progressive  encephalopathy  until  a  treatment  regimen  has  been  established  and  the
condition  has  stabilized  History  of  Arthus-type  hypersensitivity  reactions  after  a
previous  dose  of  diphtheria-toxoid—containing  or  tetanus-toxoid–containing  vaccine;
defer
 vaccination
 until
 at
 least
 10
 years
 have
 elapsed
 since
 the
 last
tetanus-toxoid–containing  vaccine  Moderate  or  severe  acute  illness  with  or  without
fever Known severe immunodeficiency (e.g., from hematologic and solid tumors, receipt
of  chemotherapy,  congenital  immunodeficiency,   long-term  immunosuppressive
therapy(c)  or  patients  with  HIV  infection  who  are  severely  immunocompromised)(j)
Pregnancy  Family  history  of  altered  immunocompetence(m)    Abbreviations:  DT  =
diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids;  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular
pertussis; DTP = diphtheria toxoid, tetanus toxoid, and pertussis; GBS = Guillain-Barré
syndrome; Hib = Haemophilus influenzae type b; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus;
HPV  =  human  papillomavirus;  IIV  =  inactivated  influenza  vaccine;  IPV  =  inactivated
poliovirus;  LAIV  =  live,  attenuated  influenza  vaccine;  MenACWY  =  quadrivalent
meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine;  MMR  =  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella;  MPSV4  =
quadrivalent meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine; PCV13 = pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine;  PPSV23=  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine;  SCID  =  severe  combined
immunodeficiency;  RIV=recombinant  influenza  vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus  and  diphtheria
toxoids; Tdap = tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis. (a)
Events or conditions listed as precautions should be reviewed carefully. Benefits of and
risks for administering a specific vaccine to a person under these circumstances should
be  considered.  If  the  risk  from  the  vaccine  is  believed  to  outweigh  the  benefit,  the
vaccine should not be administered. If the benefit of vaccination is believed to outweigh
the risk, the vaccine should be administered. Whether and when to administer DTaP to
children with proven or suspected underlying neurologic disorders should be decided on
a  case-by-case  basis.  (b)  Only  persons  with  laboratory  confirmation  of  immunity
according  to  strict  guidance  at  Laboratory  Testing  Requirements  for  Vaccination  with
Dengvaxia  Dengue  Vaccine  should  receive  dengue  vaccination.  (c)  Substantially
immunosuppressive steroid dose is considered to be ≥2 weeks of daily receipt of 20 mg
or  2  mg/kg  body  weight  of  prednisone  or  equivalent.  (d)  HPV  vaccine  is  not
recommended  during  pregnancy  (e)  When  applying  this  contraindication  to  ccIIV,  the
history  of  severe  allergic  reaction  (e.g.,  anaphylaxis)  must  be  specific  to  the  event
occurring following a dose of ccIIV. Likewise, when applying this contraindication to RIV,
the history of severe allergic reaction (e.g., anaphylaxis) must be specific to the event
occurring  following  a  dose  of  RIV.  A  history  of  severe  allergic  reaction  (e.g.,
anaphylaxis)  to  a  non-ccIIV  vaccine  or  to  a  component  specific  to  components  not
contained in ccIIV, is a precaution to ccIIV. A history of severe allergic reaction (e.g.,
anaphylaxis)  to  a  non-RIV  vaccine  or  to  a  component  specific  to  components  not
contained in RIV is a precaution to RIV. (f) In addition, ACIP recommends LAIV not be
used  for  pregnant  women,  immunosuppressed  persons,  and  children  aged  2-4  years
who  have  asthma  or  who  have  had  a  wheezing  episode  noted  in  the  medical  record
within  the  past  12  months,  or  for  whom  parents  report  that  a  health  care  provider
stated that they had wheezing or asthma within the last 12 months. LAIV should not be
administered  to  persons  who  have  taken  influenza  antiviral  medications  within  the
previous  48  hours.  Persons  who  care  for  severely  immunosuppressed  persons  who
require a protective environment should not receive LAIV, or should avoid contact with
such  persons  for  7  days  after  receipt.  (g)  See  reference:  Grohskopf  LA,  Alyanak  E,
Ferdinands  JM,  et  al.  Prevention  and  Control  of  Seasonal  Influenza  with  Vaccines:
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, United States,
2021-2022  Influenza  Season.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2021;70(No.  RR-5):1-30.  (h)  These
values  are  based  on  the  clearance  of  the  particular  antiviral.  LAIV4  should  not  be
administered to persons who have taken oseltamivir or zanamivir within the previous
48  hours,  peramivir  within  the  previous  5  days,  or  baloxavir  within  the  previous  17
days.  This  “contraindication”  is  due  to  concern  with  reduced  effectiveness  of  the
vaccine. To obtain specific information, please refer to Grohskopf LA, Alyanak, E, Broder
KR,
 et.
 al.
 
 Prevention
 and
 Control
 of
 Seasonal
 Influenza
 with
 Vaccines:
Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  —  United
States, 2020–21 Influenza Season. MMWR Recomm Rep 2020;69 (No. RR-8:1-26. Also at
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/pdfs/rr6908a1-H.pdf
 (i)
 This
 precaution
applies  to  infants  younger  than  9  months  old  (j)  HIV-infected  children  may  receive
varicella vaccine if CD4+ T-lymphocyte count is ≥15% and should receive MMR vaccine
if  they  are  aged  ≥12  months  and  do  not  have  evidence  of  current  severe
immunosuppression  (i.e.,  individuals  aged  ≤5  years  must  have  CD4+T  lymphocyte
[CD4]  percentages  ≥15%  for  ≥6  months;  and  individuals  aged  >5  years  must  have
CD4+percentages  ≥15%  and  CD4+≥200  lymphocytes/mm3  for  ≥6  months)  or  other
current  evidence  of  measles,  rubella,  and  mumps  immunity.  In  cases  when  only
CD4+cell  counts  or  only  CD4+percentages  are  available  for  those  older  than  age  5
years, the assessment of severe immunosuppression can be based on the CD4+values
(count  or  percentage)  that  are  available.  In  cases  when  CD4+percentages  are  not
available for those aged ≤5 years, the assessment of severe immunosuppression can
be  based  on  age-specific  CD4+counts  at  the  time  CD4+counts  were  measured;  i.e.,
absence  of  severe  immunosuppression  is  defined  as  ≥6  months  above  age-specific
CD4+count criteria: CD4+count >750 lymphocytes/mm3 while aged ≤12 months and
CD4+count ≥500 lymphocytes/mm3 while aged 1 through 5 years. Sources: (1, 50). (k)
MMR  and  varicella-containing  vaccines  can  be  administered  on  the  same  day.  If  not
administered on the same day, these vaccines should be separated by at least 28 days.
(l)  If  active  tuberculosis  is  suspected,  MMR  should  be  delayed.  Measles  vaccination
might  suppress  tuberculin  reactivity  temporarily.  Measles-containing  vaccine  can  be
administered on the same day as tuberculin skin or IGRA testing. If testing cannot be
performed until after the day of MMR vaccination, the test should be postponed for ≥4
weeks after the vaccination. If an urgent need exists to skin test or IGRA, do so with the
understanding  that  reactivity  might  be  reduced  by  the  vaccine.  (m)  family  history  of
congenital  or  hereditary  immunodeficiency  in  first-degree  relatives  (e.g.,  parents  and
siblings),  unless  the  immune  competence  of  the  potential  vaccine  recipient  has  been
substantiated clinically or verified by a laboratory (n) For RV1 only, based on latex in
product/packaging.  Note  that  anaphylactic  allergy  to  latex  is  covered  in  the
contraindication,  and  would  also  be  isolated  to  RV  1  in  the  case  of  latex.  For  more
details,  see  (55).  (o)  No  adverse  events  associated  with  the  use  of  aspirin  or
aspirin-containing  products  after  varicella  vaccination  have  been  reported;  however,
the  vaccine  manufacturer  recommends  that  vaccine  recipients  avoid  using  aspirin  or
aspirin-containing products for 6 weeks after receiving varicella vaccines because of the
association  between  aspirin  use  and  Reye  syndrome  after  varicella.  Vaccination  with
subsequent  close  monitoring  should  be  considered  for  children  who  have  rheumatoid
arthritis  or  other  conditions  requiring  therapeutic  aspirin.  The  risk  for  serious
complications associated with aspirin is likely to be greater in children in whom natural
varicella develops than it is in children who receive the vaccine containing attenuated
VZV. No association has been documented between Reye syndrome and analgesics or
antipyretics  that  do  not  contain  aspirin.”  Top  of  Page  Abbreviations:  DT  =  diphtheria
and  tetanus  toxoids;  DTP  =  diphtheria  toxoid,  tetanus  toxoid,  and  pertussis;  DTaP  =
diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis; GBS = Guillain-Barré syndrome;
HBsAg  =  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen;  Hib  =  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b;  HIV  =
human  immunodeficiency  virus;  HPV  =  human  papillomavirus;  IIV  =  inactivated
influenza  vaccine;  IPV  =  inactivated  poliovirus;  LAIV  =  live,  attenuated  influenza
vaccine; MenACWY = quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine; MMR = measles,
mumps,  and  rubella;  MPSV4  =  quadrivalent  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine;
PCV  =  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine;  PPSV23=  pneumococcal  polysaccharide
vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced
diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis.  (a)  Antibacterial  drugs  might  interfere  with
Ty21a  oral  typhoid  vaccine,  and  certain  antiviral  drugs  might  interfere  with
varicella-containing vaccines and LAIV4. (b) Hepatitis B vaccination should be deferred
for  infants  weighing  <2,000  g  if  the  mother  is  documented  to  be  HBsAg  negative.
Vaccination should commence at chronological age 1 month or at hospital discharge.
For infants born to HBsAg-positive women, hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B
vaccine should be administered within 12 hours after birth, regardless of weight. (c) An
exception is Guillain-Barré syndrome within 6 weeks of a dose of influenza vaccine or
tetanus-toxoid–containing  vaccine,  which  are  precautions  for  influenza  vaccines  and
tetanus-toxoid containing vaccines, respectively. (d) MMR and varicella vaccines can be
administered  on  the  same  day.  If  not  administered  on  the  same  day,  these  vaccines
should  be  separated  by  at  least  28  days.  (e)  HIV-infected  children  should  receive
immune globulin after exposure to measles. HIV-infected children can receive varicella
and measles vaccine if CD4+ T-lymphocyte count is >15%. (55). (f) Measles vaccination
might  suppress  tuberculin  reactivity  temporarily.  Measles-containing  vaccine  can  be
administered on the same day as tuberculin skin or IGRA testing. If testing cannot be
performed until after the day of MMR vaccination, the test should be postponed for at
least 4 weeks after the vaccination. If an urgent need exists to skin test or IGRA, do so
with  the  understanding  that  reactivity  might  be  reduced  by  the  vaccine.  (g)  If  a
vaccinee experiences a presumed vaccine-related rash 7-25 days after vaccination, the
person should avoid direct contact with immunocompromised persons for the duration
of the rash. Top of Page Top of Page To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/contraindications.html
