Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Question:  Should  MMR  vaccine  (PRIORIX,  GSK)  be
recommended  as  an  option  according  to  currently  recommended  schedules  and
off-label uses to prevent measles, mumps, and rubella? Population: Persons ≥6 months
of age Intervention: GSK PRIORIX Comparison: Existing MMR vaccine licensed in the US
(M-M-R II, Merck) Outcomes:
Prevention of measles, mumps, and rubella
Short-term humoral immunity
Persistence of humoral immune response
Reactogenicity grade ≥3
Serious adverse events
Additional  adverse  events  of  interest  (febrile  seizures,  aseptic  meningitis,  immune
thrombocytopenic
 purpura)
 Background:
 Measles,
 mumps,
 and
 rubella
 are
vaccine-preventable acute viral diseases with a large burden of disease worldwide. Due
to  achieving  and  maintaining  high  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  (MMR)  vaccination
coverage, endemic measles and rubella/congenital rubella syndrome were eliminated in
the United States in 2000 and 2004 respectively. Even with high vaccination coverage,
there are pockets of un- and under-vaccinated individuals at risk for import-associated
cases and outbreaks of measles. These outbreaks continue to occur, with 22 outbreaks
and 1,249 cases reported in 2019, the most US cases reported in a single year since
1992 (1). Mumps, while not eliminated, experienced a >99% reduction in cases in the
United  States  due  to  the  high,  sustained  vaccination  coverage.  However,  since  2006,
the  United  States  experienced  an  increase  in  mumps  outbreaks  in  different
close-contact  settings  with  high  intensity  exposure,  including  schools,  universities,
church  groups,  workplaces,  and  others.  The  largest  of  these  outbreaks  resulted  in
nearly  3,000  cases  in  2016-2017  (2).  High  MMR  vaccination  coverage  helps  limit  the
size,  duration,  and  spread  of  mumps  outbreaks  (2).  Previously,  only  one  MMR
combination vaccine was licensed and available in the United States:  M-M-R II, Merck &
Co.,  Inc.  The  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  recommends
routine vaccination of children with two doses of MMR, with the first dose at age 12-15
months and the second at age 4-6 years. Additional recommendations include catch-up
vaccination of persons without acceptable evidence of immunity; for infants aged 6-11
months  during  measles  outbreaks;  before  international  travel  for  infants  aged  6-11
months and  travelers aged ≥12 months who have not received two doses of MMR; for
measles  post-exposure  prophylaxis;  and  a  third  dose  during  mumps  outbreaks  for
persons identified by public health authorities as being part of a group or population at
increased risk for acquiring mumps because of an outbreak (3, 4). PRIORIX (GSK) is a
MMR combination vaccine that was approved in the United States in June 2022 for use
in  persons  aged  12  months  and  older.  Considering  availability  of  the  newly  licensed
MMR  vaccine,  the  ACIP  MMR  Vaccine  Work  Group  assessed  data  related  to  potential
benefits and harms of including PRIORIX as an option for MMR vaccination, according to
the  existing  recommended  schedules  and  off  label  uses*.  No  changes  to  the  existing
ACIP  recommendations  for  the  use  of  MMR  vaccine  were  proposed.  These  results
highlighted  the  importance  of  addressing  interchangeability  and  off-label  usage  of
vaccines  for  PRIORIX  acceptance.  Based  on  similarities  in  vaccine  components,
schedule and vaccine mechanism of action, the ACIP MMR Work Group perceived that
the domains of Values and Resource Use for PRIORIX are comparable with Values and
Resource  Use  of  M-M-R  II.  Desirable  consequences  clearly  outweigh  undesirable
consequences in most settings. MMR vaccine (PRIORIX, GSK) should be recommended
as an option according to the existing MMR recommended schedules and off-label uses
to prevent measles, mumps, and rubella. Given the similarities in potency and vaccine
components, the evidence from the clinical trials, and literature review, the Work Group
considers  PRIORIX  and  M-M-R  II  fully  interchangeable,  including  all  off-label  uses.
PRIORIX  may  be  administered  in  any  situation  in  which  a  measles,  mumps,  and
rubella-containing  vaccine  is  indicated.  *Off-label  uses  include:  Both  M-M-R  II  and
PRIORIX:  children  aged  6-11  months  who  will  travel  or  live  abroad  or  during  measles
outbreaks  and  third  dose  of  MMR  in  persons  previously  vaccinated  with  2  doses  of  a
mumps virus–containing vaccine who are identified by public health authorities as being
part  of  a  group  or  population  at  increased  risk  for  acquiring  mumps  because  of  an
outbreak.  Additionally,  measles  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  PRIORIX.  †Methods  for
assessing  potential  benefits  and  harms:  Data  on  the  outcomes  of  interest  were
summarized  based  on  findings  from  a  systematic  review  of  the  literature  in  PubMed,
Medline  (Ovid),  Embase,  Scopus,  Cochrane  databases,  and  clinicaltrials.gov  published
from
 January
 1,
 1980
 through
 May
 31,
 2022.
 Search
 terms
 included
(“Measles-Mumps-Rubella
 Vaccine”and
 (“Priorix”
 or
 “MMR
 vaccine”
 or
(“GlaxoSmithKline*” or “GSK”) and “MMR*”) or “GSK-MMR” or “MMR-RIT” or “SB-MMR”)
and  “Safe*”  or  “effective*”  or  “efficacy”  or  “immun*”  or  “interchangeab*”  or
“inter-changeab*” or “adverse” or “M-M-R II” or “Merck” or “evidence*” or (“review” or
“meta*”).  To  be  included  in  the  review,  a  study  had  to  present  immunogenicity  or
disease endpoints or safety data on PRIORIX. Studies were included if they met all of
the  following  criteria:  1)  Randomized  controls  trials  or  systematic  reviews  and
meta-analyses, 2) vaccine administered to persons ≥6 months of age, 3) at least 1 dose
of  MMR  (PRIORIX)  vaccine  as  the  intervention,  4)  at  least  1  dose  of  MMR  (M-M-R  II)
vaccine  as  the  comparator,  and  5)  were  not  animal  studies.  SAEs  and  reactogenicity
grade  ≥3  were  evaluated  only  in  studies  conducted  at  or  above  the  licensed  US
potency of PRIORIX. Additional adverse events and immunogenicity were evaluated at
any potency of PRIORIX. The search identified 918 studies of which 115 underwent full
text review. Of those, 16 RCTs, two systematic reviews, and six studies with a different
study design or comparator vaccine were included (FIGURE 1). §Serious adverse event
is  defined  as  an  undesirable  experience  associated  with  the  vaccine  that  results  in
death, hospitalization, disability or requires medical or surgical intervention to prevent
a serious outcome. **Grade 3 intensity was defined as crying when the limb was moved
or  the  limb  was  spontaneously  painful  (pain),  event  preventing  normal  activity
(drowsiness), crying inconsolably or preventing normal activity (irritability), not eating
at  all  (loss  of  appetite).  Note  that  these  are  percentage  of  total  complaints,  not
individuals; one individual participant could report multiple complaints.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/mmr-PRIORIX-etr.html
