Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for  Immunization  Updated
August  1,  2023  Printer  friendly  version  [26  pages]  This  section  incorporates  general
content  from  the  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America  policy  statement,  2013  IDSA
Clinical  Practice  Guideline  for  Vaccination  of  the  Immunocompromised  Host  (1),  to
which CDC provided input in November 2011. The evidence supporting this guidance is
based on expert opinion and arrived at by consensus.   Altered immunocompetence, a
term  often  used  synonymously  with  immunosuppression,  immunodeficiency,  and
immunocompromise,
 can
 be
 classified
 as
 primary
 or
 secondary.
 Primary
immunodeficiencies  generally  are  inherited  and  include  conditions  defined  by  an
inherent  absence  or  quantitative  deficiency  of  cellular,  humoral,  or  both  components
that  provide  immunity.  Examples  include  congenital  immunodeficiency  diseases  such
as X-linked agammaglobulinemia, SCID, and chronic granulomatous disease. Secondary
immunodeficiency is acquired and is defined by loss or qualitative deficiency in cellular
or  humoral  immune  components  that  occurs  as  a  result  of  a  disease  process  or  its
therapy. Examples of secondary immunodeficiency include HIV infection, hematopoietic
malignancies, treatment with radiation, and treatment with immunosuppressive drugs.
The
 degree
 to
 which
 immunosuppressive
 drugs
 cause
 clinically
 significant
immunodeficiency generally is dose related and varies by drug. Primary and secondary
immunodeficiencies might include a combination of deficits in both cellular and humoral
immunity.  Certain  conditions  like  asplenia  and  chronic  renal  disease  also  can  cause
altered immunocompetence. Determination of altered immunocompetence is important
to  the  vaccine  provider  because  incidence  or  severity  of  some  vaccine-preventable
diseases  is  higher  in  persons  with  altered  immunocompetence;  therefore,  certain
vaccines
 (e.g.,
 inactivated
 influenza
 vaccine,
 pneumococcal
 vaccines)
 are
recommended specifically for persons with these diseases (2,3). Administration of live
vaccines  might  need  to  be  deferred  until  immune  function  has  improved.  This  is
primarily a safety concern, because persons who have altered immunocompetence and
receive  live  vaccines  might  be  at  increased  risk  for  an  adverse  reaction  because  of
uninhibited  growth  of  the  attenuated  live  virus  or  bacteria.  Vaccines  might  be  less
effective during the period of altered immunocompetence. Non-live vaccines might best
be  deferred  during  a  period  of  altered  immunocompetence;  in  this  circumstance,  the
concern  is  with  effectiveness  and  not  safety.  Additionally,  if  a  non-live  vaccine  is
administered  during  the  period  of  altered  immunocompetence,  it  might  need  to  be
repeated
 after
 immune
 function
 has
 improved.
 The
 degree
 of
 altered
immunocompetence in a patient should be determined by a physician. The challenge
for clinicians and other health-care providers is assessing the safety and effectiveness
of  vaccines  for  conditions  associated  with  primary  or  secondary  immunodeficiency,
especially when new therapeutic modalities are being used and information about the
safety  and  effectiveness  of  vaccines  has  not  been  characterized  fully  in  persons
receiving  these  drugs  (Table  8-1).  Laboratory  studies  can  be  useful  for  assessing  the
effects  of  a  disease  or  drug  on  the  immune  system.  Tests  useful  to  assess  humoral
immunity  include  immunoglobulin  (and  immunoglobulin  subset)  levels  and  specific
antibody  levels  (e.g.,  tetanus  and  diphtheria).  Tests  that  demonstrate  the  status  of
cellular  immunity  include  lymphocyte  numbers  (i.e.,  a  complete  blood  count  with
differential),  a  test  that  delineates  concentrations  and  proportions  of  lymphocyte
subsets (i.e., B and T lymphocytes, CD4+ B lymphocytes versus CD8+ T lymphocytes),
and  tests  that  measure  T-cell  proliferation  or  function  in  response  to  specific  or
nonspecific  stimuli  (e.g.,  lymphocyte  proliferation  assays)  (4,5).  The  ability  to
characterize  a  drug  or  disease  condition  as  affecting  cellular  or  humoral  immunity  is
only the first step; using this information to draw inferences about whether particular
vaccines  are  indicated  or  whether  caution  is  advised  with  use  of  live  or  non-live
vaccines  is  more  complicated  and  might  require  consultation  with  an  infectious
diseases or immunology specialist.   This section describes situations in which vaccines
are recommended outside of the routine-age-based recommendation because the risk
for  vaccine-preventable  disease  is  increased  due  to  altered  immunocompetence.
Persons  with  altered  immunocompetence  generally  are  recommended  to  receive
polysaccharide-based vaccines (PCV13, PPSV23, and Hib), on the basis of increased risk
for  disease  if  the  vaccine  is  withheld.  For  certain  specific  categories  of  altered
immunocompetence, patients are also recommended to receive polysaccharide based
vaccines  (MenACWY,  Hib-MenCY,  and  MPSV4).  Two  types  of  vaccine  against  invasive
pneumococcal disease are available in the United States: PCV13 and PPSV23. PCV13 is
recommended  routinely  for  all  children  beginning  at  age  2  months  through  age  59
months and for adults aged 65 years or older. PCV13 is also recommended for children,
adolescents, and adults with conditions that place them at high risk for invasive disease
from Streptococcus pneumoniae. PCV13 is recommended for persons aged 6-64 years
who  have  not  previously  received  PCV13  and  have  congenital  immunodeficiency
disorders  (including  B-  or  T-lymphocyte  deficiency,  complement  deficiencies,  and
phagocytic disorders), anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease and
other  hemoglobinopathies),  HIV  infection,  cochlear  implant,  cerebrospinal  fluid  leak,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  iatrogenic  immunosuppression,  or  other
immunocompromising conditions. PPSV23 is licensed for use in persons aged ≥2 years
and  recommended  routinely  for  adults  aged  65  years  and  older.  PPSV23  is  also
recommended  for  persons  age  2  through  64  years  with  congenital  immunodeficiency
disorders,  anatomical  and  functional  asplenia,  HIV  infection,  cochlear  implant,
cerebrospinal
 fluid
 leak,
 and
 iatrogenic
 immunosuppression.
 Complete
recommendations  on  use  of  PCV13  and  PPSV23  are  available  in  the  Recommended
Immunization Schedules for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 Years and the Recommended
Adult Immunization Schedule (2,6). Three types of meningococcal vaccines are licensed
in
 the
 United
 States:
 meningococcal
 conjugate
 (MenACWY
 and
 Hib-MenCY),
meningococcal  polysaccharide  (MPSV4),  and  serogroup  B  meningococcal  (MenB)
vaccines.  Persons  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia  (including  sickle  cell  disease),
HIV  infection  and  persistent  complement  component  deficiency  (including  persons
taking  eculizumab  [Soliris])  (7)  are  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  and
should  receive  MenACWY  vaccine.  Persons  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia
(including  sickle  cell  disease)  and  persistent  complement  component  deficiency
(including  persons  taking  eculizumab  [Soliris])  should  receive  MenB  vaccine.  For
children  2  months  through  23  months  of  age,  an  age-appropriate  series  of
meningococcal conjugate vaccine should be administered. If MenACWY-D (Menactra) is
administered to a child with asplenia or HIV, it should be after 2 years of age and at
least 4 weeks after the completion of all PCV13 doses. A 2-dose primary series of either
MenACWY-CRM (Menveo) or MenACWY-D (Menactra) should be administered to persons
2 years of age or older with asplenia or complement deficiency. Following the primary
series of vaccine, a 3-year interval to the next dose is recommended for persons who
received their previous dose at younger than 7 years. A 5-year interval is recommended
for persons who received their previous dose at age 7 years or older. Although MPSV4 is
the only meningococcal vaccine licensed for persons older than 55 years of age, adults
56 years and older with asplenia or complement deficiency should be vaccinated with
MenACWY-CRM  or  MenACWY-D  rather  than  MPSV4  (8).  Meningococcal  serogroup  B
vaccines are licensed for persons 10-25 years of age and are recommended for persons
10 years of age or older for persons with high-risk conditions like functional or anatomic
asplenia  or  persistent  complement  component  deficiency.  There  are  presently  no
recommendations  for  booster  doses  of  either  MenB  vaccine  (9,10).  Complete
recommendations
 for
 use
 of
 meningococcal
 vaccines
 are
 available
 in
 the
Recommended Immunization Schedules for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 Years and the
Recommended Adult Schedule (2,6). Hib conjugate vaccines are available in single or
combined antigen preparations. Hib vaccine is recommended routinely for all children
through  age  59  months.  Children  12  through  59  months  who  are  at  high  risk  for
invasive  Hib  disease  (i.e.,  recipients  of  chemotherapy  or  radiation  for  malignant
neoplasms,
 or
 those
 with
 functional
 or
 anatomic
 asplenia,
 HIV
 infection,
immunoglobulin  deficiency,  or  early  complement  component  deficiency)  and  who  are
unvaccinated or received only one dose of Hib vaccine before 12 months of age should
receive 2 additional doses of Hib vaccine; those who received 2 or more doses of Hib
before 12 months of age should receive one additional dose.  A child younger than 5
years  of  age  receiving  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy  should  have  Hib  doses
repeated  if  the  doses  were  received  during  therapy  or  within  14  days  of  starting
therapy; repeat doses should be started at least 3 months after completion of therapy.
Recipients of hematopoietic cell transplants should be revaccinated with 3 doses of Hib
vaccine,  starting  6-12  months  after  successful  transplant,  regardless  of  vaccination
history  or  age.  Children  5-18  years  of  age  with  HIV  who  are  unimmunized(a)  should
receive  a  dose  of  Hib  vaccine;  Hib  vaccination  is  not  recommended  in  HIV-infected
adults. Unimmunized(a) asplenic patients older than 59 months of age or adults should
receive a dose of Hib vaccine. Anyone 15 months of age or older who is undergoing a
splenectomy  and  is  unimmunized(a)  should  receive  a  dose  of  Hib  vaccine  (11).
Complete recommendations for use of Hib vaccine are available in the Recommended
Immunization Schedules for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 Years and the Recommended
Adult  Immunization  Schedule  (2,6).  Zoster  (Shingrix)  vaccine  is  recommended  for
persons  19  years  old  and  older  who  have  altered  immunocompetence.    Household
contacts and other close contacts of persons with altered immunocompetence should
receive  all  age-  and  exposure-appropriate  vaccines,  with  the  exception  of  smallpox
vaccine  (12,13).  Receipt  of  vaccines  will  prevent  the  vaccine-preventable  disease,  so
there can be no potential transmission to the contact with altered immunocompetence.
The live MMR, varicella, and rotavirus vaccines should be administered to susceptible
household  contacts  and  other  close  contacts  of  immunocompromised  patients  when
indicated. No specific precautions are needed unless the varicella vaccine recipient has
a  rash  after  vaccination,  in  which  case  direct  contact  with  susceptible  household
contacts  with  altered  immunocompetence  should  be  avoided  until  the  rash  resolves
(14,15).  All  members  of  the  household  should  wash  their  hands  after  changing  the
diaper  of  an  infant  who  received  rotavirus  vaccine.  This  minimizes  rotavirus
transmission,  as  shedding  may  occur  up  to  one  month  after  the  last  dose  (16,17).
Household and other close contacts of persons with altered immunocompetence should
receive annual influenza vaccination. Introduction of low levels of vaccine viruses into
the  environment  likely  is  unavoidable  when  administering  LAIV.  LAIV  vaccine  viruses
are cold-adapted, so they can replicate in the nose and generate an immune response
without entering the lungs (i.e., they are temperature sensitive and replicate poorly at
core  body  temperatures).  No  instances  have  been  reported  of  illness  caused  by
attenuated
 vaccine
 virus
 infections
 among
 health-care
 providers
 or
immunocompromised  patients.  LAIV  may  be  administered  to  healthy  household  and
other close contacts of persons with altered immunocompetence unless the person with
altered  immunocompetence  is  in  a  protective  environment,  typically  defined  as  a
specialized  patient-care  area  with  a  positive  airflow  relative  to  the  corridor,
high-efficiency  particulate  air  filtration,  and  frequent  air  changes  (3).  No  preference
exists  for  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  use  by  health-care  workers  or  other  persons
who have close contact with persons with lesser degrees of immunosuppression (e.g.,
persons  with  diabetes,  persons  with  asthma  taking  high-dose  corticosteroids,  or
persons infected with HIV), and no preference exists for inactivated influenza vaccine
use by health-care workers or other healthy persons aged 5-49 years in close contact
with all other groups at high risk.   All non-live vaccines can be administered safely to
persons
 with
 altered
 immunocompetence,
 whether
 the
 vaccine
 is
 a
 killed
whole-organism  or  a  recombinant,  subunit,  split-virus,  toxoid,  polysaccharide,  or
polysaccharide  protein-conjugate  vaccine.    Except  for  inactivated  influenza  vaccine,
vaccination  during  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy  should  be  avoided  if  possible
because antibody response might be suboptimal. Patients vaccinated within a 14-day
period
 before
 starting
 immunosuppressive
 therapy
 or
 while
 receiving
immunosuppressive  therapy  should  be  considered  unimmunized  and  should  be
revaccinated at least 3 months after therapy is discontinued if immune competence has
been  restored.  Patients  who  have  quantitative  B-cell  deficiencies  and  are  receiving
immunoglobulin  therapy  should  not  receive  either  non-live  or  live  vaccines  while
receiving the immunoglobulin therapy because of concerns about effectiveness of the
vaccines. Patients on chemotherapy with anti-B cell antibodies (e.g., rituximab) should
wait  at  least  6  months  after  therapy  before  being  vaccinated  with  non-live  vaccines.
Some experts recommended longer than 6 months for some anti-B cell antibodies. For
other forms of altered immunocompetence, if non-live vaccines are indicated, the usual
schedules are recommended. However, the effectiveness of such vaccinations might be
suboptimal (1).   The same rationale regarding effectiveness that exists with non-live
vaccines  also  exists  with  live  vaccines.    Severe  complications  have  followed
vaccination  with  certain  live,  attenuated  viral  and  live,  attenuated  bacterial  vaccines
among persons with altered immunocompetence (18-26). Persons with most forms of
altered  immunocompetence  should  not  receive  live  vaccines  (MMR,  varicella,  MMRV,
LAIV,  yellow  fever,  Ty21a  oral  typhoid,  BCG,  smallpox,  and  rotavirus).  However,
exceptions  exist,  and  are  discussed  in  this  section.  Patients  with  any  defect  in
phagocytic  function  (e.g.,  chronic  granulomatous  disease,  leukocyte  adhesion
deficiency, myeloperoxidase deficiency, Chediak-Higashi syndrome) should NOT receive
live  bacterial  vaccines.  Patients  with  a  specific  type  of  defect  in  phagocytic
function—chronic
 granulomatous
 disease—should
 receive
 recommended
 live
attenuated viral vaccines in addition to non-live vaccines but should NOT receive live
bacterial  vaccines.  Patients  with  defects  in  phagocytic  function  that  are  undefined  or
known  to  be  accompanied  by  defects  in  T-cell  and  natural  killer  cell  function  (e.g.,
leukocyte adhesion deficiency, myeloperoxidase deficiency, Chediak-Higashi syndrome)
should NOT receive live attenuated viral or bacterial vaccines. These conditions include
specific deficits in T-cell and natural killer cell function, reducing the response to live
viral  vaccine  antigens  to  an  extent  not  seen  in  chronic  granulomatous  disease  (1).
Children with deficiencies in complement should receive recommended live, attenuated
viral and live, attenuated bacterial vaccines. Children with asplenia should not receive
LAIV, but can receive recommended live, attenuated viral and live, attenuated bacterial
vaccines. Persons with severe cell-mediated immunodeficiency should not receive live,
attenuated
 viral
 or
 bacterial
 vaccines.
 Patients
 with
 defects
 of
 the
interferon-gamma/interleukin-12  axis  should  not  receive  live  bacterial  vaccines.
Patients  with  deficiencies  of  interferon-gamma  or  interferon-alpha  should  not  receive
live  viral  or  live  bacterial  vaccine.  These  defects  involve  a  deficiency  in  cytokine
production  which  affects  the  immune  response  to  a  wide  scope  of  antigens,  both
bacterial and viral (1). Two factors support vaccination of HIV-exposed or HIV-infected
infants with rotavirus vaccines: 1) the HIV diagnosis might not be established in infants
born  to  HIV-infected  mothers  before  the  age  of  the  first  rotavirus  vaccine  dose  (only
1.5%-3%  of  HIV-exposed  infants  in  the  United  States  will  be  determined  to  be
HIV-infected),  and  2)  the  vaccine  strains  of  rotavirus  are  considerably  attenuated.
Patients taking exogenous interferon as therapy should not receive live bacterial or live
viral vaccines. Children with HIV infection are at increased risk for complications from
varicella  and  herpes  zoster  infection  compared  with  immunocompetent  children  (27,
28). Limited data among HIV-infected children younger than 8 years (specifically, those
individuals with CDC class N, A, or B with age-specific CD4+ T-lymphocyte percentages
of  ≥15%)  indicate  that  single-component  varicella  vaccine  is  immunogenic,  effective,
and  safe  (14,28).  Data  on  use  of  varicella  vaccine  in  HIV-infected  adolescents  and
adults  are  lacking.  However,  on  the  basis  of  expert  opinion,  the  safety  of  varicella
vaccine in HIV-infected persons older than 8 years with comparable levels of immune
function (CD4+T-lymphocyte count greater than 200 cells/mm3) is likely to be similar to
that of children aged younger than 8 years (14). Varicella vaccine should be considered
for persons who meet these criteria. Eligible HIV-infected persons 12 months of age or
older  should  receive  2  doses  of  single-component  varicella  vaccine  with  a  3-month
interval  between  doses  (14,28).  MMRV  vaccine  should  not  be  administered  to  any
HIV-infected  person.  Persons  with  HIV  infection  are  at  increased  risk  for  severe
complications if infected with measles. No severe or unusual adverse events have been
reported  after  measles  vaccination  among  HIV-infected  persons  who  did  not  have
evidence  of  severe  immunosuppression  (29-32).  Two  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  are
recommended  for  all  HIV-infected  individuals  aged  ≥12  months  who  do  not  have
evidence  of  current  severe  immunosuppression  (i.e.,  individuals  aged  ≤5  years  must
have  CD4+T  lymphocyte  [CD4+]  percentages  ≥15%  for  ≥6  months,  and  individuals
aged >5 years must have CD4+percentages ≥15% and CD4+≥200 lymphocytes/mm3
for  ≥6  months)  and  do  not  have  current  evidence  of  measles,  rubella,  and  mumps
immunity. In cases when only CD4+cell counts or only CD4+percentages are available
for those >5 years, the assessment of severe immunosuppression can be based on the
CD4+values (count or percentage) that are available. In cases when CD4+percentages
are
 not
 available
 for
 those
 aged
 ≤5
 years,
 the
 assessment
 of
 severe
immunosuppression can be based on age-specific CD4+counts at the time CD4+counts
were  measured;  i.e.,  absence  of  severe  immunosuppression  is  defined  as  ≥6  months
above age-specific CD4+count criteria: CD4+count >750 lymphocytes/mm3 while aged
≤12  months  and  CD4+count  ≥500  lymphocytes/mm3  while  aged  1  through  5  years
(33). Similarly, repeat doses of MMR vaccination are recommended for individuals with
perinatal  HIV  infection  who  were  vaccinated  prior  to  establishment  of  effective
combination antiretroviral therapy (cART). They should receive 2 appropriately spaced
doses of MMR vaccine once effective cART has been established (individuals aged ≤5
years  must  have  CD4+percentages  ≥15%  for  ≥6  months;  individuals  aged  >5  years
must have CD4+percentages ≥15% and CD4+≥200 lymphocytes/mm3 for ≥6 months)
unless  they  have  other  acceptable  current  evidence  of  measles,  rubella,  and  mumps
immunity. HIV-infected persons who are receiving regular doses of IGIV are unlikely to
respond  to  varicella  vaccine  or  MMR  vaccine  because  of  the  continued  presence  of
passively  acquired  antibody.  However,  because  of  the  potential  benefit,  MMR  and
varicella  vaccines  should  be  considered  approximately  14  days  before  the  next
scheduled dose of IGIV (if not otherwise contraindicated), although an optimal immune
response might not occur depending on the presence of neutralizing antibodies against
the  vaccine  virus.  Vaccination  should  be  repeated  (if  not  otherwise  contraindicated)
after  the  recommended  interval  (see  Table  3-6  in  the  Timing  and  Spacing  of
Immunobiologics of this document). In most cases, this is after the therapy has been
discontinued. Patients with leukemia, lymphoma, or other malignancies whose disease
is in remission, who have restored immunocompetence, and whose chemotherapy has
been discontinued for at least 3 months can receive live-virus vaccines. Persons with
impaired humoral immunity (e.g., hypogammaglobulinemia or dysgammaglobulinemia)
may  be  vaccinated  with  varicella  vaccine  (14).  However,  most  persons  with  these
disorders also receive periodic doses of IGIV. Appropriate spacing should be maintained
between  administration  of  IGIV  and  varicella  vaccine  in  an  attempt  to  prevent  an
inadequate response to vaccination caused by the presence of neutralizing antibodies
from  the  IGIV.  Zoster  incidence  is  higher  in  persons  with  altered  immunocompetence
(34). Adults with most types of altered immunocompetence are expected to maintain
residual  immunity  to  varicella-zoster  virus  because  of  chronic  latent  infection  that
protects  against  primary  varicella  but  provides  incomplete  protection  against  zoster.
Zoster
 vaccine
 is
 not
 recommended
 in
 persons
 with
 primary
 or
 acquired
immunodeficiency  (e.g.,  lymphoma,  leukemia,  tumors  involving  bone  marrow,  and
patients receiving chemotherapy) and some HIV infected patients (34). Zoster vaccine
may
 be
 administered
 to
 certain
 persons
 age
 50
 or
 older
 with
 altered
immunocompetence,  such  as  persons  receiving  low  dosages  of  immunosuppressive
medications, those with isolated B-cell deficiencies (i.e., impaired humoral immunity),
or those with HIV infection who have CD4+ T-lymphocyte counts >200 cells/mm3. Top
of  Page    A  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant  (HSCT)  results  in  immunosuppression
because  of  the  hematopoietic  ablative  therapy  administered  before  the  transplant,
drugs used to prevent or treat graft-versus-host disease, and, in some cases, from the
underlying  disease  process  necessitating  transplantation  (35-37).  HSCT  involves
ablation of the bone marrow followed by reimplantation of the person’s own stem cells
or stem cells from a donor. The ablation caused by the HSCT will also gradually remove
immune  memory  from  previous  vaccination.  Antibody  titers  to  vaccine-preventable
diseases  (e.g.,  tetanus,  poliovirus,  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  encapsulated
bacteria) decrease 1-4 years after autologous or allogeneic HSCT if the recipient is not
revaccinated.  HSCT  recipients  of  all  ages  are  at  increased  risk  for  certain
vaccine-preventable  diseases,  including  diseases  caused  by  encapsulated  bacteria
(e.g.,   pneumococcal  and  Hib  infections).  As  a  result,  HSCT  recipients  who  received
vaccines  prior  to  their  HSCT  should  receive  repeat  doses  routinely  after  HSCT,
regardless  of  the  source  of  the  transplanted  stem  cells  (35-37).  Revaccination  doses
following HSCT are indicated with pneumococcal vaccines, DTaP vaccine, Tdap vaccine,
Hib  vaccine,  hepatitis  A  vaccine,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  IPV,  inactivated  influenza
vaccines, meningococcal conjugate vaccine (for individuals 11 through 18 years or at
high-risk), serogroup B meningococcal vaccine (for individuals 16 through 23 years or
at  high-risk),  and  human  papillomavirus  (HPV)  vaccines  (for  individuals  aged  9-26
years, or 27 through 45 years of age based on shared clinical decision-making) (1, 35).
Recombinant zoster vaccine may  be re-administered  6-12 months after an  allogeneic
HSCT,  and  may  be  re-administered  3-12  months  after  an  autologous  HSCT.  For  more
specificity  on  the  precise  timing  of  re-administration  of  RZV,  note  that  this  should
optimally occur 2 months prior to cessation of prophylactic antiviral therapy (acyclovir,
famciclovir, and valacyclovir). Varicella and MMR vaccines may be re-administered after
HSCT if 24 months have passed since HSCT, the patient does NOT have graft-vs-host
disease,  and  is  considered  immunocompetent.  Yellow  fever  vaccine,  rabies  vaccine,
tick-borne  encephalitis  vaccine,  and  Japanese  encephalitis  vaccine  are  not  routinely
administered vaccines, so their use post-HSCT will be driven by a disease-specific risk
such as exposure or travel. If someone has received yellow fever vaccine prior to an
HSCT,  another  dose  should  be  re-administered  post-HSCT  (38).  BCG,  LAIV,  typhoid
vaccine,  and  rotavirus  vaccine  are  not  recommended  after  HSCT.  Most  non-live
vaccines  should  be  re-initiated  6  months  after  the  HSCT  (37).  Inactivated  influenza
vaccine should be administered beginning at least 6 months after HSCT and annually
thereafter  for  the  life  of  the  patient.  A  dose  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  can  be
given as early as 4 months after HSCT, but a second dose should be considered in this
situation (37). A second dose is recommended routinely for all children younger than 9
years receiving influenza vaccine for the first time. Revaccination of HCST patients with
pneumococcal
 vaccines
 is
 recommended
 regardless
 of
 whether
 doses
 were
administered  prior  to  HSCT.   For  those  HSCT  recipients  that  were  vaccinated  prior  to
HSCT  with  PCV7,  PCV13,  PCV15,  or  PCV20,  sequential  administration  of  4  doses  of
PCV20  is  recommended,  beginning  3-6  months  after  the  transplant.  The  first  three
doses  should  be  separated  by  4  weeks  and  the  fourth  dose  of  PCV20  should  be
administered 6 months after the third dose or 1 year after the HSCT, whichever is later.
As an alternative to PCV20, three doses of PCV15 separated by 4 weeks, followed by
PPSV23 one year after the last dose of PCV15 (and at least 4 weeks after the third dose
of PCV15) may be administered. If the patient has graft-versus-host disease, substitute
a  fourth  dose  of  PCV15  for  PPSV23.  For  doses  of  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine
administered after HSCT consisting of PCV13 or PCV15, these doses count as post-HSCT
doses,  so  one  always  has  the  option  to  transition  FROM  PCV15  to  PCV20  for  the
post-HSCT  dosing  regimen.  A  3-dose  regimen  of  Hib  vaccine  should  be  administered
beginning 6 months after transplant; at least 1 month should separate the doses (37).
The revaccination schedule for pertussis-containing vaccines includes 3 doses of DTaP
for  patients  <7  years  (14).  For  patients  ≥7  years,  providers  have  3  options  for
revaccination: 1) 3 doses of DTaP; 2) one dose of Tdap and 2 doses of DT; or 3) one
dose of Tdap and 2 doses of Td (1). Providers need to make a clinical judgment whether
they  will  follow  the  revaccination  schedules  described  above  in  circumstances  where
particular  vaccines  were  NOT  administered  prior  to  the  HSCT.  In  this  circumstance,
providers  may  just  vaccinate  according  to  routine  recommendations  for  post-HSCT
vaccination.   For  instance,  there  are  specific  recommendations  for  Hib  and
pertussis-containing  vaccines.  Use  of  the  3-dose  Hib  schedule  following  HSCT  is
supported  for  both  patients  that  received  Hib  prior  to  HSCT  and  those  who  did  not
receive Hib prior to HSCT (6, 11). For children >6 years who did not receive previous
doses  of  pertussis-containing  vaccine  prior  to  the  HSCT,  the  preferred  schedule
following HSCT is a dose of Tdap followed by 2 doses of Td (personal communication,
subject  matter  experts).  This  is  identical  to  one  of  the  alternative  regimens  for
revaccination doses, described above. Top of Page Asplenia and use of corticosteroids
or  certain  drugs  have  the  potential  to  be  immunosuppressive  and  are  presumed  to
cause  some  degree  of  altered  immunocompetence.  Persons  with  anatomic  asplenia
(e.g., surgical removal or congenital absence of the spleen) or functional asplenia (as
occurs  in  persons  with  sickle  cell  disease)  are  at  increased  risk  for  infection  by
encapsulated  bacteria,  especially  S.  pneumoniae  (pneumococcus),  N.  meningitidis
(meningococcus), and Hib (7-8, 39). Children should receive an age-appropriate series
of PCV13. Unvaccinated children 2-5 years should receive 2 doses of PCV13. Children
≥6 years should receive a dose of PCV13 if they have not previously received a dose of
PCV13. Persons aged ≥2 years should receive 2 doses of PPSV23 separated by 5 years,
beginning  8  or  more  weeks  after  completing  all  recommended  doses  of  PCV13  (6-7,
40-41). In circumstances where both PCV13 and PPSV23 are indicated, doses of PCV13
should be administered first followed by PPSV23 8 weeks after the last dose of PCV13.
Meningococcal  conjugate  (MenACWY)  and  serogroup  B  (MenB)  vaccines  are
recommended  for  persons  with  anatomic  or  functional  asplenia  (including  sickle  cell
disease).  For  children  2-23  months  of  age,  a  series  of  MenACWY-CRM  (Menveo)  or
Hib-MenCY (MenHibrix) should be administered. For persons ≥2 years of age, a 2-dose
primary  series  of  either  MenACWY-CRM  or  MenACWY-D  (Menactra)  should  be
administered.  If  a  person  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia  is  catching  up  on
pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (PCV13),  and  the  provider  only  carries  MenACWY-D,
indicated doses of PCV13 should be completed first and MenACWY-D should be given 4
weeks after the PCV13 series is completed. Following the primary series of vaccine, a
3-year  interval  to  the  next  dose  is  recommended  for  asplenic  children  who  received
their  last  previous  dose  at  age  younger  than  7  years.  A  5-year  interval  for  asplenic
persons  is  recommended  for  persons  who  received  their  last  previous  dose  at  age  7
years  or  older.  Meningococcal  B  (MenB)  vaccine  should  be  administered  as  either  a
2-dose series of MenB-4C (Bexsero) or a 3-dose series of MenB-FHbp (Trumenba). The
same vaccine product must be used for all doses. Based on available data and expert
opinion,  MenB-4C  or  MenB-FHbp  may  be  administered  concomitantly  with  MenACWY
vaccines,  but  at  a  different  anatomic  site,  if  feasible.  There  are  presently  no
recommendations  for  booster  doses  of  either  MenB  vaccine.  Hib  vaccine  is
recommended routinely for all children through age 59 months. Children 12-59 months
with functional or anatomic asplenia and who are unvaccinated or who received only
one dose of Hib disease before 12 months of age should receive 2 doses of Hib vaccine;
those who received 2 or more doses of Hib before 12 months of age should receive one
additional dose. Unimmunized(a) asplenic patients older than 59 months of age should
receive  one  dose  of  Hib  vaccine.  Anyone  ≥15  months  of  age  who  is  undergoing  a
splenectomy  and  is  unimmunized(a)  should  receive  one  dose  of  Hib  vaccine.
Pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Hib vaccinations should be administered at least 14
days before elective splenectomy, if possible. If the vaccinations are not administered
before  surgery,  they  should  be  administered  after  the  procedure  as  soon  as  the
patient’s condition is stable. The amount of systemically absorbed corticosteroids and
the duration of administration needed to suppress the immune system of an otherwise
immunocompetent  person  are  not  well  defined.  Although  the  immunosuppressive
effects of steroid treatment vary, the majority of clinicians consider a dose equivalent
to  either  ≥2  mg/kg  of  body  weight  or  ≥20  mg/day  of  prednisone  or  equivalent  for
persons who weigh >10 kg when administered for ≥14 consecutive days as sufficiently
immunosuppressive  to  raise  concern  about  the  safety  of  vaccination  with  live-virus
vaccines (37). This dosage is referred to as “high-dose corticosteroids”. Corticosteroids
used  in  greater  than  physiologic  doses  also  can  reduce  the  immune  response  to
vaccines. Vaccination providers should defer live-virus vaccination for at least 1 month
after  discontinuation  of  high-dose  systemically  absorbed  corticosteroid  therapy
administered for ≥14 days. Following vaccination, the decision needs to be made when
to  restart  immunosuppressive  therapy.  There  are  no  specific  recommendations  about
when
 to
 restart
 immunosuppressive
 medicines.
 However,
 when
 initiating
immunosuppressive therapy, providers should wait 4 weeks after a live vaccine and 2
weeks  after  a  non-live  vaccine.  However,  if  patients  require  therapy  for  chronic
inflammatory  conditions,  this  therapy  should  not  be  delayed  because  of  past
administration of vaccines (1). Corticosteroid therapy usually is not a contraindication
to administering live-virus vaccine when administration is 1) short term (i.e., <14 days);
2)  a  low  to  moderate  dose  (i.e.,  <20  mg  of  prednisone  or  equivalent  per  day  or
<2mg/kg body weight per day for a young child); 3) long-term, alternate-day treatment
with  short-acting  preparations;  4)  maintenance  physiologic  doses  (replacement
therapy);  or  5)  topical  (skin  or  eyes),  inhaled,  or  by  intra-articular,  bursal,  or  tendon
injection  (37).  No  evidence  of  an  increased  risk  for  more  severe  reactions  to  live,
attenuated  viral  vaccines  has  been  reported  among  persons  receiving  corticosteroid
therapy  by  aerosol,  and  such  therapy  is  not  a  reason  to  delay  vaccination.  When
feasible,  clinicians  should  administer  all  indicated  vaccines  before  initiation  of
chemotherapy,  before  treatment  with  other  immunosuppressive  drugs,  and  before
radiation  or  splenectomy.  Persons  receiving  chemotherapy  or  radiation  for  leukemia
and other hematopoietic malignancies, or for solid tumors, should be assumed to have
altered immunocompetence. Live, attenuated vaccines should not be administered for
at  least  3  months  after  such  immunosuppressive  therapy.  Non-live  vaccines
administered
 during
 chemotherapy
 should
 be
 readministered
 after
 immune
competence  is  regained.  Children  vaccinated  before  receiving  chemotherapy  for
leukemia, lymphoma, other malignancies, or radiation generally are thought to retain
immune memory after treatment, although revaccination with the common childhood
vaccines after chemotherapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia might be indicated (42).
In  general,  revaccination  of  a  person  after  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy  is
considered  unnecessary  if  the  previous  vaccination  occurred  before  therapy  and  not
during therapy, with the exception of recipients of HSCT, who should be revaccinated as
recommended previously. Determination of the level of immune memory and the need
for revaccination should be made by the treating physician. Certain immunosuppressive
medications are administered to prevent solid organ transplant rejection. Live vaccines
should be withheld for 2 months following discontinuation of anti-rejection therapies in
patients  with  a  solid  organ  transplant.  Other  immunosuppressive  medications  include
human  immune  mediators  like  interleukins  and  colony-stimulating  factors,  immune
modulators,  and  medicines  like  tumor  necrosis  factor-alpha  inhibitors  and  anti-B  cell
agents.  Non-live  and  live  vaccines  should  be  administered  2  or  more  weeks  before
initiating  such  therapies.  Live  vaccines  should  be  withheld  3  months  following  such
therapies,  and  both  non-live  and  live  vaccines  should  be  withheld  at  least  6  months
following  therapy  with  anti-B  cell  agents.  Some  experts  recommend  longer  than  6
months  following  anti-B  cell  agents.  Anti-B  cell  agents  suppress  antibody-producing
cells  for  a  prolonged  duration,  hence  the  longer  interval  recommended  before
administering vaccines (17). Zoster vaccine is an exception and should be withheld 1
month following anti-B cell agents. After vaccination, anti-B cell agents can be resumed
1 month later. (a) Patients who have not received a primary series and booster dose or
at least 1 dose of Hib vaccine after 14 months of age are considered unimmunized. Top
of  Page    IGIV  interferes  with  the  immune  response  to  measles  vaccine  and  possibly
varicella vaccine Abbreviations: AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; BCG =
bacille Calmette-Guérin; HepB = hepatitis B; Hib = Haemophilus influenzae type b; HIV
=  human  immunodeficiency  virus;  IG  =  immunoglobulin;  IGIV  =  immune  globulin
intravenous;  IgA  =  immune  globulin  A;  IgG  =  immune  globulin  G;  LAIV  =  live,
attenuated  influenza  vaccine;  MenACWY  =  quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate
vaccine; MMR = measles, mumps, and rubella; MMRV = measles, mumps, rubella, and
varicella; OPV = oral poliovirus vaccine (live); PPSV23= pneumococcal polysaccharide
vaccine; SCID = severe combined immunodeficiency; Ty21a = live oral typhoid vaccine.
Source: (43). (a) Other vaccines that are universally or routinely recommended should
be  given  if  not  contraindicated.  An  exception  is  patients  with  B-cell  deficiencies
receiving immunoglobulins, who should not receive either live or non-live vaccines, due
to safety (live vaccines) and efficacy (live and non-live vaccines) concerns. (b) OPV is no
longer  available  in  the  United  States.  (c)  This  table  refers  to  contraindications  for
nonemergency  vaccination  (i.e.,  the  ACIP  recommendations);  emergency  response
recommendations are addressed in the clinical guidance for smallpox vaccine use in an
emergency. (d) Children 12-59 months: if unimmunized or received zero or only 1 dose,
and that dose was administered before 12 months of age, should receive 2 Hib doses, 8
weeks  apart;  if  received  2  or  more  doses  before  age  12  months,  and  none  after  12
months, should receive 1 Hib dose 8 weeks after the last dose; if completed a primary
series and received a booster dose at age 12 months or older, no additional Hib doses
are  recommended.  (e)  19  years  and  older  only.  (f)  There  are  no  data  to  support  IgA
deficiency  as  a  contraindication  for  yellow  fever  vaccine.  (g)  Live  bacterial  vaccines:
BCG  and  oral  Ty21a  Salmonella  Typhi  vaccine.  (h)  Live  viral  vaccines:  MMR,  MMRV,
OPV,  LAIV,  yellow  fever,  rotavirus,  varicella,  and  vaccinia  (smallpox).  Nonemergency
smallpox  vaccination  is  not  recommended  for  children  younger  than  18  years  or  the
general public. (i) Regarding T-lymphocyte immunodeficiency as a contraindication for
rotavirus  vaccine,  data  exist  only  for  SCID.  (j)  Symptomatic  HIV  infection  or  CD4+
T-lymphocyte count of <200/mm3 or <15% of total lymphocytes for children aged <6
years  is  a  contraindication  to  yellow  fever  vaccine  administration.  Asymptomatic  HIV
infection with CD4+ T-lymphocyte count of 200-499/mm3 for persons aged ≥6 years or
15%-24%  of  total  lymphocytes  for  children  aged  <6  years  is  a  precaution  for  yellow
fever  vaccine  administration.  Details  of  yellow  fever  vaccine  recommendations  are
available  from  CDC  (44)  (k)  Patients  5-18  years  of  age  who  have  not  received  a  Hib
primary series and a booster dose or at least one Hib dose after 14 months of age. (l)
HIV-infected children should be considered for varicella vaccine if CD4+ T-lymphocyte
count is ≥15% and should receive MMR vaccine if they are aged ≥12 months and do
not have 1) evidence of current severe immunosuppression (i.e., individuals aged ≤5
years  must  have  CD4+T  lymphocyte  [CD4]  percentages  ≥15%  for  ≥6  months;  and
individuals  aged  >5  years  must  have  CD4+percentages  ≥15%  and  CD4+≥200
lymphocytes/mm3 for ≥6 months) and 2) other current evidence of measles, rubella,
and mumps immunity. In cases when only CD4+cell counts or only CD4+percentages
are  available  for  those  older  than  age  5  years,  the  assessment  of  severe
immunosuppression can be based on the CD4+values (count or percentage) that are
available. In cases when CD4+percentages are not available for those aged ≤5 years,
the  assessment  of  severe  immunosuppression  can  be  based  on  age-specific
CD4+counts  at  the  time  CD4+counts  were  measured;  i.e.,  absence  of  severe
immunosuppression  is  defined  as  ≥6  months  above  age-specific  CD4+count  criteria:
CD4+count  >750  lymphocytes/mm3  while  aged  ≤12  months  and  CD4+count  ≥500
lymphocytes/mm3 while aged 1 through 5 years (33). (m) Withholding non-live vaccines
also is recommended with some forms of immunosuppressive therapy, like anti-CD20
antibodies,  induction  or  consolidation  chemotherapy,  or  patients  with  major  antibody
deficiencies receiving immunoglobulins. Inactivated influenza vaccine is an exception,
but  consideration  should  be  given  to  repeating  doses  of  any  non-live  vaccine
administered during these therapies. (n) Persons younger than 60 months undergoing
chemotherapy or radiation therapy who have not received a Hib primary series and a
booster  dose  or  at  least  one  Hib  dose  after  14  months  of  age;  HSCT  patients  of  any
ages,  regardless  of  Hib  vaccine  history.  (o)  Persons  older  than  59  months  who  are
asplenic and persons 15 months or older who are undergoing elective splenectomy who
have not received a Hib primary series and a booster dose or at least one Hib dose after
14 months of age. (p) Hepatitis B vaccine is recommended for all persons birth through
59  years  of  age.  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  is  also  recommended  for  patients  with  chronic
renal disease in all age groups (including 60 years old and older) based on the risk from
dialysis-based  bloodborne  transmission.  Top  of  Page  Top  of  Page  To  receive  email
updates about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/immunocompetence.html
