Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for  Immunization  Printer
friendly  version  [26  pages]  Persons  administering  vaccinations  should  follow
appropriate  precautions  to  minimize  risk  for  disease  exposure  and  spread.  Hands
should be cleansed with an alcohol-based waterless antiseptic hand rub or washed with
soap and water before preparing vaccines for administration and between each patient
contact (1). Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations do not
require  gloves  to  be  worn  when  administering  vaccinations,  unless  persons
administering vaccinations have open lesions on their hands or are likely to come into
contact  with  a  patient’s  body  fluids  (2).  If  worn,  gloves  should  be  changed  between
patients. Vaccines should be drawn up in a designated clean medication area that is not
adjacent to areas where potentially contaminated items are placed. Multi-dose vials to
be  used  for  more  than  one  patient  should  not  be  kept  or  accessed  in  the  immediate
patient treatment area. This is to prevent inadvertent contamination of the vial through
direct  or  indirect  contact  with  potentially  contaminated  surfaces  or  equipment  that
could then lead to infections in subsequent patients (3).  Smallpox vaccine is accessed
by dipping a bifurcated needle directly into the vaccine vial. The vaccine adheres to the
sides of the bifurcated needle, and is administered via skin puncture. The vial must be
accessed  in  the  immediate  patient  area  to  reduce  environmental  contamination  by
vaccine virus. To prevent contamination of the vial, make sure the patient area is clean
and  free  of  potentially  contaminated  equipment.  Different  single-components  of
combination vaccines should never be mixed in the same syringe by an end-user unless
specifically licensed for such use (4). Single-dose vials and manufacturer-filled syringes
are  designed  for  single-dose  administration  and  should  be  discarded  if  vaccine  has
been  withdrawn  or  reconstituted  and  subsequently  not  used  within  the  time  frame
specified  by  the  manufacturer.  Syringes  that  are  prefilled  by  the  manufacturer  and
activated  (i.e.,  syringe  cap  removed  or  needle  attached)  but  unused  should  be
discarded  at  the  end  of  the  clinic  day.  For  non-live  vaccines,  manufacturers  typically
recommend use within the same day that a vaccine is withdrawn or reconstituted. For
live  vaccines  that  require  reconstitution,  manufacturers  typically  recommend  the
vaccine be used as soon as possible after reconstitution and be discarded if not used
within  30  minutes  after  reconstitution.  For  example,  varicella  vaccine  should  be
discarded  if  not  used  within  30  minutes  after  reconstitution,  whereas  MMR  vaccine,
once  reconstituted,  must  be  kept  in  a  dark  place  at  36°F  to  46°F  (2°C  to  8°C)  and
should be discarded within 8 hours if not used. When in doubt about the appropriate
handling
 of
 a
 vaccine,
 vaccination
 providers
 should
 contact
 that
 vaccine’s
manufacturer. ACIP discourages the routine practice of providers’ prefilling syringes for
several  reasons.  Because  the  majority  of  vaccines  have  a  similar  appearance  after
being  drawn  into  a  syringe,  prefilling  might  result  in  administration  errors.  Because
unused prefilled syringes also typically must be discarded if not used within the same
day  that  they  are  filled,  vaccine  wastage  might  occur.  The  FDA  does  not  license
administration syringes for vaccine storage. In certain circumstances in which a single
vaccine type is being used (e.g., in preparation for a community influenza vaccination
campaign), filling a small number (10 or fewer) of syringes may be considered (5). The
doses should be administered as soon as possible after filling, by the same person who
filled  the  syringes.  Unused  syringes  that  are  prefilled  by  the  manufacturer  and
activated (i.e., syringe cap removed or needle attached) should be discarded at the end
of the clinic day. Vaccine from two or more vials should never be combined to make
one  or  more  doses.  This  can  lead  to  violation  of  expiration  dates  and  product
contamination  (6,7).  Providers  are  sometimes  concerned  when  they  have  the  same
contraindications  or  precautions  as  their  patients  from  whom  they  withhold  or  defer
vaccine. For administration of routinely recommended vaccines, there is no evidence of
risk of exposure of vaccine components to the health care provider, so conditions in the
provider labeled as contraindications and precautions to a vaccine components are not
a reason to withdraw from this function of administering the vaccine to someone else.
Historic concerns about exposure to vaccine components are limited to non-parenteral
vaccines  in  which  some  degree  of  environmental  exposure  is  unavoidable  (5,  8),  or
situations  in  which  self-inoculation  is  likely  due  to  the  nature  of  the  vaccine  microbe
[e.g. reduced attenuation of smallpox vaccine virus (9)]. Persons administering ACAM
2000 smallpox vaccine to laboratory and health care personnel at risk for occupational
exposure  to  orthopoxviruses  can  decrease  the  risk  for  inadvertent  infection  through
recommended  infection  prevention  measures.  However,  because  of  a  theoretical  risk
for  infection,  vaccination  with  ACAM2000  can  be  offered  to  health  care  personnel
administering
 this
 vaccine,
 provided
 individual
 persons
 have
 no
 specified
contraindications to vaccination (10). Needles and syringes used for vaccine injections
must be sterile and disposable. A separate needle and syringe should be used for each
injection. Changing needles between drawing vaccine from a vial and injecting it into a
recipient is not necessary unless the needle has been damaged or contaminated (11).
Bloodborne  diseases  (e.g.,  hepatitis  B,  hepatitis  C,  human  immunodeficiency  virus
[HIV])  are  occupational  hazards  for  clinicians  and  other  health-care  providers.  The
Needlestick Safety and Prevention Act (2) was enacted in 2000 to reduce the incidence
of  needlestick  injury  and  the  consequent  risk  for  bloodborne  diseases  acquired  from
patients.  The  act  directed  OSHA  to  strengthen  its  existing  bloodborne  pathogen
standards.  The  revised  standards  became  effective  in  2001  (2).  These  federal
regulations  require  the  use  of  engineering  and  work  practice  controls  to  eliminate  or
minimize  employee  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens.  Engineering  controls  means
controls (e.g., sharps disposal containers, self-sheathing needles, safer medical devices,
such as sharps with engineered sharps injury protections and needleless systems) that
isolate
 or
 remove
 the
 bloodborne
 pathogens
 hazard
 from
 the
 workplace).
Needle-shielding  or  needle-free  devices  that  might  satisfy  the  occupational  safety
regulations  for  administering  injectable  vaccines  are  available  in  the  United  States
(12-13).  The  regulations  also  require  maintenance  of  records  documenting  injuries
caused by needles and other medical sharp objects and that nonmanagerial employees
be  involved  in  the  evaluation  and  selection  of  safety-engineered  devices  before  they
are  procured.  Additional  information  about  implementation  and  enforcement  of  these
regulations is available from OSHA. To prevent inadvertent needlestick injury or reuse,
safety mechanisms should be deployed after use and needles and syringes should be
discarded immediately in labeled, puncture-proof containers located in the same room
where  the  vaccine  is  administered  (5).  Used  needles  should  never  be  recapped.   
Routes
 of
 administration
 are
 recommended
 by
 the
 manufacturer
 for
 each
immunobiologic  (Table  6-1).  With  the  exceptions  of  bacille  Calmette-Guérin  (BCG)
vaccine  and  smallpox  vaccine  [ACAM2000]  (both  administered  by  the  percutaneous
route),  injectable  vaccines  are  administered  by  the  intramuscular  or  subcutaneous
route.  The  smallpox/monkeypox  vaccine  (Jynneos)  is  primarily  administered  by  the
subcutaneous  route  but  in  some  circumstances  is  administered  by  the  intradermal
route. Deviation from the recommended route of administration might reduce vaccine
efficacy (14-15) or increase the risk for local adverse reactions (16-18). The method of
administration  of  injectable  vaccines  is  determined,  in  part,  by  the  inclusion  of
adjuvants  in  some  vaccines.  An  adjuvant  is  a  vaccine  component  distinct  from  the
antigen  that  enhances  the  immune  response  to  the  antigen,  but  might  also  increase
risk  of  adverse  reactions.  To  decrease  risk  of  local  adverse  events,  non-live  vaccines
containing  an  adjuvant  should  be  injected  into  a  muscle.  Administering  a  vaccine
containing an adjuvant either subcutaneously or intradermally can cause local irritation,
induration,  skin  discoloration,  inflammation,  and  granuloma  formation.  Injectable
immunobiologics should be administered where local, neural, vascular, or tissue injury
is unlikely. Use of longer needles has been associated with less redness or swelling than
occurs  with  shorter  needles  because  of  injection  into  deeper  muscle  mass  (16).
Appropriate needle length depends on age and body mass. Injection technique is the
most  important  parameter  to  ensure  efficient  intramuscular  vaccine  delivery.  For  all
intramuscular injections, the needle should be long enough to reach the muscle mass
and  prevent  vaccine  from  seeping  into  subcutaneous  tissue,  but  not  so  long  as  to
involve  underlying  nerves,  blood  vessels,  or  bone  (15,19-22).  Vaccinators  should  be
familiar  with  the  anatomy  of  the  area  into  which  they  are  injecting  vaccine.
Intramuscular injections are administered at a 90-degree angle to the skin, preferably
into  the  anterolateral  aspect  of  the  thigh  or  the  deltoid  muscle  of  the  upper  arm,
depending on the age of the patient (Table 6-2). The needle gauge for intramuscular
injection is 22-25 gauge. A decision on needle length and site of injection must be made
for each person on the basis of the size of the muscle, the thickness of adipose tissue at
the injection site, the volume of the material to be administered, injection technique,
and the depth below the muscle surface into which the material is to be injected (Figure
1).  Some  experts  allow  intramuscular  injection  with  a  ⅝-inch  needle  but  ONLY  if  the
skin  is  stretched  flat  (21).  If  the  subcutaneous  and  muscle  tissue  are  bunched  to
minimize  the  chance  of  striking  bone  (19),  a  1-inch  needle  or  larger  is  required  to
ensure intramuscular administration. Aspiration before injection of vaccines or toxoids
(i.e., pulling back on the syringe plunger after needle insertion but before injection) is
not  necessary  because  no  large  blood  vessels  are  present  at  the  recommended
injection sites, and a process that includes aspiration might be more painful for infants
(22).  For  the  majority  of  infants,  the  anterolateral  aspect  of  the  thigh  is  the
recommended site for injection because it provides comparatively larger muscle mass
than the deltoid (Figure 2) (23). In certain circumstances (e.g., physical obstruction to
other  sites  and  no  reasonable  indication  to  defer  doses),  the  gluteal  muscle  can  be
used. If the gluteal muscle must be used, care should be taken to define the anatomic
landmarks.(a) For the majority of infants, a 1-inch needle is sufficient to penetrate the
thigh muscle. For toddlers, the anterolateral thigh muscle is preferred, and when this
site is used, the needle should be at least 1 inch long. The deltoid muscle can be used if
the muscle mass is adequate. If 2 vaccines are to be administered in a single limb, they
should  be  spaced  an  inch  apart  (4,  24).  The  deltoid  muscle  is  preferred  for  children
aged 3-10 years (25); the needle length for deltoid site injections can range from ⅝ to 1
inch  on  the  basis  of  technique.  The  anterolateral  thigh  can  also  be  used  (25).  In  this
case the needle length should be 1 inch to 1.25 inches. Knowledge of body mass can be
useful for estimating the appropriate needle length (26). The deltoid muscle is preferred
for  adolescents  11-18  years  of  age.  The  anterolateral  thigh  can  also  be  used.  For
injection into the anterolateral thigh, most adolescents will require a 1-1.5-inch needle
to  ensure  intramuscular  administration  (27).  For  adults,  the  deltoid  muscle  is
recommended for routine intramuscular vaccinations (23) (Figure 3). The anterolateral
thigh  also  can  be  used.  When  injecting  into  the  deltoid  muscle,  for  adults  a
measurement of body mass/weight is allowable prior to vaccination, understanding that
resources  to  measure  body  mass/weight  are  not  available  in  all  clinical  settings.  For
men and women who weigh <130 lbs (<60 kg), a ⅝-inch needle is sufficient to ensure
intramuscular  injection  in  the  deltoid  muscle  if  the  injection  is  made  at  a  90-degree
angle  and  the  tissue  is  not  bunched.  For  men  and  women  who  weigh  130-152  lbs
(60-70 kg), a 1-inch needle is sufficient. For women who weigh 152-200 lbs (70-90 kg)
and men who weigh 152-260 lbs (70-118 kg), a 1- to 1.5-inch needle is recommended.
For  women  who  weigh  >200  lbs  (>90  kg)  or  men  who  weigh  >260  lbs  (>118  kg),  a
1.5-inch  needle  is  recommended  (table  6-2)  (20).  For  injection  into  the  anterolateral
thigh muscle, a 1.5-inch needle should be used, although a 1-inch needle may be used
if the skin is stretched tightly and subcutaneous tissues are not bunched. Subcutaneous
injections are administered at a 45-degree angle, usually into the thigh for infants aged
<12  months  and  in  the  upper-outer  triceps  area  of  persons  aged  ≥12  months.
Subcutaneous injections may be administered into the upper-outer triceps area of an
infant  if  necessary.  A  ⅝-inch,  23-  to  25-gauge  needle  should  be  inserted  into  the
subcutaneous tissue (Figures 4 and 5) (4). Rotavirus, adenovirus, cholera vaccine, and
oral  typhoid  vaccines  are  the  only  vaccines  administered  orally  in  the  United  States.
Oral  typhoid  capsules  should  be  administered  as  directed  by  the  manufacturer.  The
capsules should not be opened or mixed with any other substance. Rotavirus vaccines
are licensed for infants. There are 2 brands of rotavirus vaccine, and they have different
types  of  applicators.  Providers  should  consult  package  inserts  for  details.  Live
attenuated influenza vaccine is approved for healthy nonpregnant persons aged 2-49
years and is the only vaccine administered by the intranasal route. The administration
device is a nasal sprayer with a dose-divider clip that allows introduction of one 0.1-mL
spray  into  each  naris.  The  tip  should  be  inserted  slightly  into  the  naris  before
administration. Even if the person coughs or sneezes immediately after administration
or  the  dose  is  expelled  any  other  way,  the  vaccine  dose  need  not  be  repeated  (5).
Severely  immunosuppressed  persons  (i.e.,  those  who  require  care  in  a  protected
environment, e.g., bone marrow transplant recipients, individuals with severe combined
immunodeficiency  diseases)  should  not  administer  LAIV.  It  would  be  uncommon  for
persons with these conditions to be in a role administering vaccines. Other persons at
increased risk for influenza complications can administer LAIV. These include persons
with underlying medical conditions placing them at higher risk or who are likely to be at
risk, including pregnant women, persons with asthma, and persons aged ≥50 years (2).
If multiple vaccines are administered at a single visit, administer each preparation at a
different  anatomic  site  (28).  The  location  of  all  injection  sites  with  the  corresponding
vaccine injected should be documented in each patient’s medical record. Health-care
practices should consider using a vaccination site map so that all persons administering
vaccines routinely use a particular anatomic site for each particular vaccine. For infants
and younger children, if more than 2 vaccines are injected in a single limb, the thigh is
the  preferred  site  because  of  the  greater  muscle  mass;  the  injections  should  be
sufficiently  separated  (separate  anatomic  sites  [i.e.  ≥1  inch]  if  possible)  so  that  any
local reactions can be differentiated (13,29). For older children and adults, the deltoid
muscle  can  be  used  for  more  than  one  intramuscular  injection.  If  a  vaccine  and  an
immune  globulin  preparation  are  administered  simultaneously  (e.g.,  Td/Tdap  and
tetanus  immune  globulin  [TIG],  hepatitis  B  and  hepatitis  B  immunoglobulin  [HBIG]),
separate limbs should be used for each injection (29-30). Jet injectors are needle-free
devices  that  pressurize  liquid  medication,  forcing  it  through  a  nozzle  orifice  into  a
narrow stream capable of penetrating skin to deliver a drug or vaccine into intradermal,
subcutaneous,  or  intramuscular  tissues  (32-33).  Immune  responses  generated  by  jet
injectors against both attenuated and non-live viral and bacterial antigens are usually
equivalent  to,  and  occasionally  greater  than,  immune  responses  induced  by  needle
injection.  However,  local  reactions  or  injuries  (e.g.,  skin  laceration,  transient
neuropathy,  hematoma)  are  sometimes  more  frequent  on  delivery  of  vaccine  by  jet
injectors compared with needle injection, depending on the inherent irritability of the
vaccine and operator technique (33). Multiple use jet injectors using the same nozzle
for  consecutive  injections  without  intervening  sterilization  were  used  in  mass
vaccination  campaigns  from  the  1950s  through  the  1990s  (33);  however,  these  were
found  to  be  unsafe  because  of  the  possibility  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission
(34-37)  and  should  not  be  used.  A  new  generation  of  jet  injectors  with  disposable
cartridges and syringes has been developed since the 1990s. With a new, sterile dose
chamber and nozzle for each patient and correct use, these devices do not have the
same safety concerns as multiple-use nozzle jet injectors. Several of the newer devices
have  been  approved  by  FDA  for  use  with  specific  vaccines  (33).  Jet  injectors  prevent
needlestick injuries to health-care providers (2) and can overcome improper, unsterile
reuse and other drawbacks of needles and syringes in developing countries (9, 38-39).
Top of Page Comfort measures, such as distraction (e.g., playing music or pretending to
blow  away  the  pain),  cooling  of  the  injection  site(s),  topical  analgesia,  ingestion  of
sweet liquids, breastfeeding, swaddling, and slow, lateral swaying can help infants or
children  cope  with  the  discomfort  associated  with  vaccination  (40-42).  Pretreatment
(30-60 minutes before injection) with a 5% topical lidocaine-prilocaine emulsion might
decrease  the  pain  of  vaccination  by  causing  superficial  anesthesia  (43-44).  Evidence
indicates  that  this  cream  does  not  interfere  with  the  immune  response  to  MMR  (45).
There  is  no  evidence  the  cream  interferes  with  other  vaccines  (46-49).  Topical
lidocaine-prilocaine emulsion should not be used on infants aged <12 months who are
receiving  treatment  with  methemoglobin-inducing  agents  (e.g.,  acetaminophen,  amyl
nitrate,
 nitroprusside,
 dapsone)
 because
 of
 the
 possible
 development
 of
methemoglobinemia (50). Use of a topical refrigerant (vapocoolant) spray immediately
before vaccination can reduce the short-term pain associated with injections and can be
as  effective  as  lidocaine-prilocaine  cream  (51).  Evidence  does  not  support  use  of
antipyretics  before  or  at  the  time  of  vaccination;  however,  they  can  be  used  for  the
treatment of fever and local discomfort that might occur following vaccination. Studies
of  children  with  previous  febrile  seizures  have  not  demonstrated  antipyretics  to  be
effective in the prevention of febrile seizures (48). Top of Page Best practice guidance
for route, site, and dosage of immunobiologics is derived from data from clinical trials,
practical  experience,  normal  intervals  of  health  care  visits,  and  theoretical
considerations. ACIP discourages variations from the recommended route, site, volume,
or number of doses of any vaccine. Variation from the recommended route and site can
result in inadequate protection. In adults (but not in infants) (52), the immunogenicity
of hepatitis B is substantially lower when the gluteal rather than the deltoid site is used
for  administration  (8).  Hepatitis  B  administered  intradermally  might  result  in  a  lower
seroconversion  rate  and  final  titer  of  hepatitis  B  surface  antibody  than  when
administered  by  the  deltoid  intramuscular  route  (53-54).  Hepatitis  B  administered  by
any route other than intramuscular, or in adults at any site other than the deltoid or
anterolateral  thigh,  should  not  be  counted  as  valid  and  should  be  repeated  (9).
Similarly, doses of rabies vaccine administered in the gluteal site should not be counted
as  valid  doses  and  should  be  repeated  (54).  Hepatitis  A  vaccine  and  meningococcal
conjugate  vaccine  do  not  need  to  be  repeated  if  administered  by  the  subcutaneous
route  (55-56).  However,  for  DTaP,  Hib,  and  PCV13,  there  is  no  evidence  related  to
immunogenicity  of  these  3  vaccines  given  subcutaneously.  Providers  should  address
circumstances  in  which  dose(s)  of  these  vaccines  have  been  administered
subcutaneously on a case-by-case basis. Inactivated influenza vaccine is immunogenic
when administered in a lower-than-standard dose by the intradermal route to healthy
adult  volunteers.  Intradermal  injection  produced  antibody  responses  similar  to
intramuscular
 injection
 in
 vaccinees
 aged
 18-60
 years
 (57).
 However,
 the
immunogenicity  for  persons  aged  ≥65  years  is  inadequate,  and  varying  the
recommended route and dose either with the intradermal product licensed through 64
years  of  age  or  with  other  influenza  vaccines  is  not  recommended  (24).  Live,
attenuated injectable vaccines (e.g., MMR, varicella, yellow fever) and certain non-live
vaccines (e.g., meningococcal polysaccharide) are recommended by the manufacturers
to be administered by subcutaneous injection. PPSV23and IPV are recommended by the
manufacturer  to  be  administered  by  the  subcutaneous  or  intramuscular  route.
Response  to  vaccines  recommended  by  the  subcutaneous  route  is  unlikely  to  be
affected  if  the  vaccines  are  administered  by  the  intramuscular  rather  than
subcutaneous  route.  Repeating  doses  of  vaccine  administered  by  the  intramuscular
route  when  recommended  to  be  by  the  subcutaneous  route  is  not  necessary  (10).
Administering volumes smaller than recommended (e.g., inappropriately divided doses)
might  result  in  inadequate  protection.  Using  reduced  doses  administered  at  multiple
vaccination  visits  that  equal  a  full  dose  or  using  smaller  divided  doses  is  not
recommended  (4).  Any  vaccination  using  less  than  the  standard  dose  should  not  be
counted,  and  the  person  should  be  revaccinated  according  to  age  unless  serologic
testing indicates that an adequate response has developed. However, if 2 half-volume
formulations  of  vaccine  have  already  been  administered  on  the  same  clinic  day  to  a
patient recommended for the full volume formulation, these 2 doses can count as one
full dose. If less than a full recommended dose of a vaccine is administered because of
syringe,  applicator,  or  needle  leakage,  the  dose  should  be  repeated  (5).  Using
larger-than-recommended  dosages  can  be  hazardous  because  of  excessive  local  or
systemic  concentrations  of  antigens  or  other  vaccine  constituents.  (a)  If  the  gluteal
muscle  is  chosen,  injection  should  be  administered  lateral  and  superior  to  a  line
between  the  posterior  superior  iliac  spine  and  the  greater  trochanter  or  in  the
ventrogluteal site, the center of a triangle bounded by the anterior superior iliac spine,
the tubercle of the iliac crest, and the upper border of the greater trochanter. Top of
Page Abbreviations: DEN4CYD = dengue vaccine; DT = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids;
DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis;  HepA  =  hepatitis  A;
HepB  =  hepatitis  B;  Hib  =  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b;  HPV  =  human
papillomavirus;  IIV  =  inactivated  influenza  vaccine;  IM  =  intramuscular;  IPV  =
inactivated  poliovirus;  LAIV  =  live,  attenuated  influenza  vaccine;  MenACWY  =
quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine;  MenB  =  serogroup  B  meningococcal
vaccine;  MenCY  =  bivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  component;  MMR  =
measles, mumps, and rubella; MMRV = measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella; MPSV4
=  quadrivalent  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine;  PCV13  =  pneumococcal
conjugate  vaccine;  PPSV23=  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine;  RV1  =  live,
attenuated  monovalent  rotavirus  vaccine;  RV5  =  live,  reassortment  pentavalent
rotavirus  vaccine;  RZV  =  recombinant  adjuvanted  zoster  vaccine;  Subcut  =
subcutaneous;  Td  =  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced
diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis.  Source:  Adapted  from  Immunization  Action
Coalition. (a) Persons aged 11-15 years may be administered Recombivax HB (Merck),
1.0 mL (adult formulation) on a 2-dose schedule.
(b) Note that prefilled syringes of High-Dose Fluzone have a volume of 0.7 cc and the
recommended volume of administration is 0.7 ccs.
(c)  Do  not  withdraw  more  than  0.5  mL  from  the  reconstituted  product,  even  if  some
product is left in the vial. Top of Page Abbreviation: IM = intramuscular. Source: (17).
(a) First 28 days of life. (b) If skin is stretched tightly and subcutaneous tissues are not
bunched.  (c)  Preferred  site.  (d)  Some  experts  recommend  a  5/8-inch  needle  for  men
and women who weigh <60 kg, if used, skin must be stretched tightly (do not bunch
subcutaneous  tissue)  (e)  Some  experts  recommend  a  1-inch  needle  if  the  skin  is
stretched  tightly  and  subcutaneous  tissues  are  not  bunched.  Top  of  Page  Source:
Adapted  from  California  Immunization  Branch.    Source:  Adapted  from  Minnesota
Department  of  Health.    Source:  Adapted  from  Minnesota  Department  of  Health  and
Immunize.org.    Source:  Adapted  from  Minnesota  Department  of  Health.    Source:
Adapted  from  California  Immunization  Branch.  Top  of  Page  To  receive  email  updates
about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/administration.html
