Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for  Immunization  Updated
August 1, 2023 Printer friendly version [40 pages] Major changes to the best practice
guidance  for  timing  and  spacing  of  immunobiologics  include  1)  guidance  for
simultaneous vaccination in the context of a risk for febrile seizures and 2) clarification
of the use of the grace period between doses of MMRV. Optimal response to a vaccine
depends  on  multiple  factors,  including  the  type  of  vaccine,  age  of  the  recipient,  and
immune  status  of  the  recipient.  Recommendations  for  the  age  at  which  vaccines  are
administered  are  influenced  by  age-specific  risks  for  disease,  age-specific  risks  for
complications,  age-specific  responses  to  vaccination,  and  potential  interference  with
the  immune  response  by  passively  transferred  maternal  antibodies.  Vaccines  are
generally  recommended  for  members  of  the  youngest  age  group  at  risk  for
experiencing  the  disease  for  which  vaccine  efficacy  and  safety  have  been
demonstrated.  Vaccines  can  be  divided  into  two  general  categories:  live  or  non-live.
Most  live  vaccines  used  in  the  United  States  are  “live  attenuated”,  meaning  that  the
microbe  in  the  vaccine  is  alive  but  has  been  weakened  (attenuated)  through  serial
passage in cultures, or produced through genetic technology. One live vaccine licensed
for use in the United States (oral adenovirus vaccine) is not attenuated.   Live vaccines
must  replicate  in  order  to  induce  an  immune  response.  Several  factors  can  interfere
with replication, and these are a driving factor in the principles of timing and spacing of
live vaccine. These principles will be discussed later in this chapter. Non-live vaccines
can include whole or fractional vaccines produced by inactivating (killing) the microbe;
or  fractional  vaccines  such  as  recombinant  vaccines,  produced  through  genetic
technologies. Also included under the category of non-live vaccines are toxoids, which
generate  an  antibody  response  to  toxins  produced  by  a  microbe  rather  than  to  the
microbe itself. Several recently developed non-live vaccines do not contain antigen but
employ  RNA  or  DNA  to  instruct  the  recipient’s  own  cellular  mechanism  to  generate
antigenic  material.  Some  vaccines  described  as  “live  attenuated”  (e.g.,  Jynneos
Smallpox/Monkeypox  vaccine)  do  not  replicate  and  for  the  purposes  of  timing  and
spacing  recommendations  behave  like  non-live  vaccines.  Certain  vaccines  available
outside  the  U.S.  might  be  categorized  differently  as  to  vaccine  type  (e.g.,  live
attenuated JE vaccine and live oral polio vaccine) (Table 3-1). Tetanus and diphtheria
toxoids  require  booster  doses  to  maintain  protective  antibody  concentrations  (1).
Unconjugated  polysaccharide  vaccines  do  not  induce  T-cell  memory,  and  additional
doses (although they elicit the same or a lower antibody concentration) might increase
the duration of protection. Conjugation with a protein carrier improves the effectiveness
of polysaccharide vaccines by inducing T-lymphocyte–dependent immunologic function
(2).  Many  vaccines  that  stimulate  both  cell-mediated  immunity  and  neutralizing
antibodies  (e.g.,  live,  attenuated  virus  vaccines)  can  usually  induce  prolonged
immunity, even if antibody titers decline over time (3). Subsequent exposure to such
viruses  usually  results  in  a  rapid  anamnestic  antibody  response  without  viremia.
Approximately  90%-95%  of  recipients  of  a  single  dose  of  certain  live  vaccines
administered by injection at the recommended age (i.e., measles, rubella, and yellow
fever vaccines) develop protective antibodies, generally within 14 days of the dose. For
varicella and mumps vaccines, 80%-85% of vaccines are protected after a single dose.
However,  because  a  limited  proportion  (5%-20%)  of  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella
(MMR) or varicella vaccinees fail to respond to 1 dose, a second dose is recommended
to provide another opportunity to develop immunity (4). Of those who do not respond to
the first dose of the measles component of MMR or varicella vaccine, 97%-99% respond
to a second dose (5,6). The Recommended Immunization Schedules for Persons Aged 0
Through  18  Years  and  the  Recommended  Adult  Immunization  Schedule  are  revised
annually.  Physicians  and  other  health-care  providers  should  ensure  that  they  are
following the most up-to-date schedules, which are available from CDC. Top of Page 
Vaccination  providers  should  adhere  to  recommended  vaccination  schedules  (Table
3-2).  Administration  at  recommended  ages  and  in  accordance  with  recommended
intervals
 between
 doses
 of
 multidose
 antigens
 provides
 optimal
 protection.
Administration  of  doses  of  a  multidose  vaccine  using  intervals  that  are  shorter  than
recommended  might  be  necessary  in  certain  circumstances,  such  as  impending
international  travel  or  when  a  person  is  behind  schedule  on  vaccinations  but  needs
rapid  protection.  In  these  situations,  an  accelerated  schedule  can  be  implemented
using intervals between doses that are shorter than intervals recommended for routine
vaccination (7). The accelerated or minimum intervals and ages for scheduling catch-up
vaccinations.  Vaccine  doses  should  not  be  administered  at  intervals  less  than  these
minimum  intervals  or  at  an  age  that  is  younger  than  the  minimum  age.*(a)  Before
administering  a  vaccine  dose,  providers  might  need  to  verify  that  all  previous  doses
were administered after the minimum age and in accordance with minimum intervals
(Table 3-2). In clinical practice, vaccine doses occasionally are administered at intervals
less  than  the  minimum  interval  or  at  ages  younger  than  the  minimum  age.  Doses
administered  too  close  together  or  at  too  young  an  age  can  lead  to  a  suboptimal
immune response. However, administering a dose a few days earlier than the minimum
interval  or  age  is  unlikely  to  have  a  substantially  negative  effect  on  the  immune
response  to  that  dose.  Known  as  the  “grace  period”,  vaccine  doses  administered  ≤4
days before the minimum interval or age are considered valid; however, local or state
mandates might supersede this 4-day guideline (7).(b) (Day 1 is the day before the day
that  marks  the  minimum  age  or  minimum  interval  for  a  vaccine.)  The  scenario  most
applicable  to  the  grace  period  is  a  visit  to  a  provider  several  days  prior  to  the  date
indicated by the minimum interval, such as for a mild illness. Follow-up is unlikely soon
after or even for a longer period of time following this mild illness visit; this therefore
raises the question of whether vaccines be administered during the mild illness visit to
avoid  missed  opportunities  to  vaccinate.   Because  of  the  unique  schedule  for  rabies
vaccine and the accelerated Twinrix schedule the 4-day guideline does not apply to this
vaccine (8, personal communication, Hepatitis A subject matter experts). Doses of any
vaccine administered ≥5 days earlier than the minimum interval or age should not be
counted  as  valid  doses  and  should  be  repeated  as  age  appropriate.  The  repeat  dose
should be spaced after the invalid dose by the recommended minimum interval (Table
3-2). For example, if the first and second doses of Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
were administered only 14 days apart, the second dose would be invalid and need to be
repeated because the minimum interval from dose 1 to dose 2 is 4 weeks. The repeat
dose should be administered ≥4 weeks after the invalid dose (in this case, the second)
(7). The repeat dose is counted as the valid second dose. If the first and second doses
of hepatitis A vaccine were administered less than 6 months apart, the second dose is
invalid and should be repeated 6 months after the invalid second dose (7). However, if
this repeat dose (the third dose) is administered anytime 6 months or more after the
first dose, the series can be considered complete. If the minimum interval between the
second and third dose of hepatitis B vaccine is violated, or if the minimum age of the
third dose is violated, the third dose of hepatitis B vaccine is invalid.  The repeat dose
can be administered as early as 8 weeks after the 2nd valid dose as long as the dose is
also after 24 weeks of age and 16 weeks after the 1st dose. (9) If the first dose in a
series  is  given  ≥5  days  before  the  recommended  minimum  age,  the  dose  should  be
repeated on or after the date when the child reaches at least the minimum age (7). If
the vaccine is a live vaccine, ensuring that a minimum interval of 28 days has elapsed
from  the  invalid  dose  is  recommended  (7).  For  example,  if  the  first  dose  of  varicella
vaccine were inadvertently administered at age 10 months, the repeat dose would be
administered  no  earlier  than  the  child’s  first  birthday  (the  minimum  age  for  the  first
dose). If the first dose of varicella vaccine were administered at age 11 months and 2
weeks,  the  repeat  dose  should  be  administered  no  earlier  than  4  weeks  thereafter,
which  would  occur  after  the  first  birthday.  Certain  vaccines  (e.g.,  adult  tetanus  and
diphtheria toxoids [Td], pediatric diphtheria and tetanus toxoids [DT], tetanus toxoid)
produce  increased  rates  of  local  or  systemic  reactions  in  certain  recipients  when
administered  more  frequently  than  recommended  (10,  11).  Careful  record  keeping,
maintenance of patient histories, use of immunization information systems (IISs), and
adherence  to  recommended  schedules  can  decrease  the  incidence  of  such  reactions
without  adversely  affecting  immunity.  Top  of  Page   Simultaneous  administration  of
vaccines is defined as administering more than one vaccine on the same clinic day, at
different anatomic sites, and not combined in the same syringe. Experimental evidence
and extensive clinical experience provide the scientific basis for administering vaccines
simultaneously  (12).  Simultaneously  administering  all  vaccines  for  which  a  person  is
eligible at the time of a visit increases the probability that a child, adolescent, or adult
will  be  vaccinated  fully  by  the  appropriate  age  (13).  A  study  conducted  during  a
measles outbreak demonstrated that approximately one-third of measles cases among
unvaccinated but vaccine-eligible preschool children might have been prevented if MMR
had been administered at the same visit when another vaccine was administered (14).
Simultaneous administration also is critical when preparing for foreign travel in the near
future  and  when  a  health-care  provider  is  uncertain  that  a  patient  will  return  for
additional  doses  of  vaccine.  With  some  exceptions,  simultaneously  administering  the
most  widely  used  live  and  non-live  vaccines  has  produced  seroconversion  rates  and
rates  for  adverse  reactions  similar  to  those  observed  when  the  vaccines  are
administered  separately  (12,  15-17).   Routine  administration  of  all  age-appropriate
doses  of  vaccines  simultaneously  is  recommended  for  children  for  whom  no  specific
contraindications  exist  at  the  time  of  the  visit  (7).  MMR  and  varicella  vaccine  can  be
administered  simultaneously  (7).  Live,  attenuated  influenza  vaccine  (LAIV)  does  not
interfere with the immune response to MMR or varicella vaccines administered at the
same visit (18). No data exist about the immunogenicity of oral Ty21a typhoid vaccine
when administered concurrently or within 30 days of live-virus vaccines. In the absence
of such data, if typhoid vaccination is warranted, administration should not be delayed
because of recent administration of live, attenuated virus vaccines (19). Simultaneous
administration  of  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  (PPSV)  and  inactivated
influenza  vaccine  elicits  a  satisfactory  antibody  response  without  increasing  the
incidence or severity of adverse reactions (20). Simultaneous administration of PPSV23
and  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  is  recommended  for  all  persons  for  whom  both
vaccines  are  indicated.  Tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular
pertussis  vaccine  (Tdap)  and  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  (IIV)  can  be  administered
simultaneously  (21).  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  administered  with  yellow  fever  vaccine  is  as
safe  and  immunogenic  as  when  these  vaccines  are  administered  separately  (22).
Measles and yellow fever vaccines have been administered safely at the same visit and
without  reduction  of  immunogenicity  of  either  component  (23,24).  During  the
2010-2011  influenza  season,  surveillance  systems  detected  safety  signals  for  febrile
seizures  in  young  children  following  IIV  and  PCV13  vaccines  (25).  CDC  studied  the
health-care  visit  records  of  more  than  200,000  vaccinated  children  ages  6  months
through 59 months through the Vaccine Safety Datalink Project during the 2010-2011
influenza  season.  The  analyses  found  that  febrile  seizures  following  IIV  and  PCV13
vaccines given to this age group were rare, but did occur at higher than expected rates.
The risk for febrile seizures peaked in children age 16 months and were more common
when the 2 vaccines were given during the same health-care visit. In this group, about
one  additional  febrile  seizure  occurred  among  every  2,200  children  vaccinated.  After
assessing  benefits  and  risks,  ACIP  continues  to  recommend  IIV  and  PCV13  be  given
concomitantly  if  both  are  recommended  (25,26).  There  are  2  exceptions  to  the
recommendation that vaccines should be administered simultaneously. In persons with
anatomic  or  functional  asplenia  and/or  HIV  infection,  quadrivalent  meningococcal
conjugate  vaccine  (MCV4)-D  (MenACWY-D,  Menactra)  and  pneumococcal  conjugate
vaccine (PCV)13 (PCV13, Prevnar 13) should not be administered simultaneously (27).
This is based on immunogenicity studies that showed reduced antibody concentrations
for  3  serotypes  of  pneumococcus  (subtypes  4,  6B,  and  18C)  when  PCV7  was
administered simultaneously with MenACWY-D. For persons with anatomic or functional
asplenia and/or HIV, PCV13 should be administered first and MenACWY-D 4 weeks later.
In patients recommended to receive both PCV13 and PPSV23, the 2 vaccines should not
be administered simultaneously (28). PCV13 should be administered first. If PPSV23 has
been administered first, PCV13 should be administered no earlier than 8 weeks later in
children 6-18 years, and one year later in adults 19 years and older. Immunogenicity
studies  evaluating  responses  to  PCV13  and  PPSV23  administered  in  series  showed  a
better immune response when PCV13 was administered first. An evaluation of immune
response after a second pneumococcal vaccination administered 1 year after the initial
study doses showed that subjects who received PPSV23 as the initial study dose had
lower antibody responses after subsequent administration of PCV13 than those who had
received PCV13 as the initial dose followed by a dose of PPSV23, regardless of the level
of  the  initial  response  to  PPSV23  (29,30).  Depending  on  which  vaccines  are
administered during the first year of life, a child might receive up to 9 injections at the
12-  through  15-month  visit  (MMR,  varicella,  Hib,  PCV13,  pediatric  diphtheria  and
tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis [DTaP], inactivated poliovirus [IPV], hepatitis A,
hepatitis  B  [HepB],  and  influenza  vaccines).  Although  there  is  no  exact  limit  on  the
number  of  injections,  with  a  little  flexibility,  a  provider  can  ensure  that  the  primary
series  doses  are  given  without  administering  too  many  injections  at  each  visit.  To
reduce the number of injections at the 12- through 15-month visit, the hepatitis B series
and 3 doses of IPV (31) can be administered before the child’s first birthday. There are
many other examples of ways the vaccination schedule provides flexibility. The majority
of  children  aged  1  year  who  have  received  2  Hib  vaccine  doses  (polyribosylribitol
phosphate-meningococcal outer membrane protein [PRP-OMP]) or 3 Hib vaccine doses
(PRP-tetanus [PRP-T]) and 3 previous doses of DTaP and PCV13 have protection against
Hib, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, and pneumococcus, which lasts throughout infancy
(2,  32).  The  third  (PRP-OMP)  or  fourth  (PRP-T)  dose  of  the  Hib  series  and  the  fourth
doses of DTaP and PCV13 are critical in boosting antibody titer and ensuring continued
protection (2, 33-35). The fourth dose of DTaP is recommended at age 15-18 months
but may be administered as early as age 12 months if 6 months have elapsed since the
third dose and if there is concern that the child might not return by age 18 months (33).
For infants at low risk for infection with hepatitis B virus (i.e., mother tested negative
for hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg] at the time of delivery and is not in a high risk
group),  the  hepatitis  B  series  can  be  completed  at  any  time  for  children  aged  6-18
months (36). The minimum age for administration of combination vaccines is the oldest
minimum  age  for  any  of  the  individual  components;  the  minimum  interval  between
doses is equal to the greatest minimum interval of any of the individual components.
Recommended  spacing  of  doses  should  be  maintained  (Table  3-2).  Combination
vaccines  merge  equivalent  component  vaccines  into  single  products  to  prevent  more
than one disease or to protect against multiple strains of infectious agents causing the
same disease. Licensed combination vaccines can be used whenever any components
of the combination are indicated and its other components are not contraindicated and
if licensed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for that dose in the series. Use of
combination  vaccines  can  reduce  the  number  of  injections  patients  receive  and
alleviate  concern  associated  with  the  number  of  injections  (29,37,38).  Studies  have
demonstrated  that  parents  and  providers  might  be  uncomfortable  with  multiple
injections  during  single  visits  (39-41).  Potential  advantages  of  combination  vaccines
include  1)  improved  vaccine  coverage  rates  (42),  2)  timely  vaccination  coverage  for
children  who  are  behind  in  the  schedule  (43,  44),  3)  reduced  shipping  and  stocking
costs,  4)  reduced  costs  for  extra  health  care  visits  necessitated  by  deferral  of
vaccination,  and  5)  facilitation  of  additional  new  vaccines  into  vaccination  programs.
Potential  disadvantages  of  combination  vaccines  include  the  following:  1)  adverse
events that might occur more frequently after administration of a combination vaccine
compared with administration of separate antigens at the same visit, such as fever that
occurs  with  the  combination  MMRV  vaccine  and  combination  DTaP-HepB-IPV  vaccine
(45,46);  2)  confusion  and  uncertainty  about  selection  of  vaccine  combinations  and
schedules  for  subsequent  doses,  especially  when  vaccinations  are  given  by  multiple
providers who might be using different products; 3) reduced pathogen coverage if the
combination  product  covers  fewer  types  of  one  particular  vaccine-preventable
disease-causing  agent  (47);  4)  extra  doses  of  certain  antigens  in  the  combination
product (e.g., a provider who administers 4 doses of DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine will give an
extra  dose  of  hepatitis  B  component);  and  5)  a  shorter  shelf-life  than  the  individual
component  vaccines.  The  economic  impact  of  the  use  of  combination  vaccines  is
unclear  because  combination  products  have  the  potential  for  either  increased  or
decreased  costs  compared  with  single-antigen  component  vaccines.  The  price  of  a
combination vaccine might exceed the total price of separate vaccines containing the
same  antigens.  However,  combination  vaccines  might  represent  a  better  overall
economic  value  if  the  direct  and  indirect  costs  of  extra  injections,  delayed  or  missed
vaccinations, and additional handling and storage are taken into consideration (48). In
this report, a combination vaccine is defined as a product containing components that
can  be  divided  equally  into  independently  available  routine  vaccines.  A  dash  (  –  )
between vaccine products indicates that products are supplied in their final form by the
manufacturer  and  do  not  require  mixing  or  reconstitution  by  the  user.  A  slash  (  /  )
indicates  that  the  products  must  be  mixed  or  reconstituted  by  the  user.  Seven
combination vaccines for which separate antigens or antigen combinations exist have
been licensed by FDA since 1996 in the United States (Table 3-3) (49-55). In the future,
combination  vaccines  might  include  increasing  numbers  of  components  in  different
arrays to protect against these and other diseases. The use of a combination vaccine
generally  is  preferred  over  separate  injections  of  the  equivalent  component  vaccines
(56). Considerations should include provider assessment,(c) patient preference, and the
potential for adverse events. An exception is the first dose of MMRV. Unless the parent
or  caregiver  expresses  a  preference  for  MMRV  vaccine,  MMR  and  varicella  vaccine
should  be  administered  for  the  first  dose  for  children  aged  12-47  months  (see
Contraindications and Precautions) (45). Situations might arise in which one component
of a combination vaccine is specifically preferred to another component in that same
vaccine. Future research considerations for newly licensed combination vaccines should
focus on safety of doses that are not needed because a patient is already vaccinated
against  the  agents,  whether  the  combination  vaccine  will  improve  the  timeliness  of
vaccination, and potential reduced costs from disease prevention resulting from timely
vaccination.  Only  combination  vaccines  licensed  by  FDA  should  be  used  (56).
Vaccination providers should not combine separate vaccines into the same syringe to
administer  together  unless  mixing  is  indicated  for  the  patient’s  age  and  is  explicitly
specified  on  the  FDA-approved  product  label  inserts.  Only  2  combination  vaccines,
(DTaP-IPV/Hib vaccine, marketed as Pentacel, and Hib-MenCY, marketed as MenHibrix)
contain separate antigen components for which FDA approves mixing by the user. The
safety,  immunogenicity,  and  effectiveness  of  unlicensed  combinations  are  unknown.
FDA generally licenses a combination vaccine based on studies demonstrating that the
product’s  immunogenicity  (or  efficacy)  and  safety  are  comparable  or  equivalent  to
monovalent  or  combination  products  licensed  previously  (38).  FDA  licensure  also
generally  indicates  that  a  combination  vaccine  may  be  used  interchangeably  with
monovalent  formulations  and  other  combination  products  with  similar  component
antigens  produced  by  the  same  manufacturer  to  continue  the  vaccination  series.  For
example,  DTaP,  DTaP-IPV/Hib,  DTaP-HepB-IPV,  and  future  DTaP  vaccines  that  contain
similar  acellular  pertussis  antigens  from  the  same  manufacturer  may  be  used
interchangeably  if  licensed  and  indicated  for  the  patient’s  age  (35).  Licensure  of  a
vaccine by FDA does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine is interchangeable with
products  from  other  manufacturers.  Such  data  are  ascertained  and  interpreted  more
readily  for  diseases  with  known  correlates  of  protective  immunity  (e.g.,  specific
serologic  markers).  For  diseases  without  such  surrogate  laboratory  markers,
prelicensure  field  vaccine  efficacy  (phase  III)  trials  or  postlicensure  surveillance
generally are required to determine protection (57). ACIP prefers that doses of vaccine
in a series come from the same manufacturer; however, if this is not possible or if the
manufacturer  of  doses  given  previously  is  unknown,  providers  should  administer  the
vaccine that they have available. Although vaccination providers should stock sufficient
quantities  of  combination  and  monovalent  vaccines  needed  to  vaccinate  children,
adolescents, and adults against all diseases for which vaccines are recommended (29,
38),  all  available  types  or  brand-name  products  need  not  be  stocked.  Potential
advantages of stocking a limited number of vaccines include 1) reducing confusion and
potential errors when staff members must handle redundant products and formulations,
2)  minimizing  waste  when  less  commonly  used  products  expire,  3)  decreasing  cold
storage  capacity  requirements,  and  4)  minimizing  administrative  costs  related  to
accounting, purchasing, and handling. The National Pediatric Vaccine Stockpile exists to
offset supply challenges (58). Administering extra antigens contained in a combination
vaccine  should  be  avoided  in  most  situations  (56).  Using  combination  vaccines
containing  certain  antigens  not  indicated  at  the  time  of  administration  to  a  patient
might  be  justified  when  1)  the  extra  antigen  is  not  contraindicated,  2)  products  that
contain only the needed antigens are not readily available, and 3) potential benefits to
the  patient  outweigh  the  potential  risk  for  adverse  events  associated  with  the  extra
antigens. An extra dose of many live-virus vaccines and Hib or hepatitis B vaccine has
not  been  found  to  be  harmful  (59,60).  However,  the  risk  for  an  adverse  event  might
increase when extra doses are administered at an earlier time than the recommended
interval  for  certain  vaccines  (e.g.,  tetanus  toxoid  vaccines  and  PPSV)  (20,  33,  61).  A
vaccination provider might not have vaccines available that contain only the antigens
needed  as  indicated  by  a  child’s  vaccination  history.  Alternatively,  although  the
indicated vaccines might be available, the provider might prefer to use a combination
vaccine  to  reduce  the  required  number  of  injections.  In  such  cases,  the  benefits  and
risks  of  administering  the  combination  vaccine  with  an  unneeded  antigen  should  be
carefully considered and discussed with the patient or parent. When non-live vaccines
(which  are  often  adsorbed  to  aluminum-salt  adjuvants)  are  administered,  the
reactogenicity of the vaccine must be considered in balancing the benefits and risks of
extra  doses  (56).  Because  clinical  experience  suggests  low  reactogenicity,  an  extra
dose  of  Hib  or  hepatitis  B  vaccine  may  be  administered  as  part  of  a  combination
vaccine  to  complete  a  vaccination  series  for  another  component  of  the  combination.
Administration of extra doses of tetanus toxoid vaccines earlier than the recommended
intervals  can  increase  the  risk  for  severe  local  reactions  (21,  34).  Examples  of  such
vaccines  include  DTaP,  DT  (for  children),  and  Td  (for  adolescents  and  adults).  Extra
doses of tetanus-toxoid–containing vaccines might be appropriate for certain patients,
including  for  children  who  previously  received  DT  or  Td  vaccine  and  need  protection
from pertussis (in DTaP or Tdap) or for immigrants with uncertain vaccination histories.
Protein  conjugates  used  in  Hib  conjugate  vaccines  produced  in  the  United  States
include tetanus toxoid (in PRP-T) which is also used as a component of DTaP and Tdap
vaccines
 (21).
 Simultaneous
 or
 sequential
 vaccination
 with
 Hib
 and
 these
tetanus-toxoid  containing  vaccines  is  recommended  when  both  are  indicated  (56).
MCV4  and  PCV13  both  contain  diphtheria-toxoid  conjugates.  There  has  been  concern
about simultaneous administration of vaccines containing like conjugates. One brand of
MCV4, MenACWY-D (Menactra), demonstrates reduced immunogenicity of the antibody
response  to  Streptococcal  pneumonia  strains  when  administered  simultaneously  with
PCV13  compared  with  separate  administration.  It  is  recommended  to  space  these
vaccines  by  28  days  in  a  person  with  anatomic  asplenia  (47).  Simultaneous  or
sequential vaccination of MCV4-CRM (Menveo), PCV13, and Tdap (34, 62), all of which
contain diphtheria toxoid, is not associated with reduced immunogenicity or increase in
local adverse events. Top of Page  There is no evidence that non-live vaccines interfere
with the immune response to other non-live vaccines or to live vaccines. Any non-live
vaccine  can  be  administered  either  simultaneously  or  at  any  time  before  or  after  a
different non-live vaccine or live vaccine (Table 3-4). The 2 exceptions, as mentioned
above,  are  a  4-week  interval  between  PCV13  and  MenACWY-D  in  a  person  with
anatomic  asplenia  and  the  separation  of  doses  between  PCV13  and  PPSV23  (6-12
months  recommended  for  non-high  risk,  8  week  minimum)  if  PCV13  is  given  first,  8
weeks  in  children  6-18  years,  and  1  year  minimum  in  adults  19  years  and  older  if
PPSV23  is  given  first  (27).  Limited  data  are  available  regarding  interference  between
live vaccines used in the United States. The immune response to one live-virus vaccine
might be impaired if administered within 28 days (i.e., 4 weeks) of another live-virus
vaccine (63,64). In a study conducted in 2 U.S. health maintenance organizations, the
risk for varicella vaccine failure (i.e., varicella disease in a vaccinated person) among
persons  who  received  varicella  vaccine  within  28  days  of  MMR  vaccination  was
threefold  higher  than  among  persons  who  received  varicella  vaccine  >28  days  after
MMR  vaccination  (65).  Another  study  determined  that  the  response  to  yellow  fever
vaccine is not affected by monovalent measles vaccine administered 1-27 days earlier
(23).  The  effect  of  nonsimultaneous  administration  of  rubella,  mumps,  varicella,  and
yellow fever vaccines is unknown. Two or more injectable or nasally administered live
vaccines not administered on the same day should be separated by at least 4 weeks
(Table  3-4),  to  minimize  the  potential  risk  for  interference.  If  2  such  vaccines  are
separated by <4 weeks, the second vaccine administered should not be counted and
the  dose  should  be  repeated  at  least  4  weeks  later.  On  the  day  a  live  injectable  or
intranasal vaccine will be administered, providers should ensure that no live injectable
or  intranasal  vaccine  was  given  in  the  previous  28  days.  The  4-day  grace  period
discussed earlier, which may be used to shorten the minimum interval between doses
of the same vaccine, should not be applied to this 4-week interval between 2 different
live  vaccines  (56).  Confusion  about  this  prohibition  may  arise  when  2  live  vaccines
whose intervals are identical are administered simultaneously. For example, if MMR and
varicella vaccines are administered on the same day, the second dose of each vaccine
could come due 4 weeks later (depending on the patient’s age). If either vaccine had
been given alone at both time points, the 4-day grace period could be applied to the
second dose. But in this situation the live vaccine rule prevents the grace period from
being applied to the second dose of either vaccine, because Varicella-2, if administered
earlier than 4 weeks, could potentially be affected by MMR1, and likewise MMR2 could
be  affected  by  Varicella-1.  Note  that  this  prohibition  also  applies  if  the  combination
MMRV  is  used  rather  than  individual  MMR  and  varicella  vaccines.  The  oral  vaccines
Ty21a typhoid vaccine and rotavirus can be administered simultaneously with or at any
interval  before  or  after  other  live  vaccines  (injectable  or  intranasal)  if  indicated  (66).
Top  of  Page   Ty21a  typhoid,  yellow  fever,  LAIV,  and  rotavirus  vaccines  may  be
administered  at  any  time  before,  concurrent  with,  or  after  administration  of  any
antibody-containing  preparation  such  as  immune  globulin,  hyperimmune  globulin,  or
intravenous  immune  globulin  (IGIV)  (67).  Blood  (e.g.,  whole  blood,  packed  red  blood
cells, and plasma) and other antibody-containing blood products (e.g., immune globulin,
hyperimmune  globulin,  and  IGIV)  can  inhibit  the  immune  response  to  measles  and
rubella vaccines for ≥3 months. The effect of blood and immune globulin preparations
on  the  response  to  mumps  and  varicella  vaccines  is  unknown;  however,  commercial
immune  globulin  preparations  contain  antibodies  to  these  viruses.  Blood  products
available in the United States are unlikely to contain a substantial amount of antibody
to  yellow  fever  virus.  The  length  of  time  that  interference  with  injectable  live-virus
vaccine (other than yellow fever) can persist after the antibody-containing product is a
function  of  the  amount  of  antigen-specific  antibody  contained  in  the  product  (68,70).
Therefore,  after  an  antibody-containing  product  is  received,  live  vaccines  (other  than
Ty21a typhoid, yellow fever, LAIV, and rotavirus vaccines) should be delayed until the
passive antibody has degraded (Table 3-5). In circumstances where there is high-risk of
vaccine-preventable  disease  it  is  acceptable  to  administer  a  dose  of  vaccine  prior  to
completion of this interval. If a dose of injectable live-virus vaccine (other than yellow
fever)  is  administered  after  an  antibody-containing  product  but  at  an  interval  shorter
than  recommended  in  this  report,  the  vaccine  dose  should  be  repeated.  The  repeat
dose  should  be  administered  at  the  interval  indicated  for  the  antibody-containing
product,  after  the  invalid  dose  of  vaccine  (Table  3-6).  Immunogenicity  and  safety  of
dengue  vaccine  after  administration  of  intravenous  immunoglobulin  (IGIV)  and  other
immunoglobulin  containing  products  has  not  been  studied.  Clinicians  considering
dengue  vaccine  for  persons  who  recently  received  blood  products  (including  IGIV)  or
other  immunoglobulin  containing  products  should  delay  pre-vaccination  testing  and
administration of vaccine doses by 12 months. Although passively acquired antibodies
can interfere with the response to rubella vaccine, the low dose of anti-Rho(D) globulin
or  any  other  blood  product  administered  to  postpartum  women  have  not  been
demonstrated  to  reduce  the  response  to  the  RA27/3  strain  rubella  vaccine  (71).
Congenital rubella syndrome and congenital varicella are conditions with considerable
morbidity and represent a true risk in future pregnancies. Because of the importance of
rubella  and  varicella  immunity  among  women  of  child-bearing  age  (4,  72),  the
postpartum vaccination of women without evidence of immunity to rubella or varicella
with  MMR,  varicella,  or  MMRV  vaccines  should  not  be  delayed  because  of  receipt  of
anti-Rho(D) globulin or any other blood product during the last trimester of pregnancy
or at delivery. Any reduction in immunity caused by anti-Rho(D) globulin or other blood
products is outweighed by the opportunity to generate immunity. These women should
be vaccinated immediately after giving birth and, if possible, tested ≥3 months later to
ensure  immunity  to  rubella  and,  if  appropriate,  to  measles  (2).  Measles  and  rubella
serologies  have  a  low  false-positive  rate  and  are  therefore  acceptable  for  use  in  this
limited  postpartum  context.  Interference  might  occur  if  administration  of  an
antibody-containing  product  becomes  necessary  after  administration  of  MMR  or
varicella vaccines. Usually, vaccine virus replication and stimulation of immunity occurs
1-2  weeks  after  vaccination.  If  the  interval  between  administration  of  any  of  these
vaccines and subsequent administration of an antibody-containing product is <14 days,
vaccination  should  be  repeated  after  the  recommended  interval  (Tables  3-5  and  3-6)
unless  serologic  testing  indicates  a  protective  antibody  response  (7).  A  humanized
mouse  monoclonal  antibody  product  (palivizumab)  is  available  as  prophylaxis  for
serious  lower  respiratory  tract  disease  from  respiratory  syncytial  virus  among  infants
and young children. This product contains only antibody to respiratory syncytial virus
and does not interfere with the immune response to licensed live or non-live vaccines.
Antibody-containing  products  interact  less  with  non-live  vaccines  compared  with  live
vaccines (73). Therefore, administering non-live vaccines either simultaneously with or
at  any  interval  before  or  after  receipt  of  an  antibody-containing  product  should  not
substantially  impair  development  of  a  protective  antibody  response  (Table  3-5).  The
vaccine  or  toxoid  and  antibody  preparation  should  be  administered  at  different  sites
using  the  standard  recommended  dose.  Top  of  Page   Certain  vaccines  that  provide
protection  from  the  same  diseases  are  available  from  different  manufacturers,  and
these vaccines usually are not identical in antigen content or in amount or method of
formulation.  Manufacturers  use  different  production  processes,  and  their  products
might  contain  different  concentrations  of  antigen  per  dose  or  a  different  stabilizer  or
preservative.  Available  data  indicate  that  infants  who  receive  sequential  doses  of
different  Hib  conjugate,  hepatitis  B,  and  hepatitis  A  vaccines  produce  a  satisfactory
antibody response after a complete primary series (74-77). All brands of Hib conjugate,
hepatitis  B,(d)  hepatitis  A,  rotavirus,(e)  and  quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate
vaccines  are  interchangeable  within  their  respective  series.  If  different  brands  of  a
particular vaccine require a different number of doses for series completion (e.g., Hib
and rotavirus vaccines) and a provider mixes brands in the primary series, the higher
number of doses is recommended for series completion (e.g., doses of either rotavirus
or Hib vaccine). For Hib vaccines, any monovalent or combination conjugate vaccine is
acceptable  for  the  booster  dose  of  the  series,  if  only  one  product  was  used  for  the
primary series (56). Limited data are available about the safety, immunogenicity, and
efficacy of using acellular pertussis (i.e., DTaP) vaccines from different manufacturers
for successive doses of the pertussis series. Data from one study indicate that for the
first  3  doses  of  the  DTaP  series,  1-2  doses  of  Tripedia  (Sanofi  Pasteur)  followed  by
Infanrix (GlaxoSmithKline) for the remaining dose (or doses) is comparable to 3 doses of
Tripedia  with  regard  to  immunogenicity,  as  measured  by  antibodies  to  diphtheria,
tetanus,  and  pertussis  toxoids,  and  filamentous  hemagglutinin  (78).  However,  in  the
absence of a clear serologic correlate of protection for pertussis, the relevance of these
immunogenicity  data  for  protection  against  pertussis  is  unknown.  When  feasible,  the
same brand of DTaP vaccine should be used for all doses of the vaccination series (56).
If  vaccination  providers  do  not  know  or  have  available  the  type  of  DTaP  vaccine
previously  administered  to  a  child,  any  DTaP  vaccine  may  be  used  to  continue  or
complete  the  series  (56).  For  a  child  who  needs  2  doses  of  influenza  vaccine  (IIV  or
LAIV), it is preferable to use the same type of vaccine for both doses. However, if the
child is eligible for either IIV or LAIV, and the type of vaccine used for the first dose is
not available, either vaccine can be used for the second dose (56). In a postlicensure
study, meningococcal conjugate vaccines from different manufacturers were evaluated
for  successive  doses  of  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine.  Persistence  of  antibodies
were studied in recipients of MCV4-CRM after previous receipt of either MCV4-CRM or
MenACWY-D.  The  percentage  of  persons  with  protective  titers  were  the  same  for  all
serogroups.  No  data  exist  on  the  use  of  MenACWY-D  after  MCV4-CRM.  Health-care
providers should use every opportunity to provide a dose when indicated, regardless of
the  vaccine  brand  used  for  the  previous  dose  or  doses.  For  vaccines  in  general,
vaccination should not be deferred because the brand used for previous doses is not
available or is unknown (29, 79).   Vaccination providers should administer vaccines as
close to the recommended intervals as possible. However, intervals between doses that
are  longer  than  recommended  typically  do  not  reduce  final  antibody  concentrations,
although protection might not be attained until the recommended number of doses has
been administered. With some exceptions (e.g. oral typhoid vaccine) an interruption in
the vaccination schedule does not require restarting the entire series of a vaccine or
toxoid  or  addition  of  extra  doses  (7).  Top  of  Page   Vaccination  providers  frequently
encounter persons who do not have adequate documentation of vaccinations. With the
exception of influenza vaccine and PPSV23, providers should only accept written, dated
records as evidence of vaccination; self-reported doses of influenza vaccine and PPSV23
are  acceptable  (61,80).  The  rationale  for  acceptance  for  influenza  vaccine  is  that  the
time  period  of  recall  is  one  year  or  less,  making  it  very  likely  that  correct  recall  will
occur. The rationale for acceptance for PPSV23 is high frequency of vaccination leads to
an increased rate of local reactions due to the reactogenicity of this vaccine. Although
vaccinations should not be postponed if records cannot be found, an attempt to locate
missing  records  should  be  made  by  contacting  previous  health  care  providers,
reviewing  state  or  local  IISs,  and  searching  for  a  personally  held  record.  If  records
cannot  be  located  within  a  reasonable  time,  these  persons  should  be  considered
susceptible  and  started  on  the  age-appropriate  vaccination  schedule.  While  serology
should generally NOT be performed to ascertain evidence of immunity, serologic testing
for immunity is an alternative to vaccination for certain antigens (e.g., measles, rubella,
hepatitis A, and tetanus). However, commercial serologic testing might not always be
sufficiently  sensitive  or  standardized  for  detection  of  vaccine-induced  immunity  (with
the  exception  of  hepatitis  B  vaccination  at  1-2  months  after  the  final  dose),  and
research  laboratory  testing  might  not  be  readily  available.  An  exception  to  the
prohibition on serologic testing is dengue.  Laboratory testing to ascertain immunity to
dengue (of which serology is one option) must be performed prior to vaccination, and
only  those  individuals  who  are  positive  should  be  vaccinated.  (a)  During  measles
outbreaks, if cases are occurring among infants aged <12 months, measles vaccination
of infants as young as 6 months can be used as an outbreak control measure. However,
doses  administered  at  ages  <12  months  should  not  be  counted  as  part  of  the  series
(81). (b) In certain situations, local or state requirements might mandate that doses of
selected vaccines be administered on or after specific ages. For example, a school entry
requirement might not accept a dose of MMR or varicella vaccine administered before
the  child’s  first  birthday.  ACIP  recommends  that  physicians  and  other  health-care
providers  comply  with  local  or  state  vaccination  requirements  when  scheduling  and
administering  vaccines.  (c)  Provider  assessment  should  include  number  of  injections,
vaccine  availability,  likelihood  of  improved  coverage,  likelihood  of  patient  return,  and
storage and cost considerations. (d) The exception is the 2-dose hepatitis B vaccination
series for adolescents aged 11-15 years. Only Recombivax HB (Merck Vaccine Division)
should be used in the schedule. Engerix-B (GlaxoSmithKline) is not approved by FDA for
this schedule. (e)Based on expert opinion. Top of Page (*) Oral adenovirus vaccine is
used  primarily  in  the  military  for  prevention  of  adenovirus  infection.  It  should  not  be
confused  with  Janssen  COVID-19  vaccine  which  is  used  for  the  prevention  of
SARS-CoV-2  infection.  (†)   The  tetanus-toxoid  components  of  these  vaccines  are
toxoids,  not  vaccines.  (§)  These  vaccines  do  not  replicate  and  therefore  behave  like
non-live  vaccines.  Top  of  Page  Known  as  the  “grace  period”,  vaccine  doses
administered  ≤4  days  before  the  minimum  interval  or  age  are  considered  valid;
however,  local  or  state  mandates  might  supersede  this  4-day  guideline.  “3  calendar
months” (or fewer) can be converted into weeks per the formula “1 month = 4 weeks”
Abbreviations: DEN4CYD = dengue vaccine; DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and
acellular  pertussis;  HepA  =  hepatitis  A;  HepB  =  hepatitis  B;  Hib  =  Haemophilus
influenzae  type  b;  HPV  =  human  papillomavirus;  IPV  =  inactivated  poliovirus;  LAIV  =
live, attenuated influenza vaccine; MenACWY = quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate
vaccine; MenB = serogroup B meningococcal vaccine; MenB-4C = Bexsero; MenB-FHbp
= Trumenba; MMR = measles, mumps, and rubella; MMRV
=  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella;  MPSV4  =  quadrivalent  meningococcal
polysaccharide  vaccine;  PCV13  =  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine;  PPSV23=
pneumococcal
 polysaccharide
 vaccine;
 PRP-OMP
 =
 polyribosylribitol
phosphate-meningococcal  outer  membrane  protein  conjugate;  RZV  =  recombinant
zoster  vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis. (a) Combination vaccines are available. Use
of licensed combination vaccines is generally preferred to separate injections of their
equivalent  component  vaccines.  When  administering  combination  vaccines,  the
minimum age for administration is the oldest age for any of the individual components.
The  minimum  interval  between  doses  is  equal  to  the  greatest  interval  of  any  of  the
individual components. (b) Information on travel vaccines, including typhoid, Japanese
encephalitis,  and  yellow  fever.  Information  on  other  vaccines  that  are  licensed  in  the
United States but not distributed, including anthrax and smallpox. (c) “Months” refers
to  calendar  months.  (d)  Within  a  number  range,  a  hyphen  (-)  should  be  read  as
“through.” (e) Combination vaccines containing the hepatitis B component are available
(see Table 3-3). These vaccines should not be administered to infants aged <6 weeks
because  of  the  other  vaccine  components  (i.e.,  Hib,  DTaP,  HepA,  and  IPV).  (f)  The
minimum recommended age for DTaP-4 is 15 months, with a recommended 6 months
from  DTaP-3  (the  recommended  interval  between  DTaP-3  and  DTaP-4  is  6  months).
However,  DTaP4  need  not  be  repeated  if  given  on  or  after  12  months  of  age  and  at
least  4  months  after  DTaP-3.  The  4-day  grace  period  can  be  applied  when  validating
past  doses  and  can  be  applied  to  the  minimum  age  of  12  months  and  the  minimum
interval of 4 months between DTaP-3 and DTaP-4. The 4-day grace period can be used
when planning doses ahead of time, but should be applied to the minimum age of 15
months  and  the  minimum  interval  between  DTaP-3  and  DTaP-4  of  6  months.  (g)  If  a
fourth dose of DTaP is given on or after the fourth birthday, a fifth dose is not needed if
the interval between the third dose and fourth dose is at least 6 months. (h) Adjuvanted
Hepatitis B vaccine (HepB-CgG) can be administered to adults 18 years old and older on
a two dose schedule, the first and second dose separated by 4 weeks. (i) HepB-3 should
be administered at least 8 weeks after HepB-2 and at least 16 weeks after HepB-1 and
should  not  be  administered  before  age  24  weeks.  (j)  For  Hib  and  PCV13,  children
receiving the first dose of vaccine at age ≥7 months require fewer doses to complete
the  series.  (k)  If  PRP-OMP  (Pedvax-Hib,  Merck  Vaccine  Division)  was  administered  at
ages 2 and 4 months, a dose at age 6 months is not necessary. The final dose has a
minimum age of 12 months. (l) A two-dose schedule of HPV vaccine is recommended
for  most  persons  beginning  the  series  between  9  through  14  years  of  age.  See  HPV
vaccine-specific
 recommendations
 for
 details.
 
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/pdfs/mm6549a5.pdf  [4  pages].  (m)  If  a  patient  is
eligible for a 2-dose HPV series, and the second dose is given less than four weeks after
the first dose, it is an invalid dose. Administer another dose 6-12 months after the first
dose. If the second dose is given less than five months after the first dose, but more
than four weeks after the first dose, the next dose should be administered at least 12
weeks after the second dose, and at least 6-12 months after the first dose. The 4-day
grace  period  may  be  used.  If  the  third  dose  was  administered  before  December  16,
2016, and was administered 12 weeks after the 2nd dose, and 16 weeks after the first
dose,  it  is  a  valid  dose.  The  4-day  grace  period  may  be  used.  If  the  third  dose  was
administered on or after December 16, 2016, and was administered 12 weeks after the
2nd dose and 5 months after the first dose, it is a valid dose. The 4-day grace period
may be used. (n) The minimum age for HPV-3 is based on the baseline minimum age
for the first dose (i.e., 9 years) and the minimum interval of 5 months between the first
and third dose. If the third dose was administered before December 16, 2016, and was
administered  12  weeks  after  the  2nd  dose,  and  16  weeks  after  the  first  dose,  it  is  a
valid dose. The 4-day grace period may be used. If the third dose was administered on
or after December 16, 2016, and was administered 12 weeks after the 2nd dose and 5
months after the first dose, it is a valid dose. The 4-day grace period may be used. (o)
One  dose  of  influenza  vaccine  per  season  is  recommended  for  most  persons.  To
determine  which  children  younger  than  9  years  should  receive  2  doses  in  a  single
season, please see influenza vaccine-specific recommendations (82). If a dose of LAIV is
administered to a child 6 months to 2 years of age in error, the dose does not need to
be repeated. (p) The minimum age for inactivated influenza vaccine varies by vaccine
manufacturer. See package insert for vaccine-specific minimum ages. (q) A fourth dose
is  not  needed  if  the  third  dose  was  administered  at  ≥4  years  and  at  least  6  months
after the previous dose. (r) If a dose of LAIV is administered to someone 6 months to 2
years of age, the dose does NOT need to be repeated. If someone is still indicated for
dose 2 of the prime-boost, and younger than 2 years of age, the second dose should be
IIV.  (s)  Revaccination  with  meningococcal  vaccine  is  recommended  for  previously
vaccinated  persons  who  remain  at  high  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  (47).  (t)
MenACWY-D  (Menactra)  can  be  given  as  young  as  9  months  for  high-risk  persons.
MenACWY-CRM  (Menveo)  can  be  given  as  young  as  2  months  for  high-risk  persons.
Hib-MenCY can be given as young as 6 weeks for high-risk persons. Hib-MenCY is given
as a 4-dose series at 2 months, 4 months, 6 months and 12-18 months. MenACWY-TT
(MenQuadfi)  can  be  given  as  young  as  2  years  for  high-risk  persons.  (u)  For  routine
non-high  risk  adolescent  vaccination,  the  minimum  age  for  the  booster  dose  is  16
years.  (v)  This  dose  is  not  necessary  if  Bexsero  is  correctly  administered,  or  if
Trumenba  is  correctly  administered  to  healthy  adolescents.  (w)  Combination  MMRV
vaccine  can  be  used  for  children  aged  12  months-12  years.  See  text  for  details.  (x)
Infants and children can optionally receive PCV15 instead of PCV13. High-risk adults 19
years through 64 years who are known to have not received any pneumococcal vaccine
or whose PCV13 history is unknown should receive either PCV20 or PCV15. Adults 65
years old and older who are known to have not received any pneumococcal vaccine or
whose  PCV13  history  is  unknown  should  receive  either  PCV20  or  PCV15.  If  PCV15  is
administered  and  if  PPSV23  naïve,  a  dose  of  PPSV23  should  be  administered  a  year
later. On the basis of shared clinical decision-making, adults 65 years old and older who
have received a complete series of pneumococcal vaccine can receive a dose of PCV20
at  least  five  years  after  the  most  recent  dose.  For  adults  who  have  started  the
recommended  pneumococcal  vaccine  series  with  PCV13  but  have  not  received  all
recommended doses, look at ACIP Vaccine Recommendations and Schedules for details.
(y) A second dose of PPSV23 5 years after the first dose is recommended for persons
aged ≤65 years at highest risk for serious pneumococcal infection and those who are
likely to have a rapid decline in pneumococcal antibody concentration. (61). (z) The first
dose of rotavirus must be administered at age 6 weeks through 14 weeks and 6 days.
The vaccine series should not be started for infants aged ≥15 weeks, 0 days. Rotavirus
should not be administered to children older than 8 months, 0 days of age regardless of
the number of doses received between 6 weeks and 8 months, 0 days of age. If 2 doses
of  Rotarix  (GlaxoSmithKline)  are  administered  as  age  appropriate,  a  third  dose  is  not
necessary.  (aa)  Only  1  dose  of  Tdap  is  recommended.  Subsequent  doses  should  be
given as Td or Tdap. For management of a tetanus-prone wound in persons who have
received  a  primary  series  of  tetanus-toxoid–containing  vaccine,  the  minimum  interval
after a previous dose of any tetanus-containing vaccine is 5 years. (bb) A special grace
period of 2 months, based on expert opinion, can be applied to the minimum interval of
3  months,  when  evaluating  records  retrospectively,  which  results  in  an  acceptable
minimum interval of 4 weeks. An additional 4 days should not be added on to this grace
period. (cc) A special grace period of 2 months, based on expert opinion, can be applied
to  the  minimum  age  of  15  months  when  evaluating  records  retrospectively,  which
results in an acceptable minimum age of 13 months. An additional 4 days should not be
added  on  to  this  grace  period.  (dd)  If  a  1st  dose  of  recombinant  zoster  vaccine  is
administered to someone 18 – 49 years of age, the dose does not need to be repeated.
A  4  day  grace  period  can  be  added  to  the  absolute  minimum  age  of  18  years  when
evaluating  records  retrospectively.  Top  of  Page  Abbreviations:  DT  =  diphtheria  and
tetanus toxoids; DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis; FDA =
Food  and  Drug  Administration;  HepA  =  hepatitis  A;  HepB  =  hepatitis  B;  Hib  =
Haemophilus influenzae type b; IPV = inactivated poliovirus; MMR = measles, mumps,
and  rubella;  MMRV  =  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella;  Td  =  tetanus  and
diphtheria  toxoids;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular
pertussis.  Source:  (82).  (a)  Although  MMR,  DTaP,  DT,  Td,  and  Tdap  are  combination
vaccines, they are not included on this list because they are not available in the United
States as single-antigen products. (b) In descriptions of combination vaccines, dash (-)
indicates products in which the active components are supplied in their final (combined)
form  by  the  manufacturer;  slash  (  /  )  indicates  products  in  which  active  components
must be mixed by the user. (c) Hib-MenCY can be used for routine dosing of Hib vaccine
but  is  recommended  only  for  meningococcal  vaccination  in  persons  at  high-risk  of
meningococcal disease. Top of Page Source: (83). (a) Certain experts suggest a 28-day
interval  between  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis
(Tdap)  vaccine  and  tetravalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  if  they  are  not
administered  simultaneously.  (b)  In  persons  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia,
MCV-D and PCV13 should not be administered simultaneously and should be spaced by
4  weeks.  Likewise  for  persons  with  immunosuppressive  high-risk  conditions  indicated
for  PCV13  and  PPSV23,  PCV13  should  be  administered  first,  and  PPSV23  should  be
administered no earlier than 8 weeks later. For persons 65 years old or older indicated
for  PCV13  and  PPSV23,  PCV13  should  be  administered  first  and  PPSV23  should  be
administered  6-12  months  later.  For  persons  with  high-risk  conditions  indicated  for
PCV15  and  PPSV23,  the  interval  between  PCV15  and  PPSV23  should  be  one  year,  for
those with immunosuppressive high-risk conditions the interval may be shortened to 8
weeks. (c) For providers who wish to use Menactra in patients indicated for DTaP, the
two  vaccines  should  be  administered  simultaneously.  If  they  cannot  be  administered
simultaneously, administer Menactra first, and then administer DTaP 6 months later. (d)
The  live  oral  vaccines  Ty21a  typhoid  vaccine  and  rotavirus  vaccine  may  be
administered  simultaneously  with  or  at  any  interval  before  or  after  non-live  or  live
injectable vaccines. Top of Page (a) Blood products containing substantial amounts of
immune  globulin  include  intramuscular,  subcutaneous,  and  intravenous  immune
globulin,  specific  hyperimmune  globulin  (e.g.,  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin,  tetanus
immune globulin, varicella zoster immune globulin, and rabies immune globulin), whole
blood, packed red blood cells, plasma, and platelet products. (b) Yellow fever vaccine;
rotavirus  vaccine;  oral  Ty21a  typhoid  vaccine;  and  live,  attenuated  influenza  vaccine
are  exceptions  to  these  recommendations.  These  live,  attenuated  vaccines  can  be
administered at any time before or after or simultaneously with an antibody-containing
product.  (c)  The  duration  of  interference  of  antibody-containing  products  with  the
immune  response  to  the  measles  component  of  measles-containing  vaccine,  and
possibly varicella vaccine, is dose related (see Table 3-6). Top of Page Abbreviations:
HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; IG = immune globulin; IgG = immune globulin G;
IGIV = intravenous immune globulin; mg IgG/kg = milligrams of immune globulin G per
kilogram of body weight; IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; RBCs = red blood cells.
(a) This table is not intended for determining the correct indications and dosages for
using antibody-containing products. Unvaccinated persons might not be protected fully
against measles during the entire recommended interval, and additional doses of IG or
measles vaccine might be indicated after measles exposure. Concentrations of measles
antibody  in  an  IG  preparation  can  vary  by  manufacturer’s  lot.  Rates  of  antibody
clearance  after  receipt  of  an  IG  preparation  also  might  vary.  Recommended  intervals
are extrapolated from an estimated half-life of 30 days for passively acquired antibody
and  an  observed  interference  with  the  immune  response  to  measles  vaccine  for  5
months  after  a  dose  of  80  mg  IgG/kg.  Sources:  Mason  W,  Takahashi  M,  Schneider  T.
Persisting  passively  acquired  measles  antibody  following  gamma  globulin  therapy  for
Kawasaki  disease  and  response  to  live  virus  vaccination  [Abstract  311].  Presented  at
the  32  meeting  of  the  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and
Chemotherapy,  Los  Angeles,  California,  October,  1992,  AND  Siber  GR,  Werner  BG,
Halsey  NA,  et  al.  Interference  of  immune  globulin  with  measles  and  rubella
immunization.  J  Pediatr.  1993;122(2):204-211.  DOI:  10.1016/S0022-3476(06)80114-9,
AND  Mason  WH,  Schneider  TL,  Takahashi  M.  Duration  of  passively  acquired  measles
antibody  and  response  to  live  virus  vaccination  allowing  gamma  globulin  therapy  for
Kawasaki
 syndrome.
 Prog
 Pediatr
 Cardiol.
 1992;1(1):82.
 DOI:
10.1016/S1058-9813(06)80067-6.  The  extrapolation  is  performed  by  counting  months
from 80 mg down to (1-3 mg) (e.g. 80 >>> 40 >> >20 >> >10 >>> 5>>>2.5….equal
to  FIVE  intervals)  and  adding  a  grace  month,  so  80  mg  values  take  a  “6  month”
interval).  (b)  Does  not  include  recombinant  zoster  vaccine,  since  this  vaccine  is
non-live.  (c)  The  interval  between  blood/passive  antibody  products  and  testing  for
history  of  dengue  infection  (which  is  mandatory  prior  to  administration  of  dengue
vaccine) should be 12 months (d) Assumes a serum IgG concentration of 16 mg/mL. (e)
The  reason  the  interval  is  6  months  (and  not  4  months)  is  that  the  quantity  of  16.5
IgG/kg does not reflect the upper ceiling of the quantity of measles IgG in the product.
(f)  Measles  vaccination  is  recommended  for  children  with  mild  or  moderate
immunosuppression from HIV infection, and varicella vaccination may be considered for
children  with  mild  or  moderate  immunosuppression  from  HIV  infection,  but  both  are
contraindicated  for  persons  with  severe  immunosuppression  from  HIV  or  any  other
immunosuppressive disorder. (g) Contains antibody only to respiratory syncytial virus.
Top of Page Top of Page To receive email updates about this page, enter your email
address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/timing.html
