Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for  Immunization  Printer
friendly version [25 pages] Major revisions to this section of the best practices guidance
include  the  timing  of  intramuscular  administration  and  the  timing  of  clotting  factor
deficiency replacement.   With a few exceptions, use of an antimicrobial agent does not
interfere with the effectiveness of vaccination. Antibacterial agents have no effect on
non-live vaccines. They also have no effect on response to live, attenuated vaccines,
except live oral Ty21a typhoid vaccine and BCG vaccines. Ty21a typhoid vaccine should
not be administered to persons receiving antimicrobial agents until 72 hours after the
last  dose  of  antimicrobial  (1).  If  feasible,  to  avoid  a  possible  reduction  in  vaccine
effectiveness, antibacterial drugs should not be started or resumed until 1 week after
the last dose of Ty21a. Antimicrobial or immunosuppressive agents may interfere with
the  immune  response  to  BCG  and  should  only  be  used  under  medical  supervision
(additional information [16 pages]). Antiviral drugs used for treatment or prophylaxis of
influenza  virus  infections  have  no  effect  on  the  response  to  inactivated  influenza
vaccine  (2).  However,  live,  attenuated  influenza  vaccine  should  not  be  administered
until  48  hours  after  cessation  of  therapy  with  antiviral  influenza  drugs.  If  feasible,  to
avoid  possible  reduction  in  vaccine  effectiveness,  antiviral  medication  should  not  be
administered for 14 days after LAIV administration (2). If influenza antiviral medications
are administered within 2 weeks after receipt of LAIV, the LAIV dose should be repeated
48 or more hours after the last dose of zanamivir or oseltamivir. The LAIV dose should
be repeated 5 days after peramivir and 17 days after baloxavir. Alternatively, persons
receiving antiviral drugs within the period 2 days before to 14 days after vaccination
with LAIV may be revaccinated with another approved vaccine formulation (e.g., IIV or
recombinant  influenza  vaccine).  Antiviral  drugs  active  against  herpesviruses  (e.g.,
acyclovir  or  valacyclovir)  might  reduce  the  efficacy  of  vaccines  containing  live,
attenuated varicella zoster virus (i.e., Varivax and ProQuad) (3,4). These drugs should
be  discontinued  at  least  24  hours  before  administration,  if  possible.  If  clinically
appropriate, delay use or resumption of antiviral therapy for 14 days after vaccination.
No data exist to suggest that commonly used antiviral drugs have an effect on rotavirus
vaccine or MMR. Top of Page  Measles illness, severe acute or chronic infections, HIV
infection, and malnutrition can create a relatively anergic state during which the TST
might have a false-negative reaction (5-7). Although live, attenuated measles vaccine
theoretically can suppress TST reactivity, the degree of suppression is likely less than
that occurring from acute infection from wild-type measles virus. Screening children for
tuberculosis  exposure  is  accomplished  by  medical  history  rather  than  TST  testing;
universal  TST  screening  of  all  children  is  no  longer  recommended,  though  TST
screening  is  sometimes  indicated  (e.g.,  for  persons  at  increased  risk  for  tuberculosis
exposure based on medical history, or for employees for occupational health reasons).
In a general screening situation, a provider may find that: both TST and live vaccine are
recommended; live vaccine is recommended, and TST has already been administered
more than one day previous; or TST is indicated, and the live vaccine has already been
administered  more  than  one  day  previous.  TST  may  be  administered  simultaneously
with  live  vaccines,  and  this  is  the  preferred  scenario.  If  live  vaccine  is  indicated,  and
TST  has  been  administered  more  than  one  day  previous,  the  live  vaccine  can  be
administered at any interval after the TST. If TST is recommended, and the live vaccine
has already been administered more than one day previous, providers should ensure a
28 day interval, in other words defer the TST for 28 days after vaccination. A delay in
performing the TST removes the concern of any theoretical transient suppression of TST
reactivity. Some providers choose to perform TST screening and then delay the vaccine
until the patient returns to have the TST read. This option is less favored compared with
simultaneous TST/live vaccination, because it delays receipt of the measles-containing
vaccine. While the above rationale is based on measles suppression of TST response,
because of similar concerns about smallpox vaccine and TST suppression, a TST should
not be performed until 4 weeks after smallpox vaccination (8).No data exist regarding
the  potential  degree  of  TST  suppression  that  might  be  associated  with  other  live,
attenuated virus vaccines (e.g., varicella or yellow fever). However, in the absence of
data,  following  guidelines  for  measles-containing  vaccine  when  scheduling  TST
screening  and  administering  other  live,  attenuated  virus  vaccines  is  prudent.  If  the
opportunity  to  vaccinate  might  be  missed,  vaccination  should  not  be  delayed  only
because  of  these  theoretical  considerations.  TST  can  be  repeated  4  weeks  after
vaccination  if  it  is  negative  and  concern  for  TB  infection  persists.  Interferon  gamma
release assays (IGRAs), such as the QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-Tube test and the T-Spot
TB test, are blood-test alternatives to the TST for detecting Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection.  The IGRA requires only a single visit to complete and may be less effected by
previous  BCG  vaccination  (9).  The  same  timing  guidelines  that  apply  to  the  interval
between a live vaccine and TST apply to IGRA (i.e., 28 days between live vaccine and
IGRA  if  they  do  not  occur  on  the  same  day),  because  IGRA  (like  TST)  might  be
suppressed  through  immunologic  mechanisms.  The  potential  for  a  previous  TST  to
cause  boosting  of  future  TST  results  should  be  considered  in  adults  who  have  a
negative initial TST (9). Two-step testing, in which TST is repeated in a short time frame
(e.g., 1 to 3 weeks) after an initial negative TST, can illicit boosting and identify persons
whose  immune  response  may  have  waned  with  time  since  infection  or  BCG
vaccination.   For  people  undergoing  serial  screening  for  infection,  for  instance  health
care  personnel  who  are  tested  yearly,  differentiation  of  positive  tests  due  boosting
versus new infection is important (9). The 2-step test, in which the test is given twice in
a short time frame, reduces the chance of these false negatives, which are important to
identify among adults who may have had or plan to have repeat testing anyway—for
example, healthcare personnel who are tested yearly (9). Because this test consists of 2
TSTs separated by an interval of 1-3 weeks, there is a greater window of time during
which  live  vaccine  replication  could  suppress  reactivity.  If  a  live  vaccine  is
administered,  the  first  dose  of  a  2-step  TST  should  be  delayed  for  4  weeks,  and  if
additional doses of live vaccines are indicated thereafter, they should be delayed until
the  second  TST  is  measured.  TST  or  IGRA  reactivity  in  the  absence  of  active
tuberculosis  is  not  a  contraindication  to  administration  of  any  vaccine,  including  live,
attenuated  virus  vaccines.  Note  that  TST  screening  of  an  asymptomatic  individual  is
clinically  different  than  testing  a  person  suspected  to  have  active  tuberculosis.  If  a
person  is  suspected  to  have  active  tuberculosis,  MMR  vaccine  is  typically  not
administered.  Active  tuberculosis  should  be  considered  severe  acute  illness,  and
moderate  or  severe  acute  illness  is  a  precaution  for  vaccination.  Although  no  studies
have  reported  on  the  effects  of  MMR  vaccine  on  persons  with  active  untreated
tuberculosis,  a  theoretical  basis  exists  for  concern  that  measles  vaccine  might
exacerbate active tuberculosis (10). As a result, before administering MMR to persons
with untreated active tuberculosis, initiating antituberculosis therapy is advisable (10).
Considering whether concurrent immunosuppression (e.g., immunosuppression caused
by  HIV  infection)  is  present  before  administering  live,  attenuated  vaccines  also  is
necessary,  because  immunosuppression  is  a  contraindication  to  MMR  vaccine.  Top  of
Page   In  the  majority  of  cases,  preterm  infants  (infants  born  before  37  weeks’
gestation), regardless of birth weight, should be vaccinated at the same chronological
age  and  according  to  the  same  schedule  and  using  the  same  precautions  as  for
full-term infants and children. Birth weight and size are not factors in deciding whether
to  vaccinate  a  clinically  stable  preterm  infant  (11-15),  except  for  hepatitis  B
vaccination.  The  full  recommended  dose  of  each  vaccine  should  be  used.  Divided  or
reduced  doses  are  not  recommended.  Decreased  seroconversion  rates  might  occur
among  certain  preterm  infants  (i.e.,  those  with  low  birth  weights  [<2,000  g])  after
administration of hepatitis B vaccine at birth (16). However, by the chronological age of
1 month, all preterm infants, regardless of initial birth weight, are likely to respond as
adequately as larger infants (17-19). Infants weighing <2,000 g born to HBsAg-negative
mothers should receive the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine series at chronological
age  1  month  or  hospital  discharge,  if  hospital  discharge  occurs  when  the  infant  is
younger
 than
 one
 month
 of
 age.
 Preterm
 low-birth-weight–infants
 born
 to
HBsAg-positive  mothers  should  receive  immunoprophylaxis  with  hepatitis  B  vaccine
within  12  hours  after  birth.  The  initial  vaccine  dose  should  not  be  counted  toward
completion  of  the  hepatitis  B  series,  and  3  additional  doses  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine
should be administered, beginning when the infant is aged 1 month. For mothers with
unknown  HBsAg  status,  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is  recommended  within  12  hours  of  birth
regardless  of  low-birth-weight  status.  In  addition  to  hepatitis  B  vaccines,  hepatitis  B
Immunoglobulin (HBIG) is recommended for infants whose mothers are HBsAg positive
or  unknown.  If  the  mother  is  HBsAg  positive,  HBIG  must  be  given  within  12  hours  of
birth.  If  the  mother’s  HBsAg  status  is  unknown,  providers  should  first  attempt  to
determine the mother’s status. Regardless, if the infant is preterm or low birth weight,
HBIG  must  be  given  within  12  hours  of  birth.  If  the  infant  is  neither  preterm  nor  low
birth  weight,  providers  have  up  to  7  days  from  birth  to  determine  if  the  mother  is
HBsAg  negative;  because  the  protective  efficacy  of  HBIG  declines  the  longer  that
administration  is  delayed,  if  results  are  unlikely  to  be  known  by  day  7  of  life,  HBIG
should  be  given  no  later  than  day  7  if  not  earlier.  If  the  mother  is  determined  to  be
HBsAg positive, HBIG should be administered as soon as possible (20). If a child aged at
least  6  weeks  has  been  in  the  hospital  since  birth,  deferral  of  rotavirus  vaccine  is
recommended  until  the  time  of  discharge.  If  an  infant  were  to  be  vaccinated  with
rotavirus vaccine while still needing care in the NICU or nursery, at least a theoretic risk
exists for vaccine virus being transmitted to infants in the same unit who are acutely ill
and to preterm infants who are not age-eligible for vaccine (21). The rotavirus vaccine
series should not be initiated for infants aged ≥15 weeks, 0 days. Top of Page  With 2
exceptions, neither non-live nor live-virus vaccines administered to a lactating woman
affect the safety of breastfeeding for women or their infants. Although live viruses in
vaccines can replicate in the mother, the majority of live viruses in vaccines have been
demonstrated not to be excreted in human milk. Varicella vaccine virus has not been
found in human milk (22). Although rubella vaccine virus has been excreted in human
milk,  the  virus  usually  does  not  infect  the  infant.  If  infection  does  occur,  it  is  well
tolerated  because  the  virus  is  attenuated  (23).  Non-live  vaccines  pose  no  risk  for
mothers who are breastfeeding or for their infants. Breastfeeding is a contraindication
for  smallpox  vaccination  of  the  mother  because  of  the  theoretical  risk  for  contact
transmission  from  mother  to  infant.  Yellow  fever  vaccine  should  be  avoided  in
breastfeeding women, because 2 cases (one confirmed, one probable) of yellow-fever
vaccine associated acute neurotropic disease (YEL-AND) have been detected in infants
whose mothers were vaccinated but were not vaccinated themselves. In both infants,
vaccine  virus  was  recovered  from  the  cerebrospinal  fluid  of  the  infant,  but  the  exact
mode  of  transmission  was  not  precisely  determined  because  vaccine  virus  was  not
recovered  from  breast  milk  (24).  However,  when  nursing  mothers  cannot  avoid  or
postpone travel to areas endemic for yellow fever in which risk for acquisition is high,
these  women  should  be  vaccinated.  Limited  data  indicate  that  breastfeeding  can
enhance the response to certain vaccine antigens (25). There are no data to suggest
that  passive  transfer  of  antibodies  in  human  milk  can  affect  the  efficacy  of  live-virus
vaccines.  Breastfed  infants  should  be  vaccinated  according  to  the  recommended
schedule (26-28). Top of Page  No evidence exists of risk to the fetus from vaccinating
pregnant women with non-live virus or bacterial vaccines (29,30). In spite of the lack of
evidence  of  risk,  HPV  vaccine,  a  non-live  vaccine,  is  not  recommended  during
pregnancy. Live vaccines administered to a pregnant woman pose a theoretical risk to
the  fetus;  therefore,  live,  attenuated  virus  and  live  bacterial  vaccines  generally  are
contraindicated  during  pregnancy.  Women  should  avoid  conception  for  4  weeks  after
vaccination  with  live  vaccines.  However,  benefits  of  vaccinating  pregnant  women
usually outweigh potential risks when the likelihood of disease exposure is high, when
infection would pose a risk to the mother or fetus, and when the vaccine is unlikely to
cause harm. Recommendations for vaccination during pregnancy are developed using
ACIP’s  Guiding  Principles  for  Development  of  ACIP  Recommendations  for  Vaccination
During Pregnancy and Breastfeeding (31). Women who are pregnant should receive a
dose of Tdap for the prevention of infant pertussis whether or not they have previously
received
 Tdap.
 Vaccination
 of
 the
 mother
 generates
 antibodies
 that
 pass
transplacentally  to  the  fetus  (32).  Vaccination  in  the  third  trimester  optimizes  the
duration of this antibody protection until after birth. Additionally, preventing pertussis in
the  mother  reduces  the  risk  that  the  infant  is  exposed  to  pertussis  after  birth  (33).
Health care personnel should administer Tdap during pregnancy, preferably during the
third trimester. If Tdap is not administered during pregnancy to women who have never
received it, it should be administered immediately postpartum. Pregnant women who
are not vaccinated or are only partially vaccinated against tetanus should complete the
primary  series  (34).  Women  for  whom  Td  is  indicated  but  who  did  not  complete  the
recommended 3-dose series during pregnancy should receive follow-up after delivery to
ensure the series is completed. One dose of the tetanus vaccine series should be Tdap,
if Tdap has not already been received. Pregnant and postpartum women are at higher
risk  for  severe  illness  and  complications  from  influenza  than  women  who  are  not
pregnant  (2,  35).  Pregnant  women  have  protective  levels  of  anti-influenza  antibodies
after  vaccination  (36,37).  Passive  transfer  of  anti-influenza  antibodies  that  might
provide protection from vaccinated women to neonates has been reported (36, 38-41).
Routine vaccination with inactivated influenza vaccine is recommended for all women
who  are  or  will  be  pregnant  (in  any  trimester)  during  influenza  season.  IPV  can  be
administered to pregnant women who are at risk for exposure to wild-type poliovirus.
This  includes  travelers  to  areas  or  countries  where  polio  is  epidemic  or  endemic;
members  of  communities  or  specific  population  groups  with  disease  caused  by  wild
polioviruses; laboratory workers who handle specimens that might contain polioviruses;
healthcare personnel who have close contact with patients who might be excreting wild
polioviruses; and unvaccinated persons whose children will be receiving oral poliovirus
vaccine (42). Hepatitis A, pneumococcal polysaccharide, meningococcal conjugate, and
meningococcal polysaccharide vaccines should be considered for women at increased
risk for those infections (43-45). Pregnant women who must travel to areas where there
is  a  risk  for  acquiring  yellow  fever  should  receive  yellow  fever  vaccine,  because  the
limited  theoretical  risk  from  vaccination  is  outweighed  substantially  by  the  risk  for
yellow fever infection (24, 46). Hepatitis B vaccine is not contraindicated in pregnancy
and should be given to a pregnant woman for whom it is indicated (20, 47). Pregnancy
is  a  contraindication  for  smallpox  (vaccinia)  vaccine  and  measles-,  mumps-,  rubella-,
and varicella-containing vaccines. Smallpox vaccine is the only vaccine known to harm
a fetus when administered to a pregnant woman. In addition, smallpox vaccine should
not be administered to a household contact of a pregnant woman (8). Women who are
pregnant should not have close contact with anyone who has recently (within the last
28 days) received the smallpox vaccine. Data from studies of children born to mothers
inadvertently  vaccinated  with  rubella  vaccine  during  pregnancy  demonstrate  rubella
antibody  in  unvaccinated  infants.  This  could  represent  passive  transfer  of  maternal
antibody or a fetal antibody response to vaccine virus infection in the fetus. No cases of
congenital rubella or varicella syndrome or abnormalities attributable to fetal infection
have  been  observed  among  infants  born  to  susceptible  women  who  inadvertently
received  rubella  or  varicella  vaccines  during  pregnancy  (48-50).  Because  of  the
importance  of  protecting  women  of  childbearing  age  against  rubella  and  varicella,
reasonable  practices  in  any  vaccination  program  include  asking  women  if  they  are
pregnant or might become pregnant in the next 4 weeks; not vaccinating women who
state  that  they  are  or  plan  to  become  pregnant  within  that  interval;  explaining  the
theoretical risk for the fetus if MMR, varicella, or MMRV vaccine were administered to a
woman  who  is  pregnant;  and  counseling  women  who  are  vaccinated  not  to  become
pregnant  during  the  4  weeks  after  MMR,  varicella,  or  MMRV  vaccination  (10,  48-51).
MMRV is an unlikely option for a pregnant woman because the vaccine is only licensed
through  12  years  of  age.  Routine  pregnancy  testing  of  women  of  childbearing  age
before  administering  a  live-virus  vaccine  is  not  recommended  (3,  10).  If  a  pregnant
woman is inadvertently vaccinated or becomes pregnant within 4 weeks after MMR or
varicella vaccination, she should be counseled about the theoretical basis of concern for
the  fetus;  however,  MMR  or  varicella  vaccination  during  pregnancy  should  not  be
considered  a  reason  to  terminate  pregnancy  (3,  10,  50).  Persons  who  receive  MMR
vaccine do not transmit the vaccine viruses to contacts (10). Transmission of varicella
vaccine virus to contacts is exceedingly rare (3). MMR and varicella vaccines should be
administered  when  indicated  to  children  and  other  household  contacts  of  pregnant
women  (10).  Infants  living  in  households  with  pregnant  women  should  be  vaccinated
with rotavirus vaccine according to the same schedule as infants in households without
pregnant  women.  Pregnant  women  should  be  evaluated  for  evidence  of  immunity  to
rubella and varicella and be tested for the presence of HBsAg during every pregnancy
(10, 20, 52). Women without evidence of immunity to rubella and varicella should be
vaccinated  immediately  after  delivery.  A  second  dose  of  varicella  vaccine  should  be
administered  4-8  weeks  later.  A  woman  found  to  be  HBsAg  positive  should  be
followed-up carefully to ensure that the infant receives HBIG and begins the hepatitis B
vaccine  series  no  later  than  12  hours  after  birth  and  that  the  infant  completes  the
recommended hepatitis B vaccine series on schedule (20). No known risk exists for the
fetus  from  passive  immunization  of  pregnant  women  with  immune  globulin
preparations.  Top  of  Page   Clinicians  have  a  limited  ability  to  determine  whether
persons  are  protected  on  the  basis  of  their  country  of  origin  and  their  vaccination
records  alone.  Vaccines  administered  outside  the  United  States  generally  can  be
accepted as valid if the schedule (i.e., minimum ages and intervals) is similar to that
recommended in the United States. There are exceptions (providers should not accept
documentation of these vaccines): Aimmugen, a hepatitis A vaccine; and Twinrix Jr., a
combination vaccine containing hepatitis A and hepatitis B components (providers can
accept  the  hepatitis  B  component  but  NOT  the  hepatitis  A  component).  Only  written
documentation should be accepted as evidence of previous vaccination. There is one
exception, influenza vaccine, for which self-report can be accepted. Written records are
more  likely  to  predict  protection  if  the  vaccines,  dates  of  administration,  intervals
between  doses,  and  age  at  the  time  of  vaccination  are  comparable  to  U.S.
recommendations. Although vaccines with inadequate potency have been produced in
other  countries  (53,54),  the  majority  of  vaccines  used  worldwide  are  produced  with
adequate quality control standards and are potent. Medscape has a guide to pediatric
vaccines used in other countries. Persons vaccinated outside of the United States can
enter  the  country  through  a  number  of  different  mechanisms.  Those  seeking  to
immigrate to the United States may be vaccinated under the authority of a civil surgeon
or  a  panel  physician.  Some  enter  the  United  States  as  refugees  and  are  vaccinated
under the authority of the Office of Refugee Resettlement, part of the Administration for
Children  and  Families,  in  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Adopted
children’s  birth  countries  often  have  vaccination  schedules  that  differ  from  the
recommended childhood vaccination schedule in the United States. Differences in the
U.S. schedule and those used in other countries include the vaccines administered, the
recommended ages of administration, and the number and timing of doses. Data are
inconclusive  regarding  the  extent  to  which  an  internationally  adopted  child’s
vaccination  record  reflects  the  child’s  protection.  A  child’s  record  might  indicate
administration  of  MMR  vaccine  when  only  single-antigen  measles  vaccine  was
administered. A study of children adopted from orphanages in the People’s Republic of
China,  Russia,  and  countries  in  Eastern  Europe  determined  that  67%  of  children  with
documentation  of  >3  doses  of  DTP  before  adoption  had  nonprotective  titers  to  these
antigens  (54).  In  contrast,  children  adopted  from  these  countries  who  received
vaccination in the community (not only from orphanages) and had documentation of ≥1
doses of DTP exhibited protective titers 67% of the time (54). However, antibody testing
was  performed  by  using  a  hemagglutination  assay,  which  tends  to  underestimate
protection and cannot directly be compared with antibody concentration (55). Data are
likely to remain limited for areas other than the People’s Republic of China, Russia, and
Eastern  Europe.  Healthcare  providers  should  ensure  that  household  contacts  of
international adoptees are vaccinated adequately, particularly for measles, hepatitis A,
and hepatitis B (56). Healthcare providers may use one of multiple approaches if the
immunogenicity  of  vaccines  or  the  completeness  of  series  administered  to  persons
outside  the  United  States  is  in  question.  Repeating  the  vaccinations  is  an  acceptable
option that usually is safe and prevents the need to obtain and interpret serologic tests.
If  avoiding  unnecessary  injections  is  desired,  judicious  use  of  serologic  testing  might
help  determine  which  vaccinations  are  needed.  For  some  vaccines,  the  most  readily
available  serologic  tests  cannot  document  protection  against  infection.  This  best
practices  document  provides  guidance  on  possible  approaches  to  evaluation  and
revaccination  for  each  vaccine  recommended  in  the  United  States  (Table  9-1).
Vaccination providers can revaccinate children younger than 7 years of age with DTaP
vaccine  without  regard  to  recorded  doses;  however,  data  indicate  increased  rates  of
local adverse reactions after the fourth and fifth doses of DTaP (57). If a revaccination
approach  is  adopted  and  a  severe  local  reaction  occurs,  serologic  testing  for  specific
IgG  antibody  to  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxins  can  be  measured  before  administering
additional  doses.  Protective  concentration(a)  indicates  that  additional  doses  are
unnecessary  and  subsequent  vaccination  should  occur  as  age  appropriate.  No
established serologic correlates exist for protection against pertussis. For a child whose
record indicates receipt of ≥3 doses of DTP or DTaP, serologic testing for specific IgG
antibody to both diphtheria and tetanus toxin before additional doses is a reasonable
approach. If a protective concentration is present, recorded doses are considered valid,
and the vaccination series should be completed as age appropriate. An indeterminate
antibody  concentration  might  indicate  immunologic  memory  but  waning  antibody;
serologic  testing  can  be  repeated  after  a  booster  dose  if  vaccination  providers  or
parents  want  to  avoid  revaccination  with  a  complete  series.  Alternately,  for  a  child
whose records indicate receipt of ≥3 doses, a single booster dose can be administered
followed by serologic testing after 1 month for specific IgG antibody to both diphtheria
and tetanus toxins. If the child has a protective concentration, the recorded doses are
considered valid, and the vaccination series should be completed as age appropriate.
Children  with  an  indeterminate  concentration  after  a  booster  dose  should  be
revaccinated
 with
 a
 complete
 series.
 Children
 aged
 12-23
 months
 without
documentation of hepatitis A vaccination or serologic evidence of immunity should be
vaccinated  on  arrival  in  the  United  States  (45).  Persons  who  have  received  1  dose
should  receive  the  second  dose  if  6-18  months  have  passed  since  the  first  dose  was
administered.  Persons  not  known  to  be  vaccinated  for  hepatitis  B  should  receive  an
age-appropriate series of hepatitis B vaccine. A person whose records indicate receipt
of a complete series of vaccine is considered protected(b), and additional doses are not
needed if ≥1 dose was administered at age ≥24 weeks. Persons who received their last
hepatitis B vaccine dose at an age <24 weeks should receive an additional dose at age
≥24  weeks.  People  who  have  received  no  doses  or  a  partial  series  of  vaccine  should
complete the series at the recommended intervals and ages. All foreign-born persons
and immigrants, refugees, and internationally adopted children born in Asia, the Pacific
Islands, Africa, and other regions of high or intermediate hepatitis B endemicity should
be  tested  for  HBsAg,  regardless  of  vaccination  status  (58).  Those  determined  to  be
HBsAg  positive  should  be  monitored  for  development  of  liver  disease.  Household
members  of  HBsAg-positive  children  or  adults  should  be  vaccinated  if  they  are  not
already immune. Interpretation of a serologic test to verify whether children who were
vaccinated  >2  months  previously  are  protected  against  Hib  bacteria  can  be  difficult.
Because  the  number  of  vaccinations  needed  for  protection  decreases  with  age  and
because adverse events are rare (59), age-appropriate vaccination should be provided.
Hib  vaccination  is  not  recommended  routinely  for  persons  aged  ≥5  years  (59).
Quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines  are  not  routinely  used  in  other
countries  in  adolescents  (the  United  Kingdom  is  the  exception).  Unless  patients  have
documented  receipt  they  should  be  considered  unvaccinated  and  receive  the
age-appropriate  doses.  The  simplest  approach  to  resolving  concerns  about  MMR
vaccination  is  to  revaccinate  with  1  or  2  doses  of  MMR  vaccine,  depending  on  age.
Serious  adverse  events  after  MMR  vaccinations  are  rare  (10).  No  evidence  indicates
that administering MMR vaccine increases the risk for adverse reactions among persons
who  are  already  immune  to  measles,  mumps,  or  rubella  as  a  result  of  previous
vaccination  or  natural  disease.  Doses  of  measles-containing  vaccine  administered
before the first birthday should not be counted as part of the series (10). Alternatively,
serologic testing for IgG antibody to vaccine viruses indicated on the vaccination record
can  be  considered.  Serologic  testing  is  widely  available  for  measles  and  rubella  IgG
antibody.  A  person  whose  record  indicates  receipt  of  monovalent  measles  or
measles-rubella vaccine on or after the first birthday and who has protective antibody
against  measles  and  rubella  should  receive  1  or  2  doses  of  MMR  or  MMRV  as  age
appropriate to ensure protection against mumps and varicella (and rubella if measles
vaccine  alone  had  been  administered).  If  a  person  whose  record  indicates  receipt  of
MMR  at  age  ≥12  months  has  a  protective  concentration  of  antibody  to  measles,  no
additional  vaccination  is  needed  unless  a  second  dose  is  required  for  school  entry.
Many  industrialized  countries  now  routinely  use  pneumococcal  vaccines.  Although
recommendations  for  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  also  exist  in  many
countries,  the  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  might  not  be  routinely  administered.
PCV13  and  PPSV23  should  be  administered  according  to  age-appropriate  vaccination
schedules  or  as  indicated  by  the  presence  of  underlying  medical  conditions  (43,  60).
The simplest approach to vaccinating with poliovirus vaccine is to revaccinate persons
aged <18 years with IPV according to the U.S. schedule. Adverse events after IPV are
rare  (42).  Children  appropriately  vaccinated  with  3  doses  of  OPV  in  economically
developing  countries  might  have  suboptimal  seroconversion,  including  to  type  3
poliovirus  (42).  Rotavirus  vaccination  should  not  be  initiated  for  infants  aged  ≥15
weeks, 0 days. Infants who began the rotavirus vaccine series outside the United States
but who did not complete the series and who are still aged ≤8 months, 0 days, should
follow the routine schedule and receive doses to complete the series. If the brand of a
previously administered dose is live, reassortment pentavalent rotavirus vaccine or is
unknown,  a  complete  series  of  rotavirus  vaccine  should  be  documented  for  series
completion(b).  All  doses  should  be  administered  by  age  8  months,  0  days.  Children
aged  ≥7  years  who  are  not  considered  fully  vaccinated  for  pertussis  should  receive
Tdap  vaccine.  “Fully  vaccinated”  means  at  least  5  doses  of  DTaP  before  the  seventh
birthday or at least 4 doses of DTaP before the seventh birthday if the fourth dose is
given  after  the  fourth  birthday.  One  dose  of  Tdap  is  recommended  after  the  seventh
birthday. If additional doses of vaccine are needed, Td should be administered as age
appropriate.  Varicella  vaccine  is  not  available  in  most  countries.  A  person  who  lacks
evidence of varicella immunity should be vaccinated as age appropriate (3, 59). In the
United States, zoster vaccination is recommended for all persons aged ≥50 years who
have no contraindications, including persons who report a previous episode of zoster or
who have chronic medical conditions. For persons who do not have documentation of
receipt  of  zoster  vaccine,  the  vaccine  should  be  offered  at  the  patient’s  first  clinical
encounter  with  the  healthcare  provider.  Two  doses  of  vaccine  are  recommended  2-6
months  apart,  each  dose  a  0.5-mL  intramuscular  dose.  Zoster  vaccination  is  not
indicated to treat acute zoster, to prevent persons with acute zoster from developing
postherpetic neuralgia, or to treat ongoing postherpetic neuralgia. Patients do not need
to  be  asked  about  their  history  of  varicella  or  to  have  serologic  testing  conducted  to
determine  zoster  immunity  prior  to  administration  of  zoster  vaccine.  Top  of  Page  
Providers  often  avoid  giving  intramuscular  injections  or  choose  alternative  routes  for
persons  with  bleeding  disorders  because  of  the  risk  for  hematoma  formation  after
injections.  In  one  study,  hepatitis  B  vaccine  was  administered  intramuscularly  to  153
persons with hemophilia. The vaccination was administered with a 23-gauge or smaller
caliber needle, followed by application of steady pressure to the site for 1-2 minutes.
The vaccinations resulted in a low (4%) bruising rate, and no patients required factor
supplementation  (61).  Whether  antigens  that  produce  more  local  reactions  (e.g.,
pertussis) would produce an equally low rate of bruising is unknown. When hepatitis B
or  any  other  intramuscularly  administered  vaccine  is  indicated  for  a  patient  with  a
bleeding  disorder,  the  vaccine  should  be  administered  intramuscularly  if  a  physician
familiar  with  the  patient’s  bleeding  risk  determines  that  the  vaccine  can  be
administered by this route with reasonable safety. If the patient receives antihemophilia
or similar therapy, intramuscularly administered vaccinations can be scheduled shortly
after such therapy is administered. A fine-gauge needle (23-gauge or smaller caliber)
should  be  used  for  the  vaccination,  followed  by  firm  pressure  on  the  site,  without
rubbing, for at least 2 minutes. The patient or family should be given information on the
risk  for  hematoma  from  the  injection.  Patients  receiving  anticoagulation  therapy
presumably have the same bleeding risk as patients with clotting factor disorders and
should  follow  the  same  guidelines  for  intramuscular  administration.  If  possible,
vaccination  could  be  scheduled  prior  to  the  use  of  these  medications,  so  that  the
patients’  risk  of  bleeding  is  not  increased  by  their  therapeutic  action.  (a)  Enzyme
immunoassay tests are available. Physicians should contact the laboratory performing
the  test  for  interpretive  standards  and  limitations.  Protective  concentrations  for
antibody  to  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxins  are  defined  as  >0.1  IU/mL.  (b)  A  complete
series may consist of two or three doses, depending on the brand of vaccine used in the
country of origin. Top of Page Abbreviations: DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and
acellular pertussis; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HepA = hepatitis A; HepB =
hepatitis B; Hib = Haemophilus influenzae type b; HPV = human papillomavirus; IgG =
immune  globulin  G;  MMR  =  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella;  PCV13  =  pneumococcal
conjugate  vaccine;  PPSV23=  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine;  Tdap  =  tetanus
toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis. (a) There is a recommended
approach  for  all  vaccines  and  an  alternative  approach  for  some  vaccines.  (b)  In  rare
instances, hepatitis B vaccine can give a false-positive HBsAg result up to 18 days after
vaccination; therefore, blood should be drawn to test for HBsAg before vaccinating (20).
Top of Page Top of Page To receive email updates about this page, enter your email
address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/special-situations.html
