A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. ABCs is a core component of CDC's EIP.
This  network  is  a  collaboration  between  CDC,  state  health  departments,  and
universities.    CDC  initially  established  ABCs  in  four  states  in  1995.  Now,  it  currently
operates  among  10  EIP  sites  across  the  United  States,  representing  a  population  of
approximately 45.5 million people.  ABCs provides estimates of invasive disease burden
and trends for five pathogens. ABCs monitors changes in antimicrobial resistance and
other characteristics over time through collection of bacterial isolates and demographic
and  clinical  data.  At  this  time,  ABCs  conducts  surveillance  for:  Enhanced  Pertussis
Surveillance  started  in  2011  through  the  ABCs/EIP  network.  ABCs  surveillance  for
methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  began  in  2004.  In  2015,  these
activities  transitioned  to  the  Hospital  Acquired  Community  Interface  (HAIC)  network.  
ABCs  conducted  active  surveillance  for  legionellosis  from  2011  through  2015.   CDC
uses ABCs data and infrastructure to track disease trends.  ABCs data documented the
decline in pneumococcal disease following introduction of the pediatric pneumococcal
conjugate
 vaccine.
 ABCs
 also
 documented
 the
 emergence
 of
 serogroup
 Y
meningococcal  disease.  Additionally,  CDC  uses  ABCs  data  to  evaluate  vaccine
effectiveness.  Past evaluations looked at the effectiveness of meningococcal conjugate
vaccine  in  adolescents  and  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  in  children  and  adults.
ABCs also provides critical information to inform public health policy. ABCs data helped
revise CDC guidelines to recommend the use of universal screening of pregnant women
to  prevent  early-onset  GBS  infections.   These  data  also  formed  the  basis  for  the
prevention  of  GAS  infections  among  household  contacts  of  people  with  invasive
disease.  This  also  helped  inform  the  prevention  of  GAS  infections  among  postpartum
and post-surgical patients.  CDC developed a program to assist state and local health
departments  with  surveillance  for  MRSA  and  drug-resistant  S.  pneumoniae.  This
program  was  based  primarily  on  lessons  learned  from  ABCs.  Emerging  Infections
Program  The  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  -  Community  Interface  Activity  (HAIC)  
Legionellosis  surveillance  Pertussis  surveillance  ABCs  is  an  active  laboratory-  and
population-based surveillance system for five invasive bacterial pathogens. Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/abcs/about/index.html
