 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. On January 2, 2008, the Nevada
State Health Division (NSHD) contacted CDC concerning surveillance 
reports received by the Southern Nevada Health District (SNHD) regarding two persons
recently diagnosed with 
acute hepatitis C. A third person with acute hepatitis C was reported the following day.
This raised concerns about 
an outbreak because SNHD typically confirms four or fewer cases of acute hepatitis C
per year. Initial inquiries found 
that  all  three  persons  with  acute  hepatitis  C  underwent  procedures  at  the  same
endoscopy clinic (clinic A) within 
35--90 days of illness onset. A joint investigation by SNHD, NSHD, and CDC was initiated
on January 9, 2008. 
The  epidemiologic  and  laboratory  investigation  revealed  that  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)
transmission likely resulted from 
reuse  of  syringes  on  individual  patients  and  use  of  single-use  medication  vials  on
multiple patients at the clinic. 
Health  officials  advised  clinic  A  to  stop  unsafe  injection  practices  immediately,  and
approximately 40,000 patients of the 
clinic were notified about their potential risk for exposure to HCV and other bloodborne
pathogens. This report 
focuses on the six cases of acute hepatitis C identified during the initial investigation,
which is ongoing; additional cases of 
acute  hepatitis  C  associated  with  exposures  at  clinic  A  might  be  identified.
Comprehensive measures involving viral 
hepatitis  surveillance,  health-care  provider  education,  public  awareness,  professional
oversight, licensing, and improvements 
in  medical  devices  can  help  detect  and  prevent  transmission  of  HCV  and  other
bloodborne pathogens in 
health-care settings. 
 The  objectives  of  the  investigation  were  to  conduct  case-finding  and  review  health
histories of infected persons, 
to determine the source of transmission and implement control measures, to identify
other patients at risk for 
exposure,  and  to  assist  in  development  of  recommendations  to  prevent  HCV
transmission in health-care settings. Persons 
with acute hepatitis C were interviewed, and blood samples were obtained after these
persons gave oral consent. 
Blood samples were sent to CDC for testing for HCV genotype at the NS5b region and
phylogenetic relatedness at 
the  hypervariable  1  region  (HVR1)  to  help  determine  whether  a  common  source  of
transmission existed 
(1). Specimens also were tested for other bloodborne infections (hepatitis B virus [HBV])
and human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]). 
Case-finding activities included SNHD's review of acute hepatitis C surveillance records,
cross-matching of local 
HCV 
laboratory records with clinic A procedure logs, review of medical records for patients
who underwent procedures 
at clinic A on the same day as HCV-infected persons, and serologic HCV, HBV, and HIV
testing of staff. An 
extensive review of the clinic practices and procedures also was conducted, including
observation of several endoscopic 
procedures  and  endoscopic  reprocessing,  observation  of  anesthesia  practices,  and
interviews with staff members regarding 
their infection-control practices. 
 For  this  investigation,  a  person  was  defined  as  having  health-care--associated  acute
hepatitis C if he or she 1) 
had symptoms of acute hepatitis within 6 months of having a procedure performed at
clinic A during July--December 
2007; 2) had laboratory-confirmed HCV infection (antibodies 
to HCV [anti-HCV]) by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) and recombinant immunoblot assay
(RIBA) or EIA with an appropriate signal-to-cutoff ratio for a given assay, or presence 
of  HCV  RNA  by  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  in  the  absence  of  acute  hepatitis  A
virus (HAV); and 3) did not 
have other risks for HCV infection. 
 In  addition  to  the  three  persons  identified  initially,  three  other  persons  were
determined to have 
health-care--associated  acute  hepatitis  C,  for  a  total  of  six  cases  diagnosed  during
July--December 2007. One of the three cases 
was identified by review of surveillance records, another 
by cross-matching local laboratory records with procedure records 
at clinic A, and the third by physician report after the start of the investigation. The six
persons ranged in age from 37 
to 72 years; four were female. All had signs and symptoms of acute hepatitis, including
jaundice, abdominal 
discomfort,
 and
 laboratory
 evidence
 of
 liver
 inflammation
 with
 alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels of 552--1,165 
units/L.*  Four  of  the  six  persons  required  hospitalization  as  a  result  of  their  HCV
infection. 
 The six persons with acute hepatitis C had onset of symptoms in late October 2007 and
November 2007, 
35--90 days after undergoing procedures at clinic A 
(Figure 1) and within the typical incubation period of 15--160 days. 
None  had  significant  risk  factors  for  HCV  infection  and  none  had  other  common
exposures. One of the procedures 
was  performed  in  July  2007;  the  other  five  were  performed  on  the  same  day  in
September 2007. Five persons (four 
with  procedures  on  the  same  day)  for  whom  blood  specimens  were  available  at  the
time of this report had HCV genotype 
1a. The four who had procedures on the same day had viral sequences with 99%--100%
genetic similarity at 
HVR1, pointing to a common source of infection. The viral 
sequence from the HCV-infected person who had the procedure 
in  July  2007  was  not  genetically  related  to  the  other  cluster,  suggesting  a  separate
transmission incident. 
 During  the  2  days  in  which  persons  with  health-care--associated  hepatitis  C  had
procedures at clinic A, 
120 additional persons had procedures at the clinic. HCV test results for those persons
are pending. Thirty-eight 
staff  members  at  the  clinic  involved  in  direct  patient  care  were  available  for  testing
during the investigation, and none 
had  evidence  of  previous  or  current  HCV  infection.  None  of  the  persons  with
health-care--associated acute hepatitis C 
and none of the staff tested positive for HBV or HIV infections.
 Inappropriate  reuse  of  syringes  on  individual  persons  and  use  of  medication  vials
intended for single-person use 
on  multiple  persons  was  identified  through  direct  observation  of  infection-control
practices at clinic A 
(Figure 2). Specifically, a clean needle and syringe were used to draw medication from
a single-use vial of propofol, a 
short-acting intravenous anesthetic agent. The medication was injected directly through
an intravenous catheter into the 
patient's arm. If a patient required more sedation, the needle was removed from the
syringe and replaced with a new needle; 
the new needle with the old syringe was used to draw more medication. Backflow from
the patient's intravenous catheter 
or  from  needle  removal  might  have  contaminated  the  syringe  with  HCV  and
subsequently contaminated the 
vial. Medication remaining in the vial was used to sedate the next patient. 
 As soon as improper injection practices were observed, health officials advised clinic A
to stop these practices 
and educated staff about the risks. Clinic A is a free-standing private endoscopy clinic in
southern Nevada that 
primarily performed upper endoscopies and colonoscopies 
(approximately 50--60 procedures a day, 5 days a week). For at least 
the 4 years that clinic A occupied its existing location, the unsafe 
injection practices had been commonly used among 
some  staff  members  who  administered  anesthesia,  according  to  those  who  were
interviewed. On 
February 27, 2008, SNHD began notifying approximately 40,000 persons who 
underwent procedures requiring anesthesia at the clinic from 
March 1, 2004, through January 11, 2008, via mail and through the media, to 
undergo screening for HCV, HBV, and HIV infections. 
Results of this screening are pending.
 Reported by: B Labus, MPH, L Sands, DO, P Rowley, Southern Nevada Health District,
Las Vegas; IA Azzam, MD, Nevada State Dept of 
Health and Human Svcs. SD Holmberg, MD, Div of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention; JF 
Perz, 
DrPH,  PR  Patel,  MD,  Div  of  Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,  National  Center  for
Preparedness, Detection, and Control of Infectious 
Diseases; GE Fischer, MD, M Schaefer, MD, EIS officers, CDC.
Editorial Note:
  Although case-control studies have not 
indicated an increased risk for acquiring HCV from 
medical, surgical, or dental procedures in the United States 
(2), outbreaks of HCV in health-care settings have long 
been recognized (3). These outbreaks have been identified primarily through clusters of
temporally related cases detected 
by  routine  viral  hepatitis  surveillance,  a  method  that  likely  underestimates  the
magnitude of transmission. Surveillance 
for viral hepatitis typically is passive, with little or no 
capacity to investigate cases suggestive of transmission during 
health care and determine their cause (4). Among persons with acute HCV infections,
60%--70% are asymptomatic 
(2).  Additionally,  currently  available  laboratory  tests  cannot  distinguish  acute  from
chronic HCV infection, which 
makes identifying newly acquired cases difficult.
 The  investigation  described  in  this  report  identified  six  cases  of  acute  hepatitis  C  in
persons who 
underwent procedures at clinic A 35--90 days before the onset of their illness. None of
the persons had significant risk factors 
for  HCV  infection  within  the  typical  incubation  period  (15--160  days  before  onset  of
symptoms), and five of the cases 
had procedures on the same day (September 21, 2007). The genetic relatedness of the
viruses from case patients who 
had procedures on September 21, 2007, supports the epidemiologic findings and points
to a common source of 
infection. The lack of genetic relatedness to the patient seen in July 2007 suggests a
separate transmission incident. The 
two distinct clusters suggest patient-to-patient transmission rather than staff-to-patient
transmission. 
 Most outbreaks of health-care--associated HCV have 
involved patient-to-patient transmission attributed 
to unsafe injection practices (3,5). The reuse of syringes and needles 
or mishandling of medication vials usually have 
been  implicated  (6--8).  In  some  situations,  syringes  or  needles  used  on  HCV-infected
persons were directly reused on 
other  persons.  In  other  instances,  syringes  or  needles  used  on  HCV-infected  persons
were reused to draw medication from a 
vial from which medicine was then drawn and administered to multiple persons, as was
found in this investigation.
 When gross errors or high-risk infection-control breaches that could lead to bloodborne
pathogen transmission 
are recognized, including unsafe injection practices, potentially exposed persons should
be notified and tested, even 
if transmission has not been confirmed (9). Those persons who are found to be infected
can then obtain proper medical 
care. In addition to approximately 40,000 notifications that occurred as a result of this
outbreak, in unrelated incidents, 
unsafe injection practices at three other outpatient clinics in two states have resulted in
approximately 28,000 patient 
notifications during the preceding year (CDC, unpublished data, 2008). These situations
could have been avoided if standard 
infection-control precautions, which include basic safe 
injection practices, had been followed (Box) 
(10).
 This outbreak highlights the importance of surveillance and investigation in detecting
viral hepatitis transmission 
in  health-care  settings.  Prevention  of  transmission  in  these  settings  requires
understanding and adherence to 
recommended  infection-control  practices.  Medical  and  nursing  school  curricula  and
other health-care professional training, 
licensing,  and  continuing  education  requirements  should  include  infection-control
content, including the safe handling 
and  administration  of  parenteral  medications,  as  areas  of  competency.  Although
hospitals employ 
infection-control professionals and regularly evaluate 
infection-control practices, such oversight might be limited in outpatient 
settings  that  are  not  associated  with  hospitals.  As  use  of  these  settings  grows,
appropriate methods will be needed to 
provide  similar  oversight  for  outpatient  clinics.  Better  surveillance,  education,  and
oversight are needed to detect and 
prevent  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission  in  ambulatory  and  other  health-care
settings.
References
 
 * The normal ALT range varies according to age, sex, and other factors. An upper limit
of 28--55 units/L is generally considered normal. 
 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from typeset documents.
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. 
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Date  last  reviewed:
5/15/2008
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5719a2.htm
