Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
‹View Table of Contents
 When there is a higher level of illness in the school community, schools can add other
strategies to their regular activities in addition to increasing everyday actions like hand
washing and ventilation. Which strategies, and how many, are added can be based on
considerations such as local factors (for example, elevated absenteeism in your area,
community preferences) and the virus or other pathogen that is circulating. Additional
strategies include: Correctly and consistently wearing a mask can help lower the risk of
respiratory virus transmission. When worn by a person with an infection, masks reduce
the spread of the virus to others. Masks can also help protect wearers from breathing in
infectious particles from people around them. Different masks offer different levels of
protection. Wearing the most protective mask you can comfortably wear for extended
periods  of  time  that  fits  well  (completely  covering  the  nose  and  mouth)  is  the  most
effective  option.  Cloth  masks  generally  offer  lower  levels  of  protection  to  wearers,
surgical/disposable masks usually offer more protection, international filtering facepiece
respirators (like KN95 respirators) offer even more, and the most protective respirators
are  NIOSH  Approved®  filtering  facepiece  respirators  (like  N95®  respirators).  During
times when respiratory disease spread and absence is high, an outbreak is occurring, or
there is an epidemic or pandemic/public health emergency, and where consistent with
local  laws,  indoor  mask  wearing  is  an  option  schools  may  choose  as  part  of  their
response. Wearing a mask may help protect those most at risk for severe illness from
respiratory disease (e.g., children with asthma or cystic fibrosis) and decrease spread of
illness  in  the  school  setting  by  helping  to  minimize  infectious  particles  in  the
environment.  Some  students  and  staff  may  elect  to  wear  masks  at  additional  times,
even  when  disease  burden  is  not  high,  due  to  personal  health  circumstances  or
preference. Schools should support anyone who chooses to wear a mask or respirator
regardless  of  illness-  spread  levels.  Mask  wearing  can  be  included  into  existing
programming (e.g., antibullying programming). Schools should also support students or
staff who might have difficulty wearing masks, or need clear masks. Physical distancing
is a way to increase space between people in settings where there is commonly close
contact with one another, such as schools. The closer you are to a greater number of
people, the more likely you are to be exposed to infectious illnesses. There is no single
number  that  defines  a  “safe”  distance,  since  spread  of  viruses  can  depend  on  many
factors. Often in the school setting, space is limited, making achieving distancing in a
classroom  difficult.  Schools  can  consider  outdoor  activities  when  feasible  to  allow
greater  distancing,  as  respiratory  illnesses  are  less  likely  to  spread  during  outdoor
activities.  If  weather  permits  and  it  is  safe  to  move  activities  outside,  schools  can
increase  the  number  of  classes  or  group  activities  done  outside  during  times  of
elevated illness activity. When space is limited, schools can use cohorting as a strategy
to  minimize  disease  spread.  Cohorting  involves  creating  groups  of  students  that  are
separated  from  other  groups.  Each  group  of  students  is  kept  together  with  the  same
peers and staff throughout the school day to reduce the risk for illness or limit spread
throughout  the  school.  Students  with  immunocompromising  conditions  or  other
underlying  medical  conditions  or  disabilities  that  increase  risk  for  getting  very  sick
should  not  be  placed  into  separate  classrooms  or  otherwise  segregated  from  other
students,  as  this  could  limit  engagement  in  learning  activities.  Schools  can  develop
cohorting  plans  in  advance,  to  ensure  that  they  are  available  for  use  promptly  when
needed.  Schools,  with  support  from  health  departments,  can  provide  parents  and
caregivers with instructions on how to monitor students for illness or when to have a
child  stay  home.  This  may  be  especially  important  in  cases  where  new  or  emerging
pathogens  are  causing  illness.  This  can  include  a  standardized  symptom  list  that
parents  need  to  consider  prior  to  students  arriving  at  school.  Procedures  for  allowing
return to the school setting (based on the infectious disease of concern) should also be
outlined.  Schools  should  communicate  procedures  to  parents  and  caregivers  and
include clearly defined reasons for school exclusion in these instances. Screening tests
identify  people  with  an  infection  who  do  not  have  symptoms  or  known  or  suspected
exposures so that steps can be taken to prevent further spread of the disease. During
an  outbreak  or  a  pandemic,  and  when  disease-specific  tests  are  available,  a  testing
program may be implemented to help prevent spread of disease. Currently, rapid tests
are  available  for  influenza  and  COVID-19.  Schools  can  work  with  their  local  health
department to help determine when and how to implement screening tests and when
there  are  reporting  requirements  for  specific  infection  types.  Schools  should  consider
the characteristics of different test types (including accessibility, accuracy, turnaround
time, cost, and practicality) to determine which best suits their needs as well as public
health guidance for the particular pathogen. Schools should conduct testing in a way
that  ensures  the  ability  to  maintain  confidentiality  of  results  and  protect  privacy  in
accordance  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations,  which  may  include  the  Family
Educational  Rights  and  Privacy  Act  (FERPA).  Schools  should  address  obtaining
appropriate  consent  to  testing  consistent  with  applicable  law.  Schools  can  provide
information  about  the  appropriate  use  of  testing  within  home  settings,  and  can
communicate with families the importance of following pertinent public health guidance
for anyone who tests positive, including information about when to contact a healthcare
provider  for  additional  management.  For  individuals  who  have  symptoms  consistent
with the circulating illness, schools can identify local facilities and healthcare providers
for  referral  to  testing  and  management.  This  resource  can  be  shared  with  students,
families, and staff if they do not have a primary care physician capable of testing and
treating  the  pathogen.  For  some  individuals,  diagnostic  testing  for  certain  respiratory
illnesses,  like  influenza  and  COVID-19,  may  be  important  especially  if  they  are  at
increased  risk  for  severe  disease  and  could  benefit  from  treatment.  Schools  can
proactively identify spaces to separate sick students from well students while waiting
for them to leave school. Ideally, such a space will allow for staff to monitor the sick
student, have a door that separates the space, and have increased air circulation. It is
important  that  staff  who  are  monitoring  students  use  appropriate  PPE  and  other
precautions.  Schools  can  notify  caregivers  of  exposures  to  certain  communicable
diseases  (e.g.,  tuberculosis,  measles,  or  new/emerging  pathogens).  Schools  may  also
be  required  to  notify  state  or  local  health  departments  for  some  diseases.  The  local
health department will work with schools and caregivers to conduct contact tracing and
identify contacts who may require notification.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/orr/school-preparedness/infection-prevention/strategies.html
