The  purpose  of  the  World  Trade  Center  Health  Program  (WTC  Health  Program  or  the
Program)  Administrative  Manual  is  to  document  the  policies  and  procedures  that
provide the comprehensive framework for administering the Program. The audience for
the PPM is internal staff, WTC Health Program support groups, and the public.  The PPM
will be updated regularly. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a general overview
of the WTC Health Program, including a brief description of the history and origins of
the Program, a summary of the guiding legislation, and a description of the organization
that has been developed to carry out the provisions of the legislation.  The Program is
established by Public Law 111-347, the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation
Act  of  2010  (the  Zadroga  Act).  Title  I  of  the  Zadroga  Act  amended  the  Public  Health
Service (PHS) Act to add Title XXXIII, establishing the WTC Health Program within the
Department of Health and Human Services. Title XXXIII of the PHS Act is codified at 42
U.S.C. §§ 300mm – 300mm-61. Program regulations were promulgated in Title 42, Part
88 of the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Descriptions of the major provisions of
the Zadroga Act and the Part 88 regulations are set forth in Section 4 below.  Since the
terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  2001,  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services (HHS), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) have facilitated health evaluations
and screenings for individuals who responded to those attacks in order to identify any
health issues resulting from their exposures in the aftermath of the attacks.  Procedures
for the determination of eligibility and enrollment of WTC Health Program members are
guided by the following sections of Title XXXIII of the Public Health Service Act (Act):
Program eligibility criteria are established in the following sections of 42 C.F.R. Part 88:
Many  parts  of  the  WTC  Health  Program  have  responsibilities  related  to  eligibility  and
enrollment in the Program.  The PHS Act identifies multiple member groups eligible to
participate  in  the  WTC  Health  Program.  Membership  groups  include:  responders  from
the  Fire  Department  of  New  York  City  (FDNY);  other  specified  New  York  responders;
New York survivors; surviving immediate family members of the 343 FDNY responders
who  perished  on  September  11,  2001;  Pentagon  responders;  and  Shanksville,  PA
responders.  Some  responders  and  survivors  were  enrolled  in  predecessor  programs
prior to the start date of the WTC Health Program (July 1, 2011). Responders who were
enrolled with FDNY or the MMTP prior to July 1, 2011 and survivors who were enrolled in
the  EHC  Community  Program  prior  to  January  2,  2011,  were  automatically  enrolled
(following Terrorist Watch List screening) in the WTC Health Program. These members
were  enrolled  in  batches.   Responders  and  survivors  who  newly  enroll  in  the  WTC
Health Program on or after July 1, 2011, and survivors who enrolled in the predecessor
program  between  January  2,  2011  and  June  30,  2011,  are  required  to  use  the  WTC
Health Program Office of Management and Budget (OMB)-approved application forms to
enroll in the Program. The application forms are specific to each member group, and
describe  the  criteria  necessary  to  qualify  for  the  Program.  FDNY  responders,  general
New York responders, Pentagon and Shanksville responders, and survivors each have a
distinct  application  form  that  is  unique  to  the  eligibility  requirements  for  each  group.
These forms may be found in Appendices 2-A through 2-D. The “responder” member
group  of  surviving  immediate  family  members  of  the  343  FDNY  responders  who
perished on September 11, 2001 is generally considered to be a closed group; however,
if  someone  believes  s/he  is  eligible  for  this  cohort,  that  person  may  use  the  FDNY
responder application and complete the appropriate sections (Appendix 2-A). Because
of the Supreme Court decision in U.S. v. Windsor, 133 S.Ct. 2675 (2013), striking down
Section  3  of  the  Defense  of  Marriage  Act,  there  may  be  individuals  who  were  in
same-sex  marriages  as  of  September  11,  2001,  who  are  newly  eligible  for  certain
benefits within the WTC Health Program. The WTC Health Program is also extending this
eligibility  to  certain  persons  who  were  in  same-sex  or  opposite-sex  domestic
partnerships as of September 11, 2001. Specifically, an applicant may be eligible if s/he
(a) were in a same-sex marriage (see the following paragraph), civil union, or domestic
partnership, with a member of the FDNY who was killed at the WTC site on September
11, 2001; and (b) received any treatment for a WTC-related mental health condition on
or  before  September  1,  2008.  For  purposes  of  eligibility,  the  WTC  Health  Program
recognizes a same-sex marriage or civil union if it was legally valid under the laws of
the  state  or  other  jurisdiction,  whether  foreign  or  domestic,  when  and  where  the
marriage or civil union was performed. The WTC Health Program follows this approach
regardless  of  where  the  couple  lived  on  September  11,  2001.  In  addition,  the  WTC
Health Program recognizes as a surviving immediate family member an individual who
will  attest  via  affidavit  that,  on  September  11,  2001,  s/he  was  in  a  same-sex  or
opposite-sex domestic partnership with a member of the FDNY who was killed at the
WTC site on that date, regardless of where the domestic partners lived on September
11, 2001, or where the surviving domestic partner lives now. This policy is consistent
with  a  post-Windsor  policy  of  treating  same-sex  marriages  on  the  same  terms  as
opposite-sex  marriages  to  the  greatest  extent  reasonably  possible.   Information  for
WTC Health Program applicants, including application forms, can be found on the How
to  Apply  page.  Individuals  can  also  call  the  WTC  Health  Program  Call  Center  and
request that an application be mailed to them. If applicants have questions about how
to complete their enrollment application, they can contact the WTC Health Program Call
Center.  Trained  Customer  Service  Representatives  at  the  WTC  Health  Program  Call
Center  are  able  to  answer  questions  regarding  the  enrollment  process.  Assistance  in
languages other than English is available. The CCE outreach teams and the outreach
and  education  contractors  (see  Chapter  9)   also  provide  enrollment  assistance  to
individuals as part of outreach activities. 
                                        Responder and survivor application forms are sent to the WTC
Health Program mailroom (BSOC) at the following address:
                                        WTC Enrollment
                                        PO Box 7000 
                                        Rensselaer, NY 12144-7000
 Alternatively,  applications  may  be  faxed  to  1-877-646-5308.  BSOC  scans  the
enrollment form and any attachments, and assigns a Document Control Number (DCN),
a 12-character length field, in the following format: W (for World Trade Center); 2-digit
year; 3-digit Julian date; 4-digit batch number; 3-digit sequential number. The scanned
enrollments  are  delivered  to  the  Enrollment  Operations  Team  via  a  secure  File
Transport Protocol (SFTP) server. The Enrollment Operations Team, which is part of the
HPS  Member  Services  Team  (MST),  receives  the  application  forms  and  attachments,
assigns  them  to  enrollment  processors,  and  tracks  the  inventory.  The  enrollment
processor  creates  the  Member  Record  and  the  Enrollment  Record  in  the  claims
processing  system.   Applications  go  through  multiple  assessment  stages.  The
applications are accepted, entered in the claims processing system, and reviewed by
the  Enrollment  Operations  Team.  By  applying  the  processes  outlined  in  42  C.F.R.  §§
88.5 and 88.9, the team determines if more documentation is required to adequately
support  an  application.  If  more  documentation  is  needed,  an  enrollment  processor
reaches  out  to  the  applicant  immediately  to  offer  guidance.  Once  adequate
documentation is attached to the application, and the application has been entered into
the system, the application is sent to the Program’s Member Services Team to make a
formal enrollment decision.  Information on all applicants who are deemed eligible for
membership in the Program is then sent to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to
confirm, per the requirements of the Act, §§ 3311(a)(5) and 3321(a)(4), that they are
not  on  the  TWL.  Once  the  applicant  is  cleared  against  the  TWL,  the  Enrollment
Operations  Team  is  given  the  direction  to  officially  enroll  new  members  into  the
Program and the system is updated. The DCs are sent a list of all new enrollees and the
NPN is notified of any new NPN enrollees on a weekly basis. Notification of membership
status is provided to all new members; however, the method by which the members are
notified  is  dependent  upon  their  membership  group.  Methods  have  been  developed
between each member cohort and the Program, as described below.  Eligibility criteria
are  defined  by  the  Act  in  §§  3311  and  3321,  and  found  at  42  C.F.R.  Part  88.  Each
application will be acknowledged with an appropriate letter, as follows. Letter templates
may  be  found  in  the  “Eligibility  Determinations,  Health  Condition  Certifications,  &
Treatment  Determinations  Subject  to  Member  Appeals”  policy  and  procedure
document, found in the Program’s file of record. If additional information is needed to
complete an application, the Enrollment Operations Center will make repeated attempts
to  obtain  the  information.  Letters  are  sent  at  30  and  90  day  intervals,  as  follows.
Templates  may  be  found  in  the  “Eligibility  Determinations,  Health  Condition
Certifications,  &  Treatment  Determinations  Subject  to  Member  Appeals”  document:
Upon  receipt  of  a  completed  application,  the  Enrollment  Operations  Team  prepares
summary information for the HPS Member Services Team to review in considering the
application.  Each  eligibility  determination  gives  consideration  to:  As  the  Enrollment
Operations Team processes applications for final decisions, the Enrollment Operations
Team Manager will perform quality assurance by reviewing for accuracy all aspects of
the application, including data entry and the decision logic for each recommendation
sent to the Program’s Member Services lead. After review of the final application, the
Enrollment  Operations  Team  makes  one  of  the  following  recommendations  for
dispensation of the application: The WTC Health Program may disenroll a WTC Health
Program  member,  pursuant  to  42  C.F.R.  §  88.13,  in  the  following  circumstances:  A
disenrolled WTC Health Program member will be notified in writing by the WTC Health
Program of a disenrollment decision, provided an explanation, as appropriate, for the
decision,  any  administrative  actions  resulting  from  the  decision,  and  provided
information on how to appeal the decision. A disenrolled WTC Health Program member
may  appeal  the  disenrollment  decision  in  accordance  with  Section  8  below.  All
applicants  have  the  right  to  appeal  an  enrollment  denial  or  disenrollment  decision,
pursuant  to  42  C.F.R.  §  88.14.  Requests  to  appeal  a  denial  of  enrollment  or  a
disenrollment decision must be postmarked within 120 calendar days of the date of the
letter from the Administrator notifying the denied applicant or disenrolled member of
the  adverse  decision.  A  valid  request  for  an  appeal  must  (1)  be  made  in  writing  and
signed;  (2)  identify  the  denied  applicant  or  disenrolled  WTC  Health  Program  member
and designated representative (if applicable); (3) describe the decision being appealed
and  state  the  reasons  why  the  denied  applicant,  disenrolled  WTC  Health  Program
member, or designated representative believes the enrollment denial or disenrollment
was incorrect and should be reversed; and (4) be sent to the WTC Health Program at
the address specified in the notice of denial or disenrollment. The appeal request may
include  relevant  new  information  not  previously  considered  by  the  WTC  Health
Program. 1  An appeal request that meets the above requirements, however, will still be
considered invalid and outside the scope of the WTC Health Program’s administrative
appeal  process  if  its  sole  argument  is  a  challenge  to  existing  law,  regulations,  or
Program policies. In other words, if the issues raised in the appeal have already been
determined  by  law,  regulation,  or  Program  policy,  then  the  appeal  may  not  move
forward  because  there  are  no  outstanding  issues  for  the  Program  to  resolve  with
respect to the individual appellant. For example, an appeal request may not challenge
the  enrollment  criteria  established  in  the  Zadroga  Act  or  the  Program’s  regulation
because those criteria are established by law and may only be changed by an act of
Congress  amending  the  law  or  the  Program  promulgating  an  amendment  to  the
regulation,  respectively.  Similarly,  an  appeal  request  may  not  challenge  a  Program
policy that has been established by the Administrator and is applicable to all Program
applicants and/or members. Any challenge to criteria established by law, regulation, or
Program  policy  through  the  appeal  process  would  be  ineffectual  because  revisions  to
such  criteria  require  a  broader  legal,  regulatory,  or  policy  action  that  would  be
applicable to all Program members; therefore, the challenge cannot be addressed in the
appeal  of  an  individual  applicant  or  member.  An  appeal  request  may,  however,
challenge the Program’s application of the enrollment criteria (e.g., the individual could
argue that the Program incorrectly determined the number of hours he/she worked or
volunteered during a covered time period). An individual wishing to voice concerns or
request  that  the  Administrator  change  a  Program  regulation  or  Program  policy  may
write to the Administrator (separate and distinct from any individual appeal process).
Changes  to  the  Zadroga  Act  require  an  act  of  Congress.  In  accordance  with  the
regulations,  the  Administrator  will  appoint  a  Federal  Official  to  review  the  appeal
request.  The  Federal  Official  is  independent  of  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  not
engaged in any enrollment and eligibility or disenrollment decisions other than appeals,
allowing for an objective third-party review of the facts.  
                                The appeal request can be mailed or submitted electronically to the
appeal coordinator at: 
                                    Appeal Coordinator
                                    WTC Health Program
                                    P.O. Box 7000
                                    Rensselaer, NY 12144
                                    Fax: 1.404.471.8338
                                
 The appeal procedure is as follows: 
                                Templates of these letters may be found in the “Eligibility
Determinations, Health Condition Certifications, & Treatment Determinations Subject to
Member Appeals” document:
                             142 C.F.R. § 88.14(b)(1)-(2). Last Revised – July, 2024 The purpose of
this  chapter  is  to  describe  the  circumstances  in  which  a  health  condition  may  be
certified under Title XXXIII of the PHS Act, the certification process, responsibilities in
the  certification  process,  conditions  that  may  be  certified,  communications  regarding
certifications, and appeals of certification decisions. Further detail on the certification
process  is  provided  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Member  Services  Operations  Manual,
found in the Program’s file of record. The following sections of Title XXXIII of the PHS
Act are applicable to this Chapter:  The following provisions in the WTC Health Program
regulations in 42 C.F.R. Part 88 are also applicable to this Chapter:  The parties involved
in certifying health conditions and their responsibilities are detailed below.  These are
histologically-proven,  metastatic,  malignant  neoplasms  the  primary  origin  of  which
cannot  be  identified  during  pre-treatment  evaluation.  The  date  of  diagnosis  of  the
metastatic  disease  will  be  used  to  evaluate  eligibility  for  certification  of  CUPs.  For
malignant neoplasms diagnosed before September 11, 2001, and those diagnosed after
September  11,  2001  but  with  insufficient  latency,  any  recurrence  or  metastasis  from
such  malignant  neoplasms  will  not  be  considered  for  certification  regardless  of  the
amount  of  time  that  passes  between  remission  of  the  pre-existing  neoplasm  and  its
recurrence  or  metastatic  spread.  An  exhaustive  search  of  the  scientific  literature  has
failed  to  identify  evidence  that  toxic  exposures  aggravate,  cause,  or  contribute  to  a
pre-existing  cancer  resulting  in  a  recurrence  or  metastasis  that  requires  a  change  in
treatment. A second primary cancer is a histologically-proven, new primary malignant
neoplasm  developing  in  a  person  with  a  history  of  cancer.  The  term  applies  to
malignant neoplasms that have arisen independently and not as a result of recurrence
or metastasis of the original primary malignant neoplasm. A second primary cancer is
considered eligible for certification if it was diagnosed after September 11, 2001 and
meets  the  WTC  Health  Program’s  minimum  latency  criteria  for  the  specific  cancer.
Alleged cases of second primary cancers originating from the same tissue and/or of the
same histological type as a malignant neoplasm that is certified, certifiable, or ineligible
for  certification  will  be  evaluated  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  The  review  will  include
consideration of the peer-reviewed scientific literature and Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results (SEER) Program   Multiple Primary and Histology Coding Rules. Such
reviews  will  be  documented  and  included  in  the  member  file  where  relevant  to  a
specific  cancer  certification  evaluation.  Special  Note  on  Acute  Traumatic  Injuries  and
Musculoskeletal Disorders 
                                            Acute Traumatic Injuries
                                            A WTC-related acute traumatic injury (ATI) is physical
damage to the body caused by and occurring immediately after a one-time exposure to
energy, such as heat, electricity, or impact from a crash or fall, resulting from a specific
event  or  incident.  Such  health  conditions  include  eye  injuries,  burns,  head  trauma,
fractures, tendon tears, complex sprains, and other similar acute traumatic injuries. 
                                            In order for an ATI to be certified by the Program, the injury
must  be  directly  related  to  a  member’s  9/11  exposures  and  activities and  must  have
occurred during one of the following time periods: September 11, 2001 – July 31, 2002
for acute traumatic injuries occurring at one of the New York City Area Sites; September
11, 2001 – November 19, 2001 for acute traumatic injuries occurring at the Pentagon
Site; or September 11, 2001 – October 3, 2001 for acute traumatic injuries occurring at
the Shanksville, Pennsylvania Site. In addition, the WTC responder or screening-eligible
or  certified-eligible  survivor  must  have  received  medical  treatment  for  the  acute
traumatic injury on or before September 11, 2003.
                                        
                                            Musculoskeletal Disorders 
                                            A WTC-related musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) is a chronic
or  recurrent  disorder  of  the  musculoskeletal  system  caused  by  heavy  lifting  or
repetitive  strain  on  the  joints  or  musculoskeletal  system  occurring  during  rescue  or
recovery efforts in the New York City disaster area in the aftermath of the September
11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Such health conditions include low back pain, carpal tunnel
syndrome (CTS), and other musculoskeletal disorders.  
                                            In order for an MSD to be certified by the Program, the
injury must be directly related to a member’s 9/11 exposures and activities and must
have  occurred  during  the  following  time  period:  September  11,  2001  –  July  31,
2002.  The Zadroga Act  only  allows  coverage  of  MSDs  for  WTC  Responders;  therefore,
Survivors and Pentagon and Shanksville, PA Responders cannot be certified for an MSD.
In  addition,  the  WTC  responder  must  have  received  medical  treatment  for  a
WTC-related musculoskeletal disorder on or before September 11, 2003.
                                        
 Health Conditions Medically Associated with WTC-Related Health Conditions
A  condition  that  is  medically  associated  with  a  WTC-related  health  condition  is  also
eligible  for  certification  and  treatment  within  the  WTC  Health  Program.  In  order  for  a
medically associated health condition to be certified, the condition must result from the
treatment  or  progression  of  a  WTC-related  health  condition.  The  underlying
WTC-related health condition must first be certified by the WTC Health Program before
any conditions may be certified as medically associated with the underlying condition.
Medically associated conditions are evaluated and certified on a case-by-case basis
The  WTC  Health  Program  requires  that  the  CCE  or  NPN  physician  provide  a  detailed
explanation  in  the  WTC-3  Certification  Request  form  (Appendix  3-A),  and  medical
records  as  appropriate,  that  the  health  condition  under  consideration  as  medically
associated  resulted  from  either  treatment  or  progression  of  the  underlying  certified
WTC-related health condition.  See Health Conditions Medically Associated with World
Trade Center-Related Health Conditions.  [5 pages, 484 KB]
                                            Establishing that the Medically Associated Health Condition
“Results from” Treatment of a Certified WTC-Related Health Condition.
                                            The WTC Health Program will review the CCE or NPN’s
explanation to determine if: (i) the relationship linking the medically associated health
condition  the  WTC-related  health  condition  occurs  without  the  influence  of  an
intermediary  health  condition  or  event;  and  (ii)  the  linkage  between  the  certified
WTC-related  health  condition  and  the  medically  associated  health  condition  resulting
from treatment of the certified WTC-related health condition has been well-established
by published peer-reviewed scientific literature.
                                            
                                                    “Results from” Treatment. The CCE or NPN physician
must  demonstrate  by  means  of  a  detailed  narrative  (including  medical  records  when
appropriate)  that  the  health  condition  “results  from”  medical  treatment  of  the
underlying  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  without  the  influence  of  an
intermediary  health  condition  or  event.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  certify  as
medically  associated  only  those  conditions  which  directly  result  from  treatment  of  a
WTC-related health condition, i.e., that the medically associated condition occurred in
absence of intervening medical events.
Note: CCE and NPN physicians are encouraged to consult with the Director, WTC Health
Program Medical Benefits, about medically associated health conditions that result from
treatment of a certified WTC-related health condition as certification will depend on the
particular medical facts of each case.
Previously  Published  in  Peer-Reviewed  Literature.  The  CCE  or  NPN  physician  must
demonstrate  that  the  medical  association  between  the  underlying  [certified
WTC-related] health condition and the medically associated health condition resulting
from  treatment  of  the  underlying  [certified  WTC-related]  health  condition  has  been
established in previously published peer-reviewed medical literature. The establishment
of  this  medical  association  in  the  literature  must  be  documented  in  the  member  file,
whether included as part of the physician’s narrative or otherwise captured by Program
staff.
                                            Establishing that the Medically Associated Health Condition
“Results from” Progression of a Certified WTC-Related Health Condition. 
The  WTC  Health  Program  will  review  the  CCE  or  NPN  physician’s  explanation  to
determine  if:  (i)  the  relationship  linking  the  medically  associated  condition  with  the
WTC-related  health  condition  occurs  without  the  influence  of  an  intermediary  health
condition  or  event;  and  (ii)  the  linkage  between  the  certified  WTC-related  health
condition  and  the  medically  associated  condition  resulting  from  progression  of  the
certified  WTC-related  health  condition  has  been  well-established  in  published,
peer-reviewed scientific literature.
                                                    “Result from” Progression. The CCE or NPN physician
must  demonstrate  by  means  of  a  detailed  narrative  (including  medical  records  when
appropriate)  that  the  health  condition  ”results  from”  progression  of  the  underlying
certified WTC-related health condition without the influence of an intermediary health
condition or event.
Note: CCE and NPN physicians are encouraged to consult with the Director, WTC Health
Program  Medical  Benefits,  about  medically  associated  health  conditions  that  are  the
result  of  progression  of  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  as  certification  will
depend on the particular medical facts of each case.
Previously  Published  in  Peer-Reviewed  Literature.   The  CCE  or  NPN  physician  must
demonstrate  that  the  medical  association  between  the  underlying  [certified
WTC-related] health condition and the medically associated health condition resulting
from  progression  of  the  underlying  [certified  WTC-related]  health  condition  has  been
established
 in
 previously
 published
 peer-reviewed
 medical
 literature.
 
 The
establishment of this medical association in the literature must be documented in the
member  file,  whether  included  as  part  of  the  physician’s  narrative  or  otherwise
captured by Program staff.
 A  condition  that  is  medically  associated  with  a  WTC-related  health  condition  is  also
eligible  for  certification  and  treatment  within  the  WTC  Health  Program.  In  order  for  a
medically associated health condition to be certified, the condition must result from the
treatment  or  progression  of  a  WTC-related  health  condition.  The  underlying
WTC-related health condition must first be certified by the WTC Health Program before
any conditions may be certified as medically associated with the underlying condition.
Medically associated conditions are evaluated and certified on a case-by-case basis The
WTC  Health  Program  requires  that  the  CCE  or  NPN  physician  provide  a  detailed
explanation  in  the  WTC-3  Certification  Request  form  (Appendix  3-A),  and  medical
records  as  appropriate,  that  the  health  condition  under  consideration  as  medically
associated  resulted  from  either  treatment  or  progression  of  the  underlying  certified
WTC-related health condition.  See Health Conditions Medically Associated with World
Trade  Center-Related  Health  Conditions.   [5  pages,  484  KB]  Note:  CCE  and  NPN
physicians are encouraged to consult with the Director, WTC Health Program Medical
Benefits, about medically associated health conditions that result from treatment of a
certified  WTC-related  health  condition  as  certification  will  depend  on  the  particular
medical  facts  of  each  case.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  review  the  CCE  or  NPN
physician’s  explanation  to  determine  if:  (i)  the  relationship  linking  the  medically
associated condition with the WTC-related health condition occurs without the influence
of an intermediary health condition or event; and (ii) the linkage between the certified
WTC-related  health  condition  and  the  medically  associated  condition  resulting  from
progression of the certified WTC-related health condition has been well-established in
published,  peer-reviewed  scientific  literature.  Note:  CCE  and  NPN  physicians  are
encouraged to consult with the Director, WTC Health Program Medical Benefits, about
medically associated health conditions that are the result of progression of a certified
WTC-related health condition as certification will depend on the particular medical facts
of each case. When a member is diagnosed with a health condition that the provider
believes  is  related  to  a  9/11  exposure,  the  member  may  be  eligible  for  medical
treatment for that condition under the Program.  If, following an initial health evaluation
or monitoring or treatment exam, the treating CCE or NPN physician determines that
the  member  has  a  health  condition  which  is  a  qualifying  condition  covered  by  the
Program, as described in Section 4, and that member’s exposure to airborne toxins, any
other hazard, or any other adverse condition resulting from the September 11, 2001,
terrorist  attacks,  is  substantially  likely  to  be  a  significant  factor  in  aggravating,
contributing to, or causing the illness or health condition or mental health condition, 
then  the  physician  must  submit  this  determination  to  the  Program  and  request
certification of the health condition in order to provide treatment under the Program.   
                                        Where a member’s CCE/NPN makes a negative determination
(a  finding  that  exposure  to  airborne  toxins,  any  other  hazard,  or  any  other  adverse
condition resulting from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, is not substantially
likely  to  be  a  significant  factor  in  aggravating,  contributing  to,  or  causing  the  health
condition or mental health condition) and declines to request certification of the health
condition by the WTC Health Program, the member may request a secondary review of
this decision by writing the Clinical Director of the CCE or NPN. However, a request for a
secondary  medical  review  for  a  health  condition  that  does  not  meet  WTC  Health
Program policy is not permitted. Disagreement with Program policy is not a valid reason
for secondary review. The procedure for a secondary review is as follows:
                                     The WTC-3 Certification Package is the standard documentation
completed  by  a  CCE/NPN  physician  to  request  certification  for  a  member’s  health
condition;  it  provides  the  medical  rationale  linking  the  exposure  to  the  stated  health
condition. A sample of the form is provided in Appendix 3-A. This form must be used for
any condition which a physician has determined to be WTC-related since the Program
CCE contracts were implemented [i.e., as of July 1, 2011 for enrolled responders; as of
September  29,  2011  for  enrolled  survivors;  and  as  of  October,  2013  for  enrolled
members assigned to the Nationwide Provider Network (NPN)]. The Clinical Director of
the  CCE  or  the  NPN  reviews,  approves  and  securely  submits  the  completed  WTC-3
Certification Package signed by the examining or responsible physician to the Program.
Such  forms  are  also  used  to  request  certification  of  health  conditions  as  medically
associated  with  a  WTC-related  health  condition.  The  WTC-3  Certification  Package
contains identifying information for the member and examiner, diagnostic codes for the
condition(s)  for  which  the  member  is  requesting  certification,  and  either  a  medical
rationale linking 9/11 exposure to the health condition or the medical rationale linking
the medically associated health condition to an existing WTC-related health condition.
For  a  health  condition  medically  associated  with  a  WTC-related  health  condition,  the
physician’s  determination  shall  contain  information  on  how  the  health  condition  has
resulted from treatment of a previously certified WTC-related health condition, or how it
has resulted from progression of the certified WTC-related health condition. All cancer
certification  requests  require  a  pathology  report  to  be  submitted  with  the  WTC-3
Certification  Package.  Specific  guidance  regarding  how  to  complete  the  WTC-3
Certification Package, including reasonable practice examples using Program-approved
templates,  is  provided  below.   When  providing  a  rationale  for  the  certification,
requesters use an explanatory narrative that may be combined with Program-approved
template  within  the  WTC-3  form.  The  rationale  should  contain  pertinent  information
about 9/11 exposure and time-linked emergence of symptoms. Facts available from the
standardized  monitoring  or  screening  examination,  including  exposure  assessment,
presenting  symptoms  and  temporal  relationship  of  these  symptoms  relative  to  9/11
exposure,  should  be  included.  Medical  findings  should  be  documented  in  the
institutional medical record, which include the screening or monitoring exams and any
additional  medical  testing  or  imaging  studies  required  to  establish  the  diagnosis.  By
procedure, the member’s institutional medical record is incorporated by reference when
the  CCE  provider  or  NPN  Clinical  Director  requests  certification  using  the  WTC-3
Certification Package. This process provides the Program with all relevant information
required  to  make  an  informed  decision  regarding  the  member’s  certification.   See
Appendix  3-B  for  instructions  specific  to  completing  the  WTC-3  form  for  cancer.  The
WTC-3  submission  must  include  a  signed  affirmative  statement  by  the  physician  that
the  member’s  exposure  to  airborne  toxins,  any  other  hazard,  or  any  other  adverse
condition resulting from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, is substantially likely
to be a significant factor in aggravating, contributing to, or causing the illness or health
condition  or  mental  health  condition.   If  the  physician  is  unable  to  make  such  and
affirmative  finding,  then  the  WTC-3  cannot  be  submitted  or  considered.   The  WTC-2
batch  certification  process  was  used  for  a  subset  of  program  members  who  had
treatment initiated for qualifying conditions as part of the previous federally-sponsored
programs  (the  Medical  Monitoring  and  Treatment  Program  (MMTP)  for  responders
and/or  the  Environmental  Health  Clinic  (EHC)  for  community  members).  This  process
was implemented to ensure treatment continuity for members already receiving care
under  predecessor  programs  and  is  no  longer  being  used.  If  the  certifications  for
qualified  conditions  were  supported  by  documentation  in  the  members’  medical
records,  the  Clinical  Director  of  the  CCE  or  the  NPN  submitted  an  attestation  for  all
members and their associated conditions via electronic spreadsheet. The spreadsheet
contained  identifying  member  information  and  diagnostic  codes  for  each  qualifying
WTC-related or medically associated condition that required certification. The CCE/NPN
then  transmitted  the  WTC-2  batch  certification  request  to  the  Program  in  a  secure
manner  (as  described  in  Section  6,  below).  The  Program  verified  the  requested
conditions against the Codebook (described further in Section 9, below) and returned
any  discrepant  data  to  the  submitter  for  rectification.  Periodic  summary  reports  of
certified conditions by member were then sent to the CCE/NPN by the HPS contractor.
The  CCE/NPN  is  responsible  for  maintaining  a  record  of  a  member’s  certifications  to
enable  appropriate  service  authorization  decisions.  As  part  of  their  Quality  Assurance
Program  the  CCE/NPN  conducts  internal  audits  of  their  contracted  part  of  the  WTC
Health Program at a minimum of every quarter. These data are made available to the
Administrator of the WTC Health Program or designee. Where data is obtained, through
a  quality  assurance  audit  or  otherwise,  that  indicates  that  the  certification  issued
through the WTC-2 process was incorrect, the Administrator of the WTC Health Program
may  de-certify  a  condition  as  appropriate.   Certification  is  the  lynchpin  by  which  the
Program  ensures  members  receive  appropriate  services  and  that  all  services  are
provided  in  accordance  with  statutory  and  regulatory  requirements.  A  CCE/NPN  is
responsible  for  submitting  requests  for  health  condition  certification  using  the  WTC-3
form.  The  WTC  Health  Program  then  reviews  and  evaluates  the  request  (WTC-3)  and
makes  one  of  three  possible  decisions  for  each  health  condition  contained  within  the
request:   Authorization  of  Treatment  Pending  Certification  is  permitted  pursuant  to
Sections 3312(b)(5) (responders) and 3322(a) (survivors) of the PHS Act and 42 C.F.R. §
88.20(c). Treatment pending certification is offered, where specifically requested by a
CCE/NPN physician, in order to provide timely institution of therapy or continuity of care
while a certification request is being reviewed.  A CCE or NPN physician is responsible
for submitting requests for certification of a health condition using the WTC-3 form. The
WTC Health Program then reviews and evaluates the request (WTC-3) and makes one of
the three following decisions for each health condition contained within the request: 
The  Program  makes  every  effort  to  make  informed  decisions  regarding  WTC-related
health condition certifications in a timely manner and to communicate those decisions
to  the  member  efficiently.  For  certification  requests  of  health  conditions  medically
associated with a WTC-related health condition, the Program will render a decision and
notify the member in writing of the decision and the reason for the decision within 60
calendar days after the date the physician’s determination was received.  To that end,
the  Program  has  developed  decision  letters  addressing  the  range  of  decisions  that
could  be  made  in  the  certification  process  (e.g.,  approval  or  denial  of  certification
request, the need for additional information to inform the certification decision, etc.).
When a member’s health condition is approved for certification as either a WTC-related
health  condition  or  a  medically  associated  health  condition,  the  Program  sends  the
member  a  letter  informing  him/her  of  the  certification  and  provides  electronic
notification  to  the  CCE/NPN  that  requested  the  certification.  When  a  member’s
requested health condition is denied certification, the Program sends the member letter
informing  him/her  of  the  denial  and  provides  an  electronic  copy  of  the  letter  to  the
requesting CCE/NPN. The denial letter discusses the condition requested, the reason for
the denial, and the information submitted to the Program for review from the CCE or
NPN.  The  letter  also  answers  frequently  asked  questions  and  provides  instructions
about how appeal the denial decision.  A suspended request for certification is neither
certified  nor  denied,  but  has  been  placed  in  an  administratively  pended  status  until
specific  facts  are  either  supplied  (when  missing)  or  clarified  (when  too  vague  or
misleading) by the CCE or NPN submitting the request for certification.  The WTC Health
Program  will  notify  the  CCE  or  NPN  that  submitted  the  request  for  certification  when
more  information  is  required  to  complete  processing  of  the  request  for  certification.
This notification will be made in writing by electronic message (via secure portal). The
CCE or NPN has 60 days from the date of the written notification from the WTC Health
Program  to  provide  the  Program  with  the  requested  additional  information.  The  WTC
Health  Program  will  provide  weekly  updates  to  each  CCE  or  NPN  regarding  any
outstanding  requests  for  certification  that  have  been  suspended  pending  additional
information  and  the  number  of  days  that  have  elapsed  since  the  notification  and
request for additional information for each case was sent to the CCE or NPN. As a result
of the request for certification being suspended, the WTC Health Program member is
generally not eligible to receive medical or pharmacy benefits for the health condition
subject  to  request  for  certification.  However,  if  the  original  submission  requesting
certification  of  a  given  condition  included  a  time-limited  authorization  of  treatment
pending  certification,  the  requesting  CCE  or  NPN  may  choose  to  continue  providing
benefits to the member at their own expense. In the event that the suspended request
for  certification  is  subsequently  approved  through  timely  rectification  of  the  record,
reimbursement  of  treatment  services  will  be  permitted  with  an  effective  date  of  the
signature  date  of  the  original  WTC-3  submission.  In  the  event  that  the  condition  is
denied certification, any care provided outside the parameters of the Diagnostic Plan
will not be covered and the CCE or NPN providing the care will be responsible for the
costs of such care. If the concerns resulting in the suspended request are not resolved
after  60  days  as  outlined  above,  then  any  authorization  for  treatment  pending
certification is terminated and the member is notified as per protocol.  There are five
potential outcomes for a request for certification that has been placed in a suspended
status; those outcomes are as follows:  The CCE or NPN responds to the notification of a
suspended request for certification with additional or clarifying information. Based on
this  information,  the  Program  is  able  to  certify  the  health  condition.  The  CCE  or  NPN
responds to the notification of a suspended request for certification with additional or
clarifying information. This additional information does not satisfy the requirements for
certification,  however,  and  results  in  a  denial  of  certification  for  the  health  condition.
The member has the right to appeal the denial decision.  The CCE or NPN responds to
the notification of a suspended request for certification by indicating in writing that they
would like to withdraw the original request for certification. If a withdrawal is requested,
the  WTC  Health  Program  will  no  longer  evaluate  the  request  for  certification  and  will
administratively  close  the  request  file.  Reasons  for  withdrawal  may  include  the
CCE/NPN  determining  that  the  requested  information  cannot  be  supplied  in  a  timely
manner  or  newly  recognizing  that  the  request  for  certification  cannot  be  supported
based  on  established  WTC  Health  Program  criteria.  The  CCE/NPN  will  inform  the
member of the withdrawal of the request for certification, and advise the member of
their  right  to  a  secondary  review.  If  the  CCE  or  NPN  responds  to  the  WTC  Health
Program’s notification of suspended request for certification but is unable to provide the
requested information necessary to resolve the suspended certification request within
the 60 day time limit allowed for final resolution of the request, then the WTC Health
Program  will  take  the  following  actions.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  send  a  written
communication  to  the  CCE/NPN  (via  electronic  message)  asking  for  confirmation  that
they  cannot  provide  additional  information  but  that  they  still  wish  to  request
certification for the health condition. If the CCE/NPN responds in writing (via electronic
message) that this is the case, then the WTC Health Program will deny the request for
certification  of  the  health  condition  due  to  lack  of  sufficient  information  to  make  a
definitive  evaluation  of  the  link  between  9/11  exposure  and  the  requested  health
condition  or  between  the  WTC-related  health  condition  and  the  requested  medically
associated  health  condition.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  inform  the  member  of  the
denial and his or her right to request an appeal of the denial decision.  If the CCE or
NPN does not respond at all to the notification of a suspended request for certification
within the 60 day time limit allowed for final resolution of the request, then the WTC
Health  Program  will  administratively  close  the  request  for  certification  of  the  health
condition  due  to  lack  of  sufficient  information  to  support  a  physician’s  determination
(upon  which  a  certification  decision  could  be  based).  Similarly,  if  the  WTC  Health
Program  asks  the  CCE/NPN  for  a  confirmation  that  they  cannot  provide  additional
information but that they still wish to request certification for the health condition (as
outlined above) and the response from the CCE/NPN is unclear or equivocal as to the
intent to request certification, then the WTC Health Program will administratively close
the request for certification of the health condition due to lack of sufficient information
to support the physician’s determination. In either case, the WTC Health Program will
notify the CCE or NPN in writing via electronic message that the request for certification
has  been  administratively  closed.  The  CCE/NPN  will  inform  the  member  of  the
administrative closure of the request for certification, and advise the member of his or
her right to a secondary review. The CCE/NPN may submit a new WTC-3 at a later date
should additional or clarifying information becomes available.  
                                        The WTC Health Program does not certify health conditions for
deceased  members.  The  WTC  Health  Program  may  cover  medically  necessary
treatment for certified health conditions from the effective date of the certification (or
from the effective date of the certification request in cases of appropriately requested
treatment pending certification). The WTC Health Program will not review certification
requests dated after a member’s death.
                                     WTC-related health conditions identified in 42 C.F.R. § 88.15
have been grouped into certification categories to align the limited coverage intent of
the Program with standards of care and principles of medical necessity. The WTC Health
Program defined the business rules used in the processing (adjudication) of healthcare
claims  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  limited  coverage  intent  of  the  Program.  Each
member  category  –  General  Responder,  Screening-eligible  Survivor,  Certified-eligible
Survivor, FDNY Responder, and FDNY Family Member – is associated with one or more
designated  benefit  plans.  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook  contains  the  covered
diagnosis  codes  (ICD-9,  or  if  after  October  1,  2015,  ICD-10),  procedural  codes  (CPT-4
and HCPCS), and pharmaceutical codes (Rx) for the Program. Providers are responsible
for  working  with  the  CCE/NPN  to  determine  allowable  services.  A  more  complete
description of these categories and benefit plans may be found in Chapter 4.  Requests
to  appeal  a  denial  of  certification  of  a  health  condition  as  a  WTC-related  health
condition  or  as  a  health  condition  medically  associated  with  a  WTC-related  health
condition,  a  decertification  of  a  health  condition,  or  a  denial  of  authorization  for
treatment must be postmarked within 120 calendar days of the date of the letter from
the Administrator notifying the member of the adverse decision. A valid request for an
appeal must (1) be made in writing and signed; (2) identify the WTC Health Program
member and designated representative (if applicable); (3) describe the decision being
appealed and the reasons why the member or designated representative believes the
decision  is  incorrect  and  should  be  reversed;  and  (4)  be  sent  to  the  WTC  Health
Program  at  the  address  specified  in  the  notice  of  denial.1   The  description  in  the
request may include scientific or medical information correcting factual errors that may
have  been  submitted  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  by  the  CCE  or  NPN;  information
demonstrating that the WTC Health Program did not correctly follow or apply relevant
WTC Health Program policies or procedures; or any information demonstrating that the
WTC  Health  Program’s  decision  was  not  reasonable  given  the  facts  of  the  case.  The
basis  provided  in  the  appeal  request  must  be  sufficiently  detailed  and  supported  by
information  to  permit  a  review  of  the  appeal.  Any  new  information  not  previously
considered  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  must  be  included  with  the  appeal  request,
unless  later  requested  by  the  WTC  Health  Program.2  For  more  detailed  information
about  what  may  or  may  not  be  considered  during  the  appeal  process,  please  see
Chapter 4, Section 3.6 of this Administrative Manual. An appeal request that meets the
above requirements, however, will still be considered invalid and outside the scope of
the  WTC  Health  Program’s  administrative  appeal  process  if  its  sole  argument  is  a
challenge to existing law, regulations, or Program policies. In other words, if the issues
raised  in  the  appeal  have  already  been  determined  by  law,  regulation,  or  Program
policy, then the appeal may not move forward because there are no outstanding issues
for  the  Program  to  resolve  with  respect  to  the  individual  appellant.  For  example,  an
appeal request may not challenge a denial of certification of a health condition where
the  denial  was  based  on  certification  requirements  established  in  the  Zadroga  Act  or
the health condition not being included on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions
(List)  in  the  Program’s  regulation  at  42  C.F.R.  §  88.15  because  those  criteria  are
established by law and may only be changed by an act of Congress amending the law
or the Program publishing an amendment to the regulation, respectively. Similarly, an
appeal request may not challenge a denial of certification based on a Program policy
that  has  been  established  by  the  Administrator  and  is  applicable  to  all  Program
members, such as the latency requirements in the Program’s Minimum Latency & Types
or  Categories  of  Cancer.  Any  challenge  to  criteria  established  by  law,  regulation,  or
Program  policy  through  the  appeal  process  would  be  ineffectual  because  revisions  to
such  criteria  require  a  broader  legal,  regulatory,  or  policy  action  that  would  be
applicable to all Program members; therefore, the challenge cannot be addressed in the
appeal  of  an  individual  member.  An  appeal  request  may,  however,  challenge  the
Program’s application of the certification criteria (e.g., the member could argue that the
Program  incorrectly  determined  the  amount  of  time  that  elapsed  between  the
member’s  initial  9/11  exposure  and  the  date  of  his/her  initial  cancer  diagnosis).    An
individual  wishing  to  voice  concerns  or  request  that  the  Administrator  change  a
Program  regulation  or  policy  may  write  to  the  Administrator.   An  individual  may  also
petition the Administrator to add a health condition to the List of WTC-Related Health
Conditions
 (List);
 for
 more
 information
 on
 the
 petition
 process,
 see
https://www.cdc.gov/wtc/petitions.html.  The  petition  process  can  only  be  used  to
request the addition of a WTC-related health condition to the List.  It cannot be used to
request that the Program cover a specific health condition medically associated with a
certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  cover  a  certain  type  of  treatment,  or  amend
Program regulations or policies. Changes to the Zadroga Act require an act of Congress.
When  a  denial  of  health  condition  certification  or  a  decision  to  decertify  a  health
condition  is  issued  by  the  Program,  the  member  may  appeal  the  decision.  An  appeal
must be made in writing within 120 calendars days from the date of the WTC Health
Program’s  letter  notifying  the  member  of  the  denial  or  decertification  decision.  The
written, signed appeal request should include a full explanation of why the member (or
the member’s designated representative) believes that the denial decision is incorrect. 
See Overview of the Appeal Process for Denial of Health Condition  [PDF, 9 pages, 684
KB]  The following mailing address or fax number should be used to submit a request
for appeal:  
                                Appeal Coordinator
                                WTC Health Program 
                                Po Box 7000
                                
                                Rensselaer, NY 12144
                                Fax: 1-404-471-8338
                             
142 C.F.R. § 88.21(b).
242 C.F.R. § 88.21(b)(2)(iii).
                             Last Revised – May, 2024 4-A WTC Health Program Instructions for
Completing  WTC-3  Package  Requesting  Certification  for  Types  of  Cancer  4-B  Medical
Change Review Request Form 4-C Transplant Authorization Form 4-D Home Health Care
CMS  Form  485  4-E  Dental  Prior  Authorization  Level  3  Request  Form  4-F  Policy  and
Procedures for Cancer Screening This chapter describes the medical benefits that are
available  through  the  World  Trade  Center  (WTC)  Health  Program  under  the  James
Zadroga  9/11  Health  and  Compensation  Act  of  2010  (the  Act),  including:  (1)  the
Program’s responsibilities regarding the provision of medical benefits and the roles of
various  parties;  (2)  the  types  of  medical  benefits  and  treatment  provided;  (3)
communications  regarding  medical  benefits;  (4)  appeals  of  treatment  authorization
decisions;  (5)  the  process  for  requesting  changes  to  medical  treatment  that  is
permitted  under  the  WTC  Health  Program;  and  (6)  unique  considerations  relative  to
certain  permitted  services.  The  following  Sections  of  the  Act  are  applicable  to  this
chapter:  Program  regulations  relating  to  medical  benefits  are  established  in  the
following  sections  of  42  C.F.R.  Part  88:  The  parties  involved  in  providing  WTC  Health
Program medical benefits and their roles are detailed below:  The WTC Health Program
provides  medical  treatment  services  for  the  conditions  specified  in  the  Act  and  42
C.F.R. § 88.15, as well as any other condition added to the List through the rulemaking
procedures specified by the Act. 
                                Pursuant to Section 3312(b)(4) of the Act, the scope of treatment
covered includes services of physicians and other health care providers, diagnostic and
laboratory  tests,  prescription  drugs,  inpatient  and  outpatient  hospital  services,  and
other  medically  necessary  treatment.  Transportation  expenses  to  secure  medically
necessary treatment through the NPN, involving travel of more than 250 miles, are also
authorized under 
                                    Section 3312(b)(4)(C).1
 Section  3312(b)(3)(A)  requires  physicians  and  other  providers  to  provide  medically
necessary  treatment  that  is  in  accordance  with  medical  treatment  protocols  when
providing  treatment  for  a  WTC-related  health  condition.  Medical  treatment  protocols,
also referred to as “medical guidelines,” are developed by the Data Centers (DCs) in
accordance  with  accepted  medical  practice  and  recommendations  from  professional
organizations,  such  as  the  American  Medical  Association,  American  College  of  Chest
Physicians, and the like. The protocols are subsequently approved by the Administrator
of  the WTC Health  Program  or  Designee for  use with  WTC Health  Program  members.
Protocols are maintained by the DCs/CCEs as well as in NIOSH’s official file of record.
Section 3312(b)(3)(B) requires that the Administrator of the WTC Health Program issue
regulations  specifying  a  standard  for  determining  medical  necessity,  a  process  for
determining  whether  the  standard  is  being  met,  and  an  appeals  process  for  medical
necessity determinations. 2 The WTC Health Program uses benefit plans to determine
the type of medical procedures or treatment a member is eligible to receive.  “Benefit
plans” are groupings developed by the WTC Health Program that define the acceptable
ranges  of  care  for  specific  categories  of  covered  health  conditions.  The  WTC  Health
Program offers multiple benefit plans, which are open to members based on their status
as  defined  in  the  Act  (e.g.,  Responder  or  Survivor)  and  their  certified  health
condition(s).  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook  also  lists  approved  medical
procedures and treatment by benefit plan (For further information, see Section 3.2 WTC
Health Program Codebooks). The benefit plans include procedures for the initial health
evaluation for survivors, annual medical monitoring for responders and certified-eligible
survivors, diagnostic evaluation to enable a nonspecific symptom or abnormal finding to
be  properly  diagnosed  for  the  purpose  of  certification,  and  treatment  benefit  plans
organized  by  the  category  of  certified  health  condition(s).  Screening-eligible  Survivor
WTC Health Program Benefit Plan: Survivor Screening (during initial health evaluation
period); Diagnostics (during initial health evaluation period); Cancer Diagnostics (during
 initial  health  evaluation  period  3)  Certified-eligible  Survivor  WTC  Health  Program
Benefit  Plan:  Monitoring;  Diagnostics;  Cancer  Diagnostics;  Treatment;  Cancer
Treatment  if  certified  for  WTC-related  cancer  condition.  General  &  FDNY  Responder
WTC  Health  Program  Benefit  Plan:  Monitoring;  Diagnostics;  Cancer  Diagnostics;
Treatment; Cancer Treatment if certified for WTC-related cancer condition. FDNY Family
WTC  Health  Program  Benefit  Plan:  Diagnostics  (coverage  limited  to  mental  health
conditions);  Treatment  (coverage  limited  to  certified  mental  health  conditions)
Shanksville  Responder  WTC  Health  Program  Benefit  Plan:  Monitoring;  Diagnostics;
Cancer  Diagnostics;  Treatment;  Cancer  Treatment  if  certified  for  WTC-related  cancer
condition.  Pentagon  Responder  WTC  Health  Program  Benefit  Plan:  Monitoring;
Diagnostics;  Cancer  Diagnostics;  Treatment;  Cancer  Treatment  if  certified  for
WTC-related  cancer  condition.  Section  3321(b)(1)  of  the  Act  provides  for  an  initial
health evaluation (screening) for screening-eligible WTC survivors. The purpose of the
screening is to determine whether the member has a WTC-related health condition and
is  eligible  for  follow-up  monitoring  and  treatment  benefits  under  the  WTC  Health
Program.  Unlike  annual  monitoring  exams,  the  screening  is  a  one-time  evaluation.
However,  the  member  may  seek  additional  screenings  at  his  or  her  own  expense.  4
Upon
 enrollment
 in
 the
 WTC
 Health
 Program,
 survivors
 are
 classified
 as
screening-eligible survivors without a certified health condition and are eligible for the
Survivor Screening Benefit Plan. As screening-eligible survivors, they have access to all
of  the  services  in  the  Survivor  Screening  Benefit  Plan  and  the  services  in  the  Cancer
Screening  Benefit  Plan.  The  initial  health  evaluation  for  screening-eligible  survivors  is
listed in the WTC Health Program Codebook, Volume B, under the Survivor Screening
Benefit Plan. Use of codes included under the Survivor Screening Benefit Plan indicates
to the claims processing system that a given procedure is part of the survivor’s initial
health  evaluation.  The  initial  health  evaluation  includes  all  of  the  following  elements,
which  have  been  implemented  for  the  WTC  Health  Program  responder  and  survivor
populations based largely on USPSTF guidelines:   
                                Once a health condition is certified, the screening-eligible survivor’s
status changes to certified-eligible survivor and they are authorized to receive annual
                                medical monitoring and medically necessary treatment to manage
that condition following the medical protocols approved by the Program. 8  Under rare
circumstances, a survivor may obtain certification prior to completion of the full initial
health
 evaluation
 exam
 if
 specific
 requirements,
 including
 medical
 record
documentation  and  other  certification  requirements  are  met.9  The  member  is  still
required  to  receive  the  appropriate  initial  health  evaluation  to  identify  other  health
conditions that may be a result of exposure.10
 Sections  3311(b)  and  3321(b)(1)  authorize  monitoring  benefits  for  enrolled  WTC
responders  and  certified-eligible  survivors,  respectively.  These  monitoring  benefits
consist of yearly medical examinations and long-term health monitoring and analysis.
Monitoring benefits are provided through the CCEs, or the NPN for enrolled members
who  live  outside  of  the  New  York  metropolitan  area.11  The  purpose  of  medical
monitoring is to identify health concerns for early intervention, characterize the health
of Program members over time, facilitate efforts for continuous quality improvement in
the healthcare rendered by the Program, and inform emergency preparedness efforts
for  future  disasters.12   Monitoring  benefits  for  WTC  responders  and  certified-eligible
survivors  are  listed  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  B,  under  the
Monitoring Benefit Plan.  Use of procedure codes included under the Monitoring Benefit
Plan  indicates  to  the  claims  processing  system  that  a  given  procedure  is  part  of  the
standard  monitoring  exam.  The  monitoring  exam  includes  the  following  elements,
which  have  been  implemented  for  the  WTC  Health  Program  responder  and  survivor
populations  based  largely  on  USPSTF  guidelines:  All  members  are  eligible  for  the
Diagnostics  Benefit  Plan,  including  members  who  have  a  certified  health  condition(s)
and  members  who  do  not  have  a  certified  health  condition(s).  Screening-eligible
survivors who do not have a certified health condition(s) have access to the Diagnostics
Benefit Plan only during the initial health evaluation period. Codes in this benefit plan
should  be  used  when  evaluating  a  member’s  symptoms  to  determine  whether  a
member  has  a  WTC-related  health  condition,  including  both  cancer  and  non-cancer
conditions.  Mental  health  conditions  under  the  Diagnostics  Benefit  Plan  are  also
available  to  FDNY  family  members.  All  diagnostic  claims  should  be  coded  using  an
approved  ICD-10  code  in  the  Diagnostics  Benefit  Plan.  Following  certification  of  the
WTC-related  health  condition  (as  appropriate),  the  ICD-10  codes  available  for  that
condition  can  be  used  as  part  of  the  Treatment  Benefit  Plan.  Under  the  Treatment
Benefit  Plan,  the  WTC  Health  Program  provides  coverage  for  medical  diagnoses  and
procedures  related  to  a  member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  The
Treatment  Benefit  Plan  should  be  used  for  all  non-cancer  certifications,  while  the
Cancer Treatment Benefit Plan should be used for all cancer certifications. FDNY family
members  are  eligible  for  treatment  of  mental  health  conditions  under  the  Treatment
Benefit Plan.  For responders and certified-eligible survivors, providers may use any of
the  procedure  codes  located  in  the  Treatment  Benefit  Plan,  as  long  as  the  codes
correspond  with  the  condition-specific  Care  Suite.  Care  Suites  are  used  in  the
Treatment Benefit Plan to further group medical diagnosis codes (ICD-10) into specific
treatment categories. When a member is certified for a WTC-related health condition,
the  member  is  assigned  to  a  Care  Suite  that  correlates  with  their  certified  health
condition(s).  The  medical  services  associated  with  each  covered  condition  arise  from
standard  coding  references,  including  the  American  Medical  Association’s  (AMA’s)
Current  Procedural  Terminology  (CPT®)  codes,  and  the  Centers  for  Medicare  and
Medicaid  Services’  (CMS’)  Healthcare  Common  Procedural  Coding  System  (HCPCS)
Level II codes.  The table below provides an example of ICD-10 diagnosis codes that are
in the Gastroesophageal Reflux Disorder (GERD) Care Suite. Certification of any of the
following WTC-related ICD-10 diagnosis codes opens up the GERD Care Suite, so that
the  member  has  access  to  all  the  medical  services  within  the  GERD  Care  Suite.  
WTC-Related ICD-10 Code: J39.2 ICD-10 Code Description: Diseases of Pharynx- Other
WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K20.0  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Esophagitis-  Eosinophilic
WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K20.8  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Esophagitis-  Other
WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K21.0  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Gastro-esophageal  reflux
with  esophagitis  WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K21.9  ICD-10  Code  Description:
Gastro-esophageal  reflux  without  esophagitis   WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K29.30  
ICD-10  Code  Description:  Chronic  superficial  gastritis  without  bleeding  WTC-Related
ICD-10  Code:  K29.31  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Chronic  superficial  gastritis  with
bleeding WTC-Related ICD-10 Code: K29.40 ICD-10 Code Description: Chronic atrophic
gastritis without bleeding WTC-Related ICD-10 Code: K29.41 ICD-10 Code Description:
Chronic atrophic gastritis with bleeding WTC-Related ICD-10 Code: K29.50 ICD-10 Code
Description: Chronic gastritis without bleeding – Unspecified WTC-Related ICD-10 Code:
K29.51  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Chronic  gastritis  with  bleeding—Unspecified
WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K29.60  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Other  gastritis  without
bleeding  WTC-Related  ICD-10  Code:  K29.61  ICD-10  Code  Description:  Other  gastritis
with
 bleeding
 WTC-Related
 ICD-10
 Code:
 K29.90
 ICD-10
 Code
 Description:
Gastroduodenitis without bleeding—Unspecified The Care Suites provide an important
fiscal  control  for  the  Program  by  defining  additional  business  rules  guiding  the
adjudication  of  healthcare  claims  for  payment.  The  examining  physician  submits
information about a specific health condition to the WTC Health Program to review for
certification (see Chapter 3, Certification of Health Conditions). The Codebooks provide
the  medical  coding  for  all  medically  necessary  care  to  manage  the  certified  health
condition under a specific Care Suite. The Care Suites enable the claims adjudication
process  to  approve  the  appropriate  care  for  that  health  condition,  but  withstand  the
variability  that  may  occur  between  providers  or  referral  specialists  using  different
specific  diagnosis  codes  when  billing  for  procedures.  The  conditions  listed  within  a
given Care Suite either share target symptoms (like cough), or share a mechanism of
injury (like inflammation) within a given organ system. The Program uses the following
Care Suites in the Treatment Benefit Plan: Once a member receives certification for a
new  non-cancer  health  condition,  the  condition  is  assigned  to  a  specific  Care  Suite
listed  above.  The  claims  processing  system  compares  the  billed  diagnosis  code  on  a
claim  against  the  Care  Suite  for  the  member’s  health  condition,  and  verifies  that  the
diagnosis  on  a  claim  is  among  the  accepted  diagnoses  within  that  Care  Suite.  This
process provides important checks and balances to ensure only approved care for the
member’s  certified  condition  is  delivered  under  the  WTC  Health  Program.   Health
conditions  medically  associated  to  the  WTC-related  health  condition  due  to  the
progression or treatment of the certified WTC-related health condition are also treated
through the Care Suite model and require certification.  “Ancillary condition” refers to a
health  condition  that  does  not  meet  the  requirements  for  certification  under  the
Program,  but  must  be  treated  in  order  to  manage,  ameliorate  or  cure  a  certified
WTC-related health condition or health condition medically associated with a certified
WTC-related health condition. Ancillary conditions are typically within the same organ
system  as  the  certified-WTC  related  health  condition  or  certified  health  condition
medically  associated  with  a  certified-WTC  related  health  condition.  This  includes  the
acute complications of WTC-related health conditions or common treatment side effects
that  are  generally  inexpensive  to  manage  (ex.  Cough,  nausea).  WTC  Health  Program
cancer  screening  benefits  are  based  upon  guidelines  recommended  by  the  U.S.
Preventive  Services  Task  Force  (USPSTF).  The  Program  only  covers  cancer  screening
services  with  a  USPSTF  Grade  A  or  Grade  B  recommendation15.  Cancer  screening  is
currently  limited  to  breast,  cervical,  colon,  and  lung  cancers.  Cancer  screening
procedures  can  be  billed  with  any  valid  diagnosis  code  listed  in  the  WTC  Health
Program, Codebook Volume B. Cancer screening is available to all WTC Health Program
members16 (except FDNY family members) who meet the age and risk guidelines set
forth by the USPSTF. The timing and frequency of cancer screening are based on the
following guidelines: Exclusion criteria for all forms of cancer screening covered by the
WTC Health Program are based on best medical practice and include: When a CCE or
NPN  health  provider  determines  that  a  member  has  an  abnormality  which  merits
diagnostic evaluation for a possible WTC-related cancer, the provider uses codes in the
Cancer  Diagnostic  Benefit  Plan.  The  Cancer  Diagnostic  Benefit  Plan  is  assigned  to  all
enrolled  responders  (except  FDNY  family  members),  and  is  also  available  to  enrolled
survivors  during  the  initial  health  evaluation  period.  If  the  survivor  has  a  certified
WTC-related  health  condition,  the  Cancer  Diagnostic  Benefit  Plan  is  available  on  a
continuous basis along with the Monitoring Benefit Plan. CCE and NPN providers should
use their clinical judgment to determine when clinical, laboratory, or imaging findings
merit  further  evaluation  for  a  possible  WTC-related  cancer,  while  considering  the
exposure history of the member and the likelihood of finding a form of cancer that is
covered  by  the  WTC  Health  Program.   The  services  (procedure  codes)  that  are
permitted  for  cancer  under  the  Cancer  Diagnostic  Benefit  Plan  are  found  in  the  WTC
Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  A.  In  addition,  numerous  ICD-10  condition  codes
(some  that  correlate  with  various  signs  and  symptoms  that  could  be  indicative  of
cancer) may be used for services billed under the Cancer Diagnostic Benefit Plan. These
allowable  condition  codes  (ICD-10)  are  listed  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,
Volume B. When a CCE or NPN physician determines that a member’s 9/11 exposures
are substantially likely to have been a significant factor in aggravating, contributing to,
or causing  a cancer condition, the physician may request certification of the member’s
condition with the submission of a WTC-3 certification request. To assist the CCE or NPN
provider  with  certification  requests  for  cancer  conditions,  a  supplemental  information
packet  has  been  developed  entitled  “Instructions  for  Completing  WTC-3  Package
Requesting Certification for Types of Cancer.”21 Once a member has been certified for
a WTC-related cancer, the member is assigned to the Cancer Treatment Benefit Plan.
The  Cancer  Treatment  Benefit  Plan  contains  the  medical  services  (procedure  codes)
necessary  to  treat  certified  cancer  conditions,  medically  associated  conditions,  and
ancillary  conditions.22  The  procedure  codes  for  these  services  are  found  in  the  WTC
Health Program Codebook, Volume A. The cancer diagnosis (ICD-10) codes are found in
the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  B.  The  National  Comprehensive  Cancer
Network has developed “Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology” (NCCN Guidelines23)
for cancer treatment. To the extent practical and possible, these guidelines will be used
to  guide  cancer  treatment  under  the  Program.   The  Medical  Coverage  Determination
(MCD) and coverage guidelines for this section are under development. This section will
be updated once finalized. The WTC Health Program Codebook lists approved medical
procedures  and  diagnosis  codes  that  may  be  used  for  members,  depending  on  the
members’  Member  Category  (Responder  or  Survivor)  and  their  certified  health
condition(s). The WTC Health Program Codebook is divided into two volumes, which are
further organized by benefit plans that define the acceptable ranges of care for specific
categories of health conditions. The treatment benefit plan is further organized by care
suites.   (For  further  information,  see  Approved  Benefit  Plans,  Section  2.0).  The
Codebook should be consulted by the CCE/NPN providers to determine payable services
and  to  review  applicable  guidelines  and  authorization  requirements.  Limitations  and
authorization  requirements  are  further  described  in  Guidelines  for  Covered  Services,
Section  4.0  .   The  Codebook  lists  the  available  procedure/service  code,  code
description,  mapping  to  the  respective  benefit  plan,  relevant  effective  dates,  prior
authorization  levels  (if  applicable),  guidelines  (if  applicable),  service  limitations  (if
applicable),  and  code  history.  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  A  is
reviewed and updated on a regular basis, and is provided to the CCEs and NPN. The
diagnosis  codes  arise  from  standard  coding  references,  including  the  International
Classification  of  Diseases,  Revision  10  (ICD-10).  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,
Volume  B  lists  the  available  diagnosis  code,  code  description,  mapping  to  the
respective benefit plan or Care Suite, relevant effective dates, guidelines (if applicable),
and  code  history.  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  B  is  reviewed  and
updated on a regular basis, and is provided to the CCEs and NPN. To ensure members
receive  ongoing  high-quality,  WTC  Health  Program-approved  care,  the  Program
maintains  a  mechanism  for  making  necessary  changes  to  the  WTC  Health  Program
Codebook.  WTC  Health  Program-initiated  changes  in  covered  health  condition
diagnostic and treatment codes are made on an ongoing basis. These changes may be
enacted to refine treatment protocols, align code coverage with WTC Health Program
approved  coverage,  or  bring  codes  in  line  with  updates  made  by  organizations  that
oversee  the  codes  (such  as  the  American  Medical  Association  or  the  Centers  for
Medicare and Medicaid Services).  The CCE/NPN may determine 26  that a diagnosis,
procedure, or medical product is necessary for quality patient care, but is not currently
covered by the WTC Health Program. The CCE/NPN may also need to request changes
to covered health condition diagnostic and treatment codes. In both of these scenarios,
the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director  may  request  coverage  for  the  diagnosis,  procedure,  or
medical  product,  or  a  change  to  the  code,  by  properly  completing  and  submitting  a
WTC-5 Medical Code Request Form (Appendix 5.2) to the WTC Health Program MBM via
the  Medical  Code  Request  Process.  The  submission  of  this  form  triggers  the  process,
which begins with a review of the request and a subsequent decision by the WTC Health
Program  MBM  through  the  HPS.  The  WTC  Health  Program  MBM  will  review  the
CCE/NPN-completed WTC-5 Medical Code Request Form (Appendix 5.2) and render one
of the following decisions: The CCE/NPN and Program staff are required to use the most
current version of the Codebook. Because the Codebook undergoes frequent revisions,
the CCE/NPN and Program staff should always consult the most current version of the
Codebooks when referencing any procedure or diagnosis codes cited in this manual to
determine if the code is still valid. Codebooks are updated and posted monthly in the
SAMS Portal for the CCEs/NPN to access. Certain medical services, devices, and drugs
have  limited  use  guidelines  and/or  require  Prior  Authorization  (PA).  Brief  guidelines,
including  those  related  to  PAs,  are  listed  in  the  Codebook  and  direct  the  treating
provider  to  use  services  in  limited  or  specific  clinical  situations  that  align  with  the
Program’s  limited  health  plan  model.  More  information  on  coverage  limitations  and
service  specific  coverage  decisions  can  be  viewed  in  Section  4.0  “Guidelines  for
Covered  Services  (A-Z).”  The  Codebook  will  list  the  code,  definition,  authorization
requirement, and guideline (if applicable). The CCE/NPN Clinical Director may designate
individuals to serve as designees for Level 2 Prior Authorization (PA2) and Level 3 Prior
Authorization  (PA3)  requests.  The  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director  is  liable  for  all  PA2/PA3
decisions.  The  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director  may  designate  a  limited  number  of  staff
members  to  sign  PA2/PA3  requests  on  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director’s  behalf  only  if
they  have  the  appropriate  training  and  expertise.  The  name  and  credentials  of  the
designee  must  be  sent  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  for  approval  as  a  selected
“treatment  authorization  designee.”  Medical  necessity  documentation  must  clearly
state the justification for use of the service, drug, or device. If the member is certified,
documentation must clearly state how the service/drug/device manages, ameliorates,
or  cures  the  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  or  health  condition  medically
associated with a certified WTC-related condition. Some services are for diagnostic and
evaluation  purposes  and  should  have  clear  documentation  in  the  member  medical
record  or  other  CCE/NPN  tracking  system  as  to  why  the  service,  drug,  or  device  is
necessary to diagnose and evaluate a suspected WTC-related health condition.   
                                            No further notification to the WTC Health Program is
required
 for
 PA2s,
 since
 the
 CCE/NPN
 stamp
 on
 a
 paper-based
 or
electronically-submitted  medical  claim  (described  in  Chapter  5)  reflects  the  CCE/NPN
acknowledgement  that  the  claim  is  valid  in  accordance  with  all  WTC  Health  Program
requirements, including those related to PAs.
                                         If the CCE/NPN Clinical Director denies the PA2, the members
may request a secondary review. Each CCE/NPN must have an established secondary
review  process.  Please  contact  the  CCE/NPN  for  instructions  on  the  secondary  review
process.  Some services which require a PA3 (e.g. home health aide, hospice inpatient
respite care, etc.) have a Medical Coverage Determination (MCD) with specific guidance
on use and limitations (see MCDs in Section 4.0 “Guidelines for Covered Services A-Z”).
The CCE/NPN Clinical Director must submit a PA3 Request to the WTC Health Program
for any service, drug, or device that requires a PA3. Prior to performing or authorizing a
service that requires a PA3, the CCE/NPN Clinical Director must submit a PA3 Request to
the  WTC  Health  Program  and  receive  authorization  from  the  Program.  If  the  PA3
Request  is  not  received,  the  WTC  Health  Program  will  not  provide  payment  for  the
service.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  either  approve,  deny,  or  administratively  close
the  PA3  Request  and  will  return  the  form,  along  with  the  decision,  to  the  Health
Program  Support  (HPS)  contractor  for  distribution  to  the  requesting  CCE/NPN.  In  the
event  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  the  medical  service,  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director
may submit a PA3 Request for the medically necessary, urgent services retrospectively.
This  retrospective  PA3  Request  must  be  submitted  within  the  timeframe  parameters
stated  within  the  MCD.  For  those  services  which  do  not  currently  have  an  MCD,  the
retrospective  PA3  should  be  submitted  within  14  calendar  days  of  the  start  date  of
services.  Each  medical  service  will  generally  be  authorized  as  a  single  service  unless
otherwise requested by the CCE/NPN in the PA3 Request. The rationale for additional
services  must  be  included  in  the  medical  justification.  For  PA3  Requests  extending
beyond  a  single  service,  the  CCE/NPN  must  specify  an  authorization  date  range  and
intended quantity (or unit) of service.  The HPS contractor coordinates with the MBM to
process the authorization request. The HPS contractor will notify the CCE/NPN Clinical
Director of the approval, denial, or administrative closure. While certification is pending,
authorization  for  time-limited  treatment  of  a  WTC-related  health  condition  or  health
condition medically associated with a WTC-related health condition may be requested
at  the  CCE/NPN  physician’s  discretion  through  the  WTC-3  Form.  The  purpose  of  this
authorization is to ensure continuity of appropriate medical care that is time sensitive
and consistent with Program policy. Such authorization must be obtained from the WTC
Health Program before treatment is provided, except for the provision of treatment for
a  medical  emergency.  28  Treatment  rendered  after  WTC-3  submission,  but  prior  to
certification, will only be covered if the request for treatment pending certification was
included in the WTC-3 submittal, the request for certification is ultimately granted, and
the  treatment  provided  is  medically  necessary,  does  not  require  a  Level  3  Prior
Authorization,  follows  Program  guidelines,  and  is  rendered  by  a  CCE/NPN-affiliated
provider. In the event that the condition is denied certification, any care provided for
the  condition  that  is  outside  the  parameters  of  the  Diagnostic  Plan  or  Cancer
Diagnostics  Benefit  Plan  shall  be  discontinued  immediately  and  the  CCE  or  NPN
providing the care will be responsible for the costs of such care.29 Requests to appeal a
denial of authorization for treatment must be postmarked within 120 calendar days of
the  date  of  the  letter  from  the  Administrator  notifying  the  member  of  the  adverse
decision.  A  valid  request  for  an  appeal  must  (1)  be  made  in  writing  and  signed;  (2)
identify the WTC Health Program member and designated representative (if applicable);
(3)  describe  the  decision  being  appealed  and  the  reasons  why  the  member  or
designated  representative  believes  the  decision  is  incorrect  and  should  be  reversed;
and  (4)  be  sent  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  at  the  address  specified  in  the  notice  of
denial.30 The description in the request may include scientific or medical information
correcting factual errors that may have been submitted to the WTC Health Program by
the  CCE  or  NPN;  information  demonstrating  that  the  WTC  Health  Program  did  not
correctly  follow  or  apply  relevant  WTC  Health  Program  policies  or  procedures;  or  any
information demonstrating that the WTC Health Program’s decision was not reasonable
given  the  facts  of  the  case.  The  basis  provided  in  the  appeal  request  must  be
sufficiently detailed and supported by information to permit a review of the appeal. Any
new  information  not  previously  considered  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  must  be
included with the appeal request, unless later requested by the WTC Health Program.31
An appeal request that meets the above requirements, however, will still be considered
invalid  and  outside  the  scope  of  the  WTC  Health  Program’s  administrative  appeal
process  if  its  sole  argument  is  a  challenge  to  existing  law,  regulations,  or  Program
policies. In other words, if the issues raised in the appeal have already been determined
by law, regulation, or Program policy, then the appeal may not move forward because
there are no outstanding issues for the Program to resolve with respect to the individual
appellant. For example, an appeal request may not challenge a denial of certification of
a health condition where the denial was based on certification requirements established
in the Zadroga Act or the health condition not being included on the List of WTC-Related
Health Conditions (List) in the Program’s regulation at 42 C.F.R. § 88.15 because those
criteria  are  established  by  law  and  may  only  be  changed  by  an  act  of  Congress
amending  the  law  or  the  Program  publishing  an  amendment  to  the  regulation,
respectively. An individual wishing to voice concerns or request that the Administrator
change  a  Program  regulation  or  policy  may  write  to  the  Administrator.  An  individual
may also petition the Administrator to add a health condition to the List of WTC-Related
Health  Conditions  (List);  for  more  information  on  the  petition  process,  see  
https://www.cdc.gov/wtc/petitions.html.  The  petition  process  can  only  be  used  to
request the addition of a WTC-related health condition to the List. It cannot be used to
request that the Program cover a specific health condition medically associated with a
certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  cover  a  certain  type  of  treatment,  or  amend
Program regulations or policies. Changes to the Zadroga Act require an act of Congress.
When  a  denial  of  authorization  for  treatment  is  issued  by  the  Program,  the  member
may appeal the decision. An appeal must be made in writing within 120 calendars days
from the date of the WTC Health Program’s letter notifying the member of the denial or
decertification  decision.  The  written,  signed  appeal  request  should  include  a  full
explanation of why the member (or the member’s designated representative) believes
that the denial decision is incorrect. See Overview of the Appeal Process for Denial of
Health Condition [PDF, 10 pages, 591KB] . The following mailing address or fax number
should be used to submit a request for appeal:  
                                    Appeal Coordinator
                                    WTC Health Program
                                    P.O. Box 7000
                                    Rensselaer, NY 12144
                                    Fax: 1-404-471-8338
                                 Covered services, procedures, and devices are given codes and
listed  in  the  Program  Codebooks  for  use  by  CCE/NPN  and  network  providers.  Some
codes include additional guidelines for use, which are listed in the Codebook. Certain
subsets of services have exceptions, limitations, and/or authorization criteria, which are
desribed in the section below. For those services, procedures, and devices with more
detailed  exceptions  and  limitations,  the  Program  has  created  Policy  and  Procedure
(P&P)  documents  that  broadly  delineate  the  Program’s  stance  on  benefit  or
pharmaceutical coverage, outline high-level Program procedure, or clarify current law
and  regulation.  Some  P&Ps  generate  more  comprehensive  coverage  information
contained in documents called Medical Coverage Determinations (MCDs). MCDs are an
administrative tool which provide coverage information for specific services, along with
qualifying  criteria  for  coverage  and  instructions  for  authorization.  Certain  MCDs  may
also have applicable forms, such as prior authorization forms or reimbursement forms,
intended for use by WTC Health Program providers. The below section outlines Program
guidelines  for  certain  covered  services,  procedures,  and  devices.  The  content  in  this
section undergoes regular programmatic evaluation, as the Program revises its policies
and procedures to reflect the latest administrative regulations. As a result, this section
may  have  frequent  program  updates  or  new  language  in  development.  Acupuncture
involves the manipulation of a bodily system by inserting small needles into identified
anatomical  points.  Acupuncture  methods  may  also  include  the  use  of  heat,  pressure,
friction,  suction,  and  electromagnetic  impulses.  The  WTC  Health  Program  provides
coverage of such acupuncture services in certain instances. The WTC Health Program
will  cover  medically  necessary  acupuncture  services  for  members  with  certified
WTC-related  cancer  when  authorized  by  a  WTC  Health  Program  provider.  The  WTC
Health Program follows the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines
which  recommend  the  use  of  acupuncture  for  cancer-related  pain,  fatigue,  nausea,
and/or  vomiting.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  also  cover  acupuncture  services  for
members with chronic pain resulting from certified WTC-related acute traumatic injuries
(ATI), musculoskeletal disorders (MSD), and health conditions causing chronic pain that
are medically associated with the ATI or MSD condition. The WTC Health Program must
authorize acupuncture services for ATI and MSD conditions. Members may receive up to
12 acupuncture visits in 90 days if they meet certain criteria for authorization. Members
showing  improvement  may  receive  subsequent  authorization  for  an  additional  eight
acupuncture visits for a total of 20 acupuncture visits during the 12-month period from
the date of their first treatment. 
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination   [PDF, 6 pages, 208 KB] 
 
                                    CAR-T therapy is a type of cancer treatment that is used when
standard  cancer  treatments  have  failed  or  cancer  has  relapsed.  In  CAR-T  therapy,  a
type of immune system cell called a T-cell is taken from a patient’s blood and altered in
the laboratory so it will attack cancer cells. Large numbers of CAR-T cells are grown in
the laboratory and given to the patient by infusion. CAR-T therapy may be covered by
the WTC Health Program when the services are medically necessary for the member’s
certified WTC-related cancer, or health condition medically associated with a certified
WTC-related cancer.
                                 
                                    Members may receive medically necessary CAR-T therapy when
they meet certain criteria for authorization. CAR-T therapy must be administered at a
healthcare facility enrolled in the FDA Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS)
compliance program; the therapy must be used for either an FDA-approved indication
or for other uses when the product has been FDA-approved and the use is supported in
one  or  more  CMS-approved  compendia.  Coverage  of  CAR-T  therapy  services  is
permitted only when in accordance with other Program guidelines.
                                 
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination  [PDF, 204 KB, 5 pages, June
2023]
 
                                    The WTC Health Program will only cover medically necessary
healthcare services within the United States and its territories, including the District of
Columbia, Guam, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, the
Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. The WTC
Health  Program  will  not  cover  medical  care,  pharmacy  products,  or  supplies  received
outside of the United States or its territories.
                                 COVID-19 is a systemic respiratory disease caused by the severe
acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  2  (SARS-CoV-2  or  SARS-CoV-2  infection).  The
virus spreads through respiratory droplets or very small particulates produced when an
infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks. Some people infected may be asymptomatic.
For those who are symptomatic, illness may range from mild to severe. Adults 65 years
and older and people with certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for
severe COVID-19.  The WTC Health Program may provide coverage of acute COVID-19
diagnostic and treatment services that are medically necessary to manage, ameliorate,
or  cure  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  or  medically  associated  health
condition  and  which  meet  relevant  prior  authorization  criteria.  The  CCE/NPN  Clinical
Director may authorize acute COVID-19-related services only when the member meets
all  of  the  applicable  requirements  described  in  this  medical  coverage  determination
(MCD). 
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination – COVID-19  [PDF, 221 KB, 10
pages, July 2021]
 
                                    The WTC Health Program provides limited coverage of medically
necessary dental services for members undergoing certain cancer treatments or organ
transplantation for a certified WTC-related health condition. Members receiving either a
solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplant or cancer treatment involving
radiation and chemotherapy for a certified WTC-related health condition may receive a
dental  exam  and  medically  necessary  dental  treatment  prior  to  undergoing  the
transplant or treatment. In addition, members with certified WTC-related head or neck
cancers may receive additional dental services that are medically necessary to address
dental trauma or other adverse effects resulting from cancer treatment. 
                                 
                                    The WTC Health Program provides coverage of medically
necessary  dental  services  only  when  certain  criteria  for  authorization  are  met.  Some
dental  services  may  be  authorized  by  a  WTC  Health  Program  provider.  Other  dental
services  must  be  authorized  by  the  Program.   The  Program  may  cover  medically
necessary dental services related to other certified WTC-related health conditions on a
case-by-case basis, including coverage for fitting an oral device in limited situations for
members certified for sleep apnea.
                                 
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination  [PDF, 278 KB, 7 pages, June
2023]
 Durable  medical  equipment,  prosthetics,  orthotics,  and  supplies  (DMEPOS)  rental  or
purchase is a covered health service by the WTC Health Program. The CCE/NPN Clinical
Director  must  provide  a  Level  2  Prior  Authorization  (PA),  when  indicated  in  the  WTC
Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  A,  and  the  DMEPOS  must  be  ordered  via
prescription 37  by a WTC Health Program provider or a WTC Health Program-affiliated
provider to treat a certified WTC-related health condition or health condition medically
associated with a certified WTC-related health condition. DMEPOS is a covered health
service  when  the  member  is  under  the  care  of  a  CCE/NPN  provider  or  a
CCE/NPN-affiliated provider; the DMEPOS is ordered by the provider via prescription; the
CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director  provides  a  Level  2  PA  Request,  when  indicated  in  the  WTC
Health Program Codebook, Volume A; and the DMEPOS is to be used primarily at home
to  treat  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  or  a  health  condition  medically
associated with a certified WTC-related health condition.  Suppliers of DMEPOS must be
enrolled in Medicare and have a Medicare supplier number. The WTC Health Program
will not pay a claim for equipment that is provided by a supplier that does not have a
Medicare  supplier  number.   The  following  three  (3)  requirements  must  be  met  and
documented by the CCE/NPN in order for the WTC Health Program to provide payment
for the DMEPOS: 38  Equipment which is primarily and customarily used for non-medical
purposes may not be considered “medical” equipment for which payment can be made
under  the  WTC  Health  Program.  This  is  true  even  though  the  item  has  some  remote
medically-related use. For example, in the case of a member with lung cancer, an air
conditioner might possibly be used to lower room temperature to reduce fluid loss in
the patient and to restore an environment conducive to maintenance of the proper fluid
balance. Nevertheless, because the primary and customary use of an air conditioner is
a  non-medical  one,  the  air  conditioner  may  not  be  deemed  to  be  DMEPOS  for  which
payment can be made.46  Other devices and equipment used for environmental control
or  to  enhance  the  environmental  setting  in  which  the  beneficiary  is  placed  are  not
considered  covered  DMEPOS.  These  include,  for  example,  room  heaters,  humidifiers,
dehumidifiers,  and  electric  air  cleaners.  Equipment  which  basically  serves  comfort  or
convenience  functions,  or  is  primarily  for  the  convenience  of  a  person  caring  for  the
member,  such  as  elevators,  stairway  elevators,  and  posture  chairs,  do  not  constitute
DMEPOS.  Similarly,  physical  fitness  equipment  (such  as  an  exer-cycle),  first-aid  or
precautionary-type equipment (such as preset portable oxygen units), self-help devices
(such as safety grab bars), and training equipment (such as Braille training texts) are
considered  nonmedical  in  nature.  47  The  following  DMEPOS  are  excluded  from
coverage under the WTC Health Program: The CCE/NPN Clinical Director must provide a
Level 2 PA Request when indicated in the WTC Health Program Codebook, Volume A.
The  CCE/NPN  is  responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  DMEPOS  supplier  is  enrolled  in  the
WTC  Health  Program.  The  WTC  Health  Program  will  pay  for  a  member  to  receive
DMEPOS if all established conditions are met. 
                                            Reimbursement rates for DMEPOS are in accordance with
the FECA fee schedule.
                                            Payment for DMEPOS is either on a rental or lump-sum
purchase basis. In the case of rental, the item(s) are to be paid monthly.48  Separate
maintenance  and  servicing  payments  are  not  made  for  any  rented  DMEPOS,  nor  are
delivery and service charges for rental or purchased DMEPOS. Such costs are assumed
to have been taken into account by suppliers (along with all other overhead expenses)
in setting the prices they charge for covered items and services.
                                         The WTC Health Program will continue to review available
DMEPOS  codes  and  add  them  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,  as  appropriate.
DMEPOS items, with established CPT/HCPCS codes, that are prescribed and considered
to be medically necessary for treatment of a member’s certified condition(s), may be
requested for addition to the WTC Health Program Codebook by the CCE/NPN through
the usual change request process using a WTC-5 Medical Code Request Form. If there is
no  established  CPT/HCPCS  code  for  a  necessary  DMEPOS  item,  the  CCE/NPN  should
contact the HPS Contractor for guidance. The WTC Health Program follows the definition
of emergency medical condition established in the Medicare regulations implementing
the  Emergency  Medical  Treatment  and  Active  Labor  Act  (EMTALA)  which  define  an
emergency  medical  condition  as  “a  medical  condition  manifesting  itself  by  acute
symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain, psychiatric disturbances and/or
symptoms of substance abuse) such that the absence of immediate medical attention
[via  emergency  care  services]  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  result  in:  placing  the
health of the individual… in serious jeopardy; serious impairment to bodily functions; or
serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part….”49 The WTC Health Program follows
the  Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  definition  of  emergency  care
services,  which  are  defined  as  “inpatient  or  outpatient  hospital  services  that  are
necessary to prevent death or serious impairment of health and, because of the danger
to life or health, require use of the most accessible hospital available and equipped to
furnish  those  services.”50   Payment  for  treatment  that  is  not  related  to  a  certified
WTC-related health condition, or health condition medically associated with a certified
WTC-related  health  condition,  or  a  health  condition  likely  to  be  certified  as  a  WTC
health condition due to exposure, will be denied.  Claims submitted directly to the WTC
Health Program by external providers will be returned to the CCE/NPN for review and
authorization.  When the CCE/NPN submits the ED claim to the WTC Health Program,
the CCE/NPN is responsible for ensuring that the medical facility providing emergency
services is enrolled as a provider with the WTC Health Program, through either a Single
Case  Agreement  (SCA)  or  a  full  contract.  The  standard  review  stamp  or  submission
through Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) represents the CCE/NPN’s acknowledgement
that the CCE/NPN has an authorization on file. ED claims must be accompanied by any
available  medical  documents/reports  to  facilitate  the  medical  review.  Whenever
possible,  ED  claims  should  contain  valid  codes  found  in  the  WTC  Health  Program
Codebook for the date of service. If after medical review, the WTC Health Program finds
that codes other than those found in the WTC Health Program Codebook are acceptable
for  the  claim,  the  additional  charges  will  be  paid  and  the  Codebook  will  be  updated
accordingly.  All  coding  and  reimbursement  is  subject  to  the  requirements  of  coding
rules  and  guidelines  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook  located  on  the  Secure
Access Managements services (SAMs) portal.  As with other CCE/NPN documentation,
all authorizations are subject to audit and utilization reviews. The Program will not pay
for  the  following  services  provided  by  an  emergency  care  provider:  Members  should
follow-up with their respective CCE/NPN for further treatment and monitoring following
their ED visit within 14 calendar days. As with other external provider bills, ER claims
must  be  submitted  through  the  member’s  CCE/NPN.  The  CCE/NPN  is  responsible  for
ensuring that the medical facility providing emergency services is enrolled as a provider
in the WTC Health Program. Claims submitted directly to the WTC Health Program by
external providers will be returned to the CCE/NPN for review and authorization. When
the ER claim is submitted to the WTC Health Program via the CCE/NPN, the standard
review stamp or submission through Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) represents the
CCE’s/NPN’s  acknowledgement  that  the  CCE/NPN  has  an  ER-A  on  file.  As  with  other
CCE/NPN documentation, ER-As are subject to audit and utilization reviews. ER claims
must be accompanied by any available medical reports to facilitate the medical review. 
Whenever  possible,  ER  claims  should  contain  valid  codes  found  in  the  WTC  Health
Program  Codebook  for  the  date  of  service.  If  after  medical  review  the  WTC  Health
Program finds that codes other than those found in the WTC Health Program Codebook
are acceptable for the claim, the additional charges will be paid and the Codebook will
be  updated  accordingly.  All  coding  and  reimbursement  is  subject  to  requirements  of
coding rules and guidelines.  All ER treatment will be evaluated during the processing of
the  claim  to  ensure  that  treatment  beyond  screening  and  stabilization  was  directly
related  to  the  care  of  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health  condition
medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  to  an  initial  or
emergency  presentation  of  a  condition  that  is  likely  to  be  certified  as  a  WTC-related
health condition (based on the exposure history on file). Payment for treatment beyond
screening  and  stabilization  that  is  not  related  to  a  certified  WTC-related  health
condition or health condition medically associated with a certified WTC-related health
condition,  or  a  WTC  exposure,  will  be  denied.  The  hospital  providing  emergency
services  may  follow  reasonable  registration  procedures  once  the  member  has  been
screened and stabilized. EMTALA does not prohibit an inquiry into availability of medical
insurance, but it does provide that neither examination nor treatment may be delayed
to make the inquiry.53   A pre-authorization requirement imposed by the WTC Health
Program  should  not  prevent  or  delay  the  performance  of  a  medical  screening
evaluation  or  the  institution  of  necessary  stabilizing  treatment  once  it  is  determined
that an emergency medical condition exists. Hospitals may ask members to complete
financial  responsibility  forms  upon  registration.  Such  forms  are  common  practice  and
are standard consent forms that are signed at the time of hospital registration. These
forms may result in the member being responsible for payment for services not covered
by WTC Health Program.  An ER or ED is not the appropriate medical environment for a
WTC Health Program member to seek care for a routine illness. Where the member’s
medical  condition  never  was,  or  never  appeared  to  be,  an  emergency,  a  physician’s
office  or  CCE/NPN  clinic,  for  example,  would  be  a  more  appropriate  and  adequate
medical environment for providing such non-emergency care. Non-emergency visits to
the  ER  or  ED  compromise  the  coordination  and  continuity  of  care  for  individual  WTC
Health Program members; therefore, they are not covered by the WTC Health Program.
Members should be referred back to their CCE/NPN for appropriate follow-up care. To
ensure proper receipt and payment of claims, the member should inform the treating
hospital/ED that the CCE/NPN should be notified of the member’s visit to the ER or ED. 
WTC  Health  Program  members  may  require  hospitalization  in  the  treatment  of  their
covered  conditions.  Such  treatment  is  covered  by  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in
accordance with the provisions below.  Only claims that relate to certified WTC-related
health conditions, or health conditions medically associated with certified WTC-related
health conditions, should be submitted to the WTC Health Program.
All  inpatient  hospitalizations  require  a  Level  2  PA  by  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director,
unless  Level  3  PA  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  is  required  (e.g.,  transplants,  some
surgeries).  See  Section  3.4,  “Prior  Authorizations”  above  for  further  information
regarding PA requirements. 
The CCE/NPN Clinical Director may authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting diagnosis (primary diagnosis-related group [DRG] ) is directly related to the
member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  directly  related  to  a  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  The
CCE/NPN Clinical Director may also authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting  diagnosis  is  documented  as  consistent  with  WTC  Health  Program  policy
pertaining to diagnostic evaluation services for WTC-related conditions.54
If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 
All  inpatient  hospitalizations  require  a  Level  2  PA  by  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director,
unless  Level  3  PA  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  is  required  (e.g.,  transplants,  some
surgeries).  See  Section  3.4,  “Prior  Authorizations”  above  for  further  information
regarding PA requirements. 
The CCE/NPN Clinical Director may authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting diagnosis (primary diagnosis-related group [DRG] ) is directly related to the
member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  directly  related  to  a  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  The
CCE/NPN Clinical Director may also authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting  diagnosis  is  documented  as  consistent  with  WTC  Health  Program  policy
pertaining to diagnostic evaluation services for WTC-related conditions.54
If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 All  inpatient  hospitalizations  require  a  Level  2  PA  by  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director,
unless  Level  3  PA  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  is  required  (e.g.,  transplants,  some
surgeries).  See  Section  3.4,  “Prior  Authorizations”  above  for  further  information
regarding PA requirements. 
The CCE/NPN Clinical Director may authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting diagnosis (primary diagnosis-related group [DRG] ) is directly related to the
member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  directly  related  to  a  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  The
CCE/NPN Clinical Director may also authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting  diagnosis  is  documented  as  consistent  with  WTC  Health  Program  policy
pertaining to diagnostic evaluation services for WTC-related conditions.54
If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 
The CCE/NPN Clinical Director may authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting diagnosis (primary diagnosis-related group [DRG] ) is directly related to the
member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  directly  related  to  a  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  The
CCE/NPN Clinical Director may also authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting  diagnosis  is  documented  as  consistent  with  WTC  Health  Program  policy
pertaining to diagnostic evaluation services for WTC-related conditions.54
If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 The CCE/NPN Clinical Director may authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting diagnosis (primary diagnosis-related group [DRG] ) is directly related to the
member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  directly  related  to  a  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  The
CCE/NPN Clinical Director may also authorize admission for inpatient services when the
admitting  diagnosis  is  documented  as  consistent  with  WTC  Health  Program  policy
pertaining to diagnostic evaluation services for WTC-related conditions.54
If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 
If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 If the hospitalization also involves a procedure that requires prior authorization by the
WTC Health Program (Level 3 PA) and the CCE/NPN is aware prior to hospitalization that
a Level 3 PA procedure will be performed, then the admission must be authorized by
both  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Directorand  the  WTC  Health  Program,  in  accordance  with
established procedures for a Level 3 PA.  If the need for a Level 3 PA55 procedure arises
during the hospitalization, authorization will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
 
 Claims  for  inpatient  hospitalizations  must  be  submitted  using  standard  UB-04
(CMS-1450)  format  or  electronically  using  the  837  5010  ANSI  standard  format.
Hospital-based inpatient services should be billed on the UB-04 showing revenue center
charges, ICD-10 diagnosis codes, procedure codes, and the hospital's Medicare number.
Inaccurate  coding  may  cause  inappropriate  reimbursement,  erroneous  reductions  in
allowable  amounts,  and/or  delays  in  bill  processing.  The  physician's  professional
services should be coded and billed on Form CMS-1500 or the electronic equivalent. 
The  WTC  Health  Program  may  request  detailed  inpatient  hospital  claims,  notes,  and
discharge summaries for some claims after submission. Failure to respond to requests
for additional information related to claims for inpatient hospitalizations may result in
delay in processing or denial of the claim. The CCE/NPN is responsible for ensuring that
the hospital is enrolled as a provider in the WTC Health Program. See Chapter 6 of this
manual for more information regarding enrolling providers.  All acute inpatient hospital
claims  processed  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  will  be  priced  using  diagnosis-related
group (DRG)-based pricing, as modified by the FECA Program. The amount paid will be
the  lesser  of  the  DRG-based  price  or  the  amount  billed.  See  Chapter  5  for  more
information regarding billing of claims.  
                                    The WTC Health Program does not cover costs associated with
medical marijuana.56
                                    As of May 2019, 33 States and Washington D.C. allow the
purchase and use of medical marijuana.  Although WTC Health Program members may
be able to access and purchase medical marijuana in their state of residence, its use is
not approved by the FDA57  and is considered an illegal substance (Schedule 1)58  by
the federal government.
                                 The Medical Coverage Determination (MCD) and coverage
guidelines  for  this  section  are  under  development.  This  section  will  be  updated  once
finalized. The Medical Coverage Determination (MCD) and coverage guidelines for this
section are under development. This section will be updated once finalized. The Medical
Coverage  Determination  (MCD)  and  coverage  guidelines  for  this  section  are  under
development.  This  section  will  be  updated  once  finalized.  The  Medical  Coverage
Determination (MCD) and coverage guidelines for this section are under development.
This  section  will  be  updated  once  finalized.  In  certain  circumstances,  psychotherapy
services  for  a  member’s  family  may  be  covered  as  part  of  the  treatment  of  the
member’s  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  Family  members  include  a  parent,
spouse,  or  child  who  lives  in  the  same  household  as  the  member.  As  part  of  a
comprehensive  mental  health  assessment  with  a  qualified  provider,  a  diagnostic
interview  session  with  other  family  members  may  be  needed  to  assess  the  family
context contributing to or being impacted by the member’s mental health related to the
attacks  on  September  11th.  When  conducted  with  the  explicit  verbal  and  written
consent of a WTC Health Program member, a single diagnostic interview session may
be billed (CPT 90791) to the WTC Health Program as part of the member’s benefit under
the Diagnostics Benefit Plan in order to evaluate whether the member’s situation meets
the Program’s criteria for certification. This single session may involve more than one
family member, if clinically desirable.  In addition, marriage or family counseling may
be medically indicated to treat a WTC Health Program member’s certified mental health
condition.  During  the  course  of  such  therapy,  the  non-member  may  require  an
individual  therapeutic  evaluation/intervention  to  manage  traumatic  reactions  or  trust
issues  emerging  from  the  family  treatment.  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,
Volume A identifies the appropriate codes for use when marriage or family counseling is
needed  to  treat  the  member’s  certified  mental  health  condition.  The  WTC  Health
Program may provide a maximum of two family therapy sessions without the member
present (CPT 90846) every 3 months for up to eight sessions in total with the expressed
consent  of  the  member  for  this  specific  reason.  Use  of  the  member’s  treatment  plan
benefit for this purpose must be documented as medically necessary in the treatment
record  and  a  Level  2  PA  by  the  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director  is  required.  The  CMS-1500
form  (or  EDI  equivalent)  should  be  completed  using  the  member’s  ID  number,  the
member’s  name  as  the  “Insured’s  Name”  (box  4),  and  the  member’s  name  as  the
“Patient’s Name” (box 2). The remittance advice will reflect the member name only. 
Mental health conditions detected or emerging in the non-member during the course of
family  therapy,  including  ongoing  trust  issues,  should  be  referred  to  community
resources  for  treatment.  The  WTC  Health  Program  does  not  cover  the  cost  of  such
treatment for non-members.  To the extent permitted under State law, mental health
services can be delivered by a: 
                                    MGUS is a condition in which abnormal levels of certain proteins
are found in the blood. These abnormal levels of protein must be monitored by regular
blood  tests  to  check  for  any  signs  of  cancer  that  could  develop  over  time.  The  WTC
Health  Program  may  provide  coverage  of  medically  necessary  MGUS  services  (i.e.,
initial  diagnostic  studies  and,  after  diagnosis,  further  monitoring)  when  there  are
symptoms  of  a  plasma  cell  neoplasm  or  clinical  findings  suggestive  of  MGUS.  WTC
Health Program providers may authorize a follow-up evaluation and ongoing monitoring
of MGUS when the member meets all the applicable requirements. MGUS is NOT eligible
for certification.
                                 
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination   [PDF, 6 pages, 259 KB]
                                 
                                    Non-invasive neoplasms of the cervix uteri are ineligible for
certification  but  further  surveillance,  management,  and/or  treatment  of  these
conditions may be covered under the diagnostic benefit plan. Initial diagnostic studies
of abnormal cervical screening results will be covered only if being used to evaluate for
potential WTC-related invasive cervical cancer.
                                 
                                    After initial diagnosis, further surveillance, management, and/or
treatment  may  be  covered  for  identification  of  potential  WTC-related  cervical  cancer
following  the  guidelines  established  by  the  American  Society  for  Colposcopy  and
Cervical Pathology (ASCCP). These services are available under the cancer diagnostic
plan for all Responders and Certified-eligible survivors. These services are available for
Screening-eligible survivors during the initial health evaluation period only.
                                 
                                    Any medically associated nonmalignant condition resulting from
surveillance or management/treatment of non-invasive neoplasms of the cervix uteri is
not  eligible  for  certification  or  treatment.  This  includes  any  medically  associated
conditions that affect fertility or pregnancy outcomes. Types of non-invasive neoplasms
that are ineligible for certification include cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) grades
I-III and carcinoma in situ of the cervix uteri.
                                 Home Health Care services are personal care and related support
services  that  enable  WTC  Health  Program  members  to  live  at  home  while  receiving
medically  necessary  care  for  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  or  health
condition medically associated with a certified WTC-related health conditions certified
by  the  Administrator  of  the  WTC  Health  Program  or  Designee.  Under  certain
circumstances,  care  received  at  home  may  be  a  substitute  for  receiving  medically
necessary  care  in  a  hospital  or  skilled  nursing  facility  for  members  who  are
homebound.60 The Administrator of the WTC Health Program has elected to follow the
definition of “confined to his home” used by CMS to determine whether a WTC Health
Program member is “homebound.” In establishing conditions required for payment of
services, CMS defines an individual as being “confined to his home” when: CMS further
clarifies that the individual may leave home for medical treatment or short, infrequent
absences for non-medical reasons, such as attending religious services, and may still
receive  home  health  care  if  he/she  attends  adult  day  care.  In  order  for  a  qualified
service provider to be eligible for payment for home health services, CMS requires that
the individual submit a written request and that an enrolled physician certify the below
requirements:62  Home health care is intended to provide treatment for an illness or
injury with the goal of maintaining health. In order for a member’s home health care to
be eligible for payment by the WTC Health Program, the following requirements must
be  met  and  documented  by  the  CCE  or  NPN:  The  CCE  or  NPN  Clinical  Director  shall
provide authorizations in 60-day episodes of care. The HHA will be required to obtain
additional  authorization  if  there  is  a  need  for  subsequent  episodes  of  care.  If  the
member still requires home health care at the end of the initial 60-day episode of care,
a  new  authorization  will  be  required  to  justify  a  new  episode  of  care  on  day  61.
Re-authorization continues to be required (the next episode would start on day 121, the
next  on  day  181,  etc.)  as  long  as  the  member  is  receiving  services  under  the  HHA’s
plan of care. More than one episode may be authorized for the same or different dates
of service when there is a transfer to another HHA, or discharge with readmission to the
same  HHA.  Authorization  for  service  extending  beyond  120  days  may  be  subject  to
audit by the WTC Health Program for medical necessity. Medical social services that are
provided  by  a  qualified  medical  social  worker  or  a  social  work  assistant  under  the
supervision of a qualified medical social worker may be covered as home health care
services  where  the  beneficiary  meets  the  qualifying  criteria  specified  below:  When  a
home  health  aide  visits  a  member  to  provide  a  health  related  service  as  discussed
above, the home health aide may also perform some incidental services which do not
meet the definition of a home health aide service (e.g., light cleaning, preparation of a
meal,  taking  out  the  trash,  shopping,  etc.).  However,  the  main  purpose  of  a  home
health aide visit may not be to provide these incidental services as they are not health
related services Hospice provides medical, psychological, and spiritual support during
end-of-life care. Hospice care68  allows the member to remain at home in a personal,
comfortable setting, or in special in-patient facilities, hospitals, or nursing homes. It also
supports  caregivers  and  families  with  bereavement  counseling.  The  WTC  Health
Program  will  pay  for  hospice  services  when  therapies  for  a  covered  condition  are  no
longer controlling the illness and, if the illness runs its normal course, the member’s life
expectancy  is  6  months  or  less69.  If  the  member’s  condition  improves  or  the  illness
goes  into  remission,  hospice  care  can  be  discontinued  and  active  treatment  may
resume.70  Acceptance into hospice care requires a Level 2 Prior Authorization (PA2) by
the CCE or NPN Clinical Director specifying that the member has a life expectancy of 6
months or less if the illness runs its normal course. The member also signs a statement
saying that he or she is choosing hospice care. (Hospice care can be continued if the
member  lives  longer  than  6  months,  as  long  as  the  CCE  or  NPN  Clinical  Director
reconfirms  the  member’s  terminal  illness  and  provides  a  new  PA2  for  continuity  of
hospice care.) In order for a member’s hospice care to be eligible for payment by the
WTC  Health  Program,  the  CCE/NPN  must  meet  and  document  the  following
requirements:  Extended care services are provided to WTC Health Program members
who  require  skilled  nursing  or  rehabilitation  staff  to  manage,  observe,  and  evaluate
their care for a condition or conditions certified by the Administrator of the WTC Health
Program or Designee. Inpatient skilled nursing facility (SNF) care, including room and
board,
 skilled
 nursing
 care,
 and
 other
 customarily
 provided
 services
 in
 a
Medicare-certified skilled nursing facility, are covered by the WTC Health Program when
certain factors are met.73   The Administrator of the WTC Health Program has elected
to follow factors similar to those used by CMS. 74 All of the following conditions must be
established and documented by the CCE/NPN in order for the WTC Health Program to
provide payment for services:75  If any one of these factors is not met, a stay in a SNF,
even though it might include the delivery of some skilled services, will not be covered
by the WTC Health Program. The CCE/NPN Clinical Director shall provide an initial Level
2  PA  for  a  30-day  SNF  episode  of  care.  The  SNF  will  be  required  to  obtain  additional
authorization(s) if there is need for subsequent episodes of care (in 30-day increments).
Level 2 PA continues to be required (in 30 day increments) as long as the member is
receiving SNF services. Extended care services are considered post-hospital if initiated
within 30 days following discharge. In order to be eligible for coverage of post-hospital
extended  care  services,  the  member  must  be  receiving  inpatient  hospital  care  for  a
WTC  Health  Program  certified  condition  for  not  less  than  3  consecutive  days  of
medically necessary services before discharge, and must also require a skilled level of
care.  The member must also require at least one of the following: 80  The following are
excluded  from  the  SNF  benefit:  The  Medical  Coverage  Determination  (MCD)  and
coverage  guidelines  for  this  section  are  under  development.  This  section  will  be
updated  once  finalized.  The  Medical  Coverage  Determination  (MCD)  and  coverage
guidelines  for  this  section  are  under  development.  This  section  will  be  updated  once
finalized. The Medical Coverage Determination (MCD) and coverage guidelines for this
section are under development. This section will be updated once finalized. WTC Health
Program  immunization  benefits  are  based  upon  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention
 (CDC)’s
 Advisory
 Committee
 on
 Immunization
 Practices
 (ACIP)
recommendations86.  For the immunizations described in this section, the WTC Health
Program  will  cover  the  vaccine  product  and  the  procedure  to  administer  the  vaccine
when  clinically  indicated  and  advised  by  CDC  ACIP  recommendations.  Further  coding
guidance may be found in the WTC Health Program Codebook, Volume A. Please refer
to CDC ACIP recommendations for further clinical guidance on the appropriate use of
these  vaccines.  The  WTC  Health  Program  provides  vaccine  coverage  based  on  the
member’s benefit plan. The benefit plan determines what type of medical treatment or
services  a  member  is  eligible  to  receive,  according  to  their  member  category  and
certification status. The table below shows what vaccines are payable under the WTC
Health  Program  for  eligible  members  of  each  benefit  plan  (except  for  FDNY  family
members).  For  more  information  on  benefit  plans,  see  Section  2.0  “Approved  Benefit
Plans.”   The  WTC  Health  Program  provides  smoking  cessation  therapy  for  (1)  those
members  with  at  least  one  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  or  (2)  eligible
members  who  are  current  smokers  and  are  referred  as  part  of  the  lung  cancer
screening  program.  For  members  with  at  least  one  certified  WTC-related  health
condition,  smoking  cessation  therapy  services  will  be  available  for  use  in  the  benefit
plan for the certified condition.  For those members who are eligible though a referral
from the lung cancer screening program, smoking cessation services will be accessible
through the benefit plan being used at the time of the lung cancer screening. Service
limitations  and/or  prior  authorization  requirements  may  apply  if  the  member  is  not
certified for at least one WTC-related health condition.   The available pharmaceutical
formulary  will  include  medications  for  use  in  conjunction  with  smoking  cessation
therapy (See Chapter 12 Pharmacy Benefits). When a member is referred for smoking
cessation  therapy,  this  information  should  be  documented  in  the  member’s  medical
record.  This  medical  record  documentation  is  subject  to  audit  by  the  WTC  Health
Program. 
                                    Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) is a
non-invasive, non-systemic treatment using an FDA-approved device to generate brief
magnetic pulses that induce an electrical field in a localized region of the brain for the
purpose of treating major depressive disorder (MDD) without psychosis. The technique
involves  placing  a  small  electromagnetic  coil  over  the  scalp  and  passing  a  rapidly
alternating  current  through  the  coil  wire  to  produce  a  magnetic  field  that  passes
unimpeded through the brain.
                                 
                                    Depending on stimulation parameters (frequency, intensity,
pulse  duration,  stimulation  site),  rTMS  applied  to  specific  cortical  regions  can  change
the excitability of the affected brain structures. The procedure is usually carried out in
an  outpatient  setting  and  does  not  require  anesthesia  or  analgesia.  When  used  as
antidepressant  therapy,  rTMS  produces  a  clinical  benefit  without  the  systemic  side
effects  of  standard  oral  medications  and  without  adverse  effects  on  cognition.  Unlike
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), rTMS does not induce amnesia or intentionally induce
seizures.
                                 
                                    The WTC Health Program may provide coverage of medically
necessary rTMS services which meet relevant Level 2 Prior Authorization (PA2) criteria.
The  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director  or  Designee  may  authorize  rTMS  services  only  when
there  is  clinical  documentation  that  the  member  has  MDD  that  is  a  certified
WTC-related  health  condition  or  medically  associated  health  condition,  or  the  MDD  is
ancillary  to  another  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  Members  with  certain
medical or psychiatric conditions may not be a candidate for rTMS treatment. Coverage
of rTMS services must be in accordance with Program guidelines.
                                 
Authorization  Required  –  Medical  Coverage  Determination    [PDF,  582  KB,  7  pages,
August 2023] 
rTMS PA2 Request Form for Providers   [PDF, 1140 KB, 6 pages, September 2023]
                                 
                                    The WTC Health Program only covers medically necessary
treatment for certified WTC-related health conditions or medically associated conditions
that result from treatment or progression of a certified condition. The Program does not
cover  routine  medical  care.  Members  should  always  maintain  their  own  primary  care
provider for health conditions not covered by the Program.
                                 Member-initiated second opinions by a CCE/NPN-affiliated provider
may be covered by the WTC Health Program only when assessing the medical need for
a covered surgery or for major nonsurgical diagnostic and therapeutic procedures (e.g.,
invasive  diagnostic  techniques  such  as  biopsy  or  differing  therapeutic  options  for  a
covered cancer). Second opinions may be covered to address the appropriate approach
to  evaluating  allowable  clinical  findings,  as  consistent  with  policies  for  managing
(treating)  a  member’s  certified  health  condition(s).   In  the  event  that  the
recommendation  of  the  first  and  second  physician  differs  regarding  the  need  for
surgery (or other major procedure), a third opinion may also be covered. Second and
third  opinions  are  covered  even  if  a  therapeutic  modality  under  consideration  is  not
covered  by  the  WTC  Health  Program.  Payment  may  be  made  for  the  history  and
examination  of  the  member,  and  for  other  covered  diagnostic  services  required  to
properly  evaluate  the  member’s  need  for  a  procedure  and  to  render  a  professional
opinion. Sleep apnea is a common sleep disorder characterized by brief interruptions of
breathing  during  sleep.  The  most  common  type  of  sleep  apnea  is  obstructive  sleep
apnea (OSA). OSA occurs when the upper airway collapses or becomes blocked during
sleep,  thus  reducing  or  stopping  airflow.  Central  sleep  apnea  (CSA)  is  caused  by
irregularities in the brain’s normal signals to breathe. Most people with sleep apnea will
have  a  combination  of  both  types.  Sleep  apnea  may  be  covered  by  the  WTC  Health
Program in three different ways: as a certified WTC-related health condition included on
the  List  of  WTC-Related  Health  Conditions  (List),  as  a  health  condition  medically
associated with a certified WTC-related condition, or where medically necessary to treat
certain certified WTC-related health conditions. 
Medical  Coverage  Determination  –  Sleep  Apnea   [PDF,  309  KB,  12  pages,  December
2021]
                                    (Section 4.10 revised—March 5, 2021)
                                 WTC Health Program policies regarding solid organ transplants are
consistent  with  best  clinical  practices  and  nationally  recognized  guidelines.  The  WTC
Health Program may cover solid organ transplants if specific requirements are met and
a  Level  3  PA  is  in  place.  The  transplant  must  be  non-experimental  and
non-investigational. The specific medical condition(s) being treated by the solid organ
transplant  must  be  certified  by  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  must  be  a  contributory
cause  to  the  deterioration  of  the  organ  being  transplanted.  The  specific  medical
condition(s) being treated with the solid organ transplant must be shown to be chronic
and severe/end-stage despite maximal treatment with other known standard treatment
options. The solid organ transplant should be considered to have a high likelihood of a
positive  health  outcome,  with  potential  benefits  effectively  outweighing  any  potential
harms. All appropriate indications and absolute and relative contraindications must be
considered.  All  pre-transplant  and  transplant  services  must  be  non-experimental,
non-investigational procedures, and all other WTC Health Program requirements must
be  met.  All  pre-transplant  and  transplant  authorizations  and  services  are  subject  to
WTC  Health  Program  utilization  review  and/or  audit.  The  CCE/NPN  Clinical  Director
should  consult  with  the  WTC  Health  Program  Medical  Benefits  Team  regarding
additional requirements related  to specific solid  organ transplant requests. Denials of
requests for transplants are subject to appeal by the member, pursuant to regulation,
as a denial of medically necessary treatment. Appeal rights will be provided when the
outcome of the WTC Health Program evaluation is a denial decision (see Section 3.6 for
additional information on appeals). Diagnostic and reparative surgery and any surgery
requiring inpatient hospitalization are generally subject to a Level 2 PA by the CCE/NPN
Clinical Director in accordance with medical protocols and WTC Health Program policy.
Transplants  and  certain  dental  surgeries  require  a  Level  3  PA  from  the  WTC  Health
Program.  The  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook,  Volume  A  should  be  consulted  to
determine  whether  a  PA  is  required  for  any  particular  surgery.  Diagnostic  and
reparative surgeries requiring inpatient hospitalization are covered by the WTC Health
Program  for  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health  condition  medically
associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  with  Level  2  PA  by  the
CCE/NPN  Clincial  Director.  Special  circumstances  surrounding  transplants,  dental
surgeries,  or  procedures  related  to  cancer  treatment  may  require  additional
authorization. Special circumstances must be considered when a member has multiple
surgical  procedures.  Multiple  surgeries  are  separate  procedures  performed  by  a
physician on the same patient during the same operative session or on the same date.
Multiple  surgeries  are  distinguished  from  procedures  that  are  components  of,  or
incidental  to,  a  primary  procedure.  Intraoperative  services,  incidental  surgeries,  or
components of surgeries will not be separately reimbursed. 
 
 All multiple surgeries on a single claim are reimbursed by paying 100 percent of the
FECA rate for the procedure with the highest cost (highest fee schedule amount) and 50
percent for all remaining procedures. In addition, the claims processing system checks
for multiple surgeries across multiple claims. The claims processing system applies the
50 percent reduction to surgeries on subsequent claims for the same member on the
same day by the same  provider.87  When submitting a claim for multiple surgeries, the
most  costly  procedure  (the  one  that  will  result  in  the  highest  fee  schedule  amount)
should  be  listed  first.  Each  additional  procedure  should  be  billed  using  “51”  as  a
modifier. Payable amounts for multiple surgeries will be determined by paying the full
FECA fee schedule amount for the most costly procedure, plus 50 percent of the FECA
fee  schedule  amount  for  each  additional  procedure.  Payment  will  be  made  at  50
percent for additional procedures whether or not modifier 51 is used.  Limitations on
multiple surgeries do not apply to bilateral procedures. Bilateral procedures should be
billed using modifier “50” and with one (1) unit, and are reimbursed at 150 percent of
the FECA fee schedule amount (to account for the dual procedure).  The WTC Health
Program does not use a special pricing algorithm for endoscopic procedures. Multiple
endoscopic procedures will be priced according to the same formula as other multiple
surgeries. The Medical Coverage Determination (MCD) and coverage guidelines for this
section are under development. This section will be updated once finalized. The WTC
Health  Program  may  provide  members  assigned  to  the  Nationwide  Provider  Network
(NPN)  coverage  of  expenses  for  necessary  and  reasonable,  non-emergency  general
transportation  services,  and  those  expenses  that  are  incident  to  the  necessary  and
reasonable, non-emergency general transportation. This transportation must be for the
purpose  of  the  member  securing  medically  necessary  treatment  for  a  certified
WTC-related health condition, or a health condition medically associated with a certified
WTC-related health condition. In addition, the travel must exceed 250 miles roundtrip
from  the  member’s  place  of  residence  or  a  WTC  Health  Program-affiliated  healthcare
facility or office to a WTC Health Program-affiliated healthcare facility or office. Travel is
reimbursed  according  to  General  Services  Administration  (GSA)  rates  and  practices.  
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination  [6 pages, 531 KB]  The WTC
Health  Program  only  provides  coverage  of  medically  necessary,  non-emergency
medical  transportation  services  by  ambulette  or  ambulance  for  members  when  it  is
determined  that  no  other  means  of  transportation  could  be  used  without  posing  a
threat  to  the  member’s  survival  or  seriously  endangering  the  member’s  health.  Any
expenses  must  be  for  the  purpose  of  the  member  accessing  medically  necessary
treatment  from  a  CCE-  or  NPN-affiliated  provider  for  a  certified  WTC-related  health
condition, or a health condition medically associated with a certified WTC-related health
condition.  The  WTC  Health  Program  does  not  pay  for  expenses  incident  to  medically
necessary, non-emergency medical transportation services for a CCE- or NPN-assigned
member.  Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination  [6 pages, 632 KB]
Applicable Forms An urgent medical condition is a condition which is not considered to
be an emergency, but must be addressed within 12 hours in order to avoid the likely
onset of an emergency medical condition.88  Unlike emergency care services which are
immediately  necessary  to  prevent  serious  health  impairment  or  death,  urgent  care
services  may  not  be  immediately  necessarily,  though  the  member  does  require  care
within 12 hours in order to avoid adverse consequences.89 Urgent care facilities include
freestanding, walk-in ambulatory clinics that are generally open seven days per week
with  extended  hours.  Urgent  care  facilities  provide  urgent  medical  treatment  and
unscheduled, episodic care to individuals who require timely care, but whose condition
is  not  immediately  life-threatening.90  Members  who  visit  an  urgent  care  center  and
need  a  higher  level  of  service  will  be  referred  to  a  specialist  or  an  ED.  Acutely  ill
members may be referred by ambulance through activation of the 911 system because
most  urgent  care  centers  are  not  equipped  or  staffed  to  handle  life-threatening
emergencies.  The  urgent  care  facility  is  not  required  to  be  a  WTC  Health
Program-affiliated provider on the date of service to the member. No prior authorization
is required for urgent care services. To ensure proper receipt and payment of claims,
the member should have the urgent care facility notify the CCE/NPN of their visit. When
the  CCE/NPN  has  been  notified  of  the  urgent  care  visit,  or  when  the  bill  and  medical
records are sent from the external urgent care provider to the member’s CCE/NPN, the
CCE/NPN  will  retrospectively  review  the  urgent  care  medical  records  and  ensure  that
the  treatment  was  related  to  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health
condition medically associated with a certified WTC-related health condition, or a health
condition likely to be certified as a WTC health condition due to exposure. Payment for
treatment  that  is  not  related  to  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health
condition medically associated with a certified WTC-related health condition, or a health
condition  likely  to  be  certified  as  a  WTC  health  condition  due  to  exposure,  will  be
denied.  Claims submitted directly to the WTC Health Program by external providers will
be returned to the CCE/NPN for review and authorization. When the CCE/NPN submits
the  urgent  care  claim  to  the  WTC  Health  Program,  the  CCE/NPN  is  responsible  for
ensuring  that  the  medical  facility  providing  urgent  care  services  is  enrolled  as  a
provider with the WTC Health Program, through either a Single Case Agreement (SCA)
or  a  full  contract.  The  standard  review  stamp  or  submission  through  Electronic  Data
Interchange (EDI) represents the CCE’s/NPN’s acknowledgement that the CCE/NPN has
an  authorization  on  file.  Urgent  care  claims  must  be  accompanied  by  any  available
medical documents/reports to facilitate the medical review. Whenever possible, urgent
care claims should contain valid codes found in the WTC Health Program Codebook for
the date of service. If after medical review, the WTC Health Program finds that codes
other  than  those  found  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook  are  acceptable  for  the
claim,  the  additional  charges  will  be  paid  and  the  Codebook  will  be  updated
accordingly.  All  coding  and  reimbursement  is  subject  to  the  requirements  of  coding
rules  and  guidelines  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Codebook  located  on  the  Secure
Access Managements services (SAMs) portal. As with other CCE/NPN documentation, all
authorizations  are  subject  to  audit  and  utilization  reviews.  Where  determined  to  be
related  to  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health  condition  medically
associated with a certified WTC-related health condition, or a health condition likely to
be certified as a WTC health condition due to exposure, WTC Health Program coverage
of urgent care services may include orthopedic-related services, onsite laboratory and
diagnostic  testing,  pharmacy  services,  and  other  treatments  and  services  (i.e.,
intravenous (IV) fluids).91 Coverage of urgent care services is permitted only when in
accordance the program formulary and other program guidelines.92  Some examples of
urgent medical conditions may include, but are not limited to: A range of laboratory and
diagnostic tests may be provided to a member during an urgent care visit. A laboratory
test  is  a  medical  procedure  which  involves  testing  a  sample  of  blood,  urine,  or  other
substance  from  the  body.  Laboratory  tests  can  help  determine  a  diagnosis,  plan
treatment,  verify  that  treatment  is  working,  or  monitor  the  disease  over  time.93  A
diagnostic test is a type of test used to diagnose a disease or condition.94  Examples
include  x-rays,  and  ultrasounds.  In  general,  when  an  urgent  care  provider  orders  a
laboratory  or  diagnostic  test  for  a  member,  this  test  will  be  utilized  to  determine  a
diagnosis and treatment plan. Members should follow-up with their respective CCE/NPN
for further treatment and monitoring following their urgent care visit within 14 calendar
days. Orthopedic services focus on injuries and diseases of the body’s musculoskeletal
system.  This  complex  system,  which  includes  your  bones,  joints,  ligaments,  tendons,
muscles,  and  nerves,  allows  you  to  move,  work,  and  be  active.95  Examples  of
orthopedic services that may be provided at an urgent care center include dislocations,
fractures, and sprains. Pharmacy services (including prepackaged pharmaceuticals and
limited pain management)96  may be covered in an urgent care when an urgent care
provider  prescribes  medication  to  treat  the  urgent  medical  problem,  and  thus  to
manage,  ameliorate,  or  cure  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition,  or  health
condition  medically  associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition  Other
urgent care treatments and services which may be provided to a member include, but
are  not  limited  to:  Non-urgent  visits  to  an  urgent  care  center  compromise  the
coordination  and  continuity  of  care  for  individual  WTC  Health  Program  members;
therefore,  they  are  not  covered  by  the  WTC  Health  Program.  Members  should  be
referred back to their CCE/NPN for appropriate follow-up care. The Program will not pay
for the following services provided at an urgent care facility: *In limited situations, the
NPN  may  utilize  urgent  care  centers  for  monitoring  exams  and  survivor  screenings
when reimbursing the urgent care center at the FECA rate; Members should follow-up
with  their  respective  CCE/NPN  for  further  treatment  and/or  monitoring  following  their
urgent care visit within 14 calendar days. 
                                    Uterine cancer is a common term for cancer of the female
reproductive tract. Uterine cancer is
                                    also referred to as endometrial cancer since it occurs in the inner
lining of
                                    the uterine body called the endometrium.
                                 
                                    The WTC Health Program covers medically necessary treatment
of certified endometrial cancer
                                    following the clinical practice guidelines set forth by the National
                                    Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN).
                                 
                                    The WTC Health Program also covers medically necessary
treatment of atypical endometrial
                                    hyperplasia, also known as EIN. EIN is an abnormal change in the
uterine lining
                                    that can lead to cancer of the uterus.
                                 
                                    The WTC Health Program may authorize fertility-sparing
treatment via hormone-based therapy when
                                    requested by a WTC Health Program provider for members with
certified low-grade
                                    endometrial cancer or EIN. Coverage of fertility-sparing
treatment is limited
                                    to those services related to endometrial disease only. Coverage
includes
                                    appropriate clinical counseling, additional diagnostics as needed,
medically
                                    necessary hormonal therapy, and follow-up disease surveillance
per NCCN
                                    guidelines. Certain criteria must be met for the Program to
authorize coverage
                                    of fertility-sparing treatment.
                                 
Authorization Required – Medical Coverage Determination   [PDF, 6 pages, 223 KB] 
 4-AWTC  Health  Program  Instructions  for  Completing  WTC-3  Package  Requesting
Certification  for  Types  of  Cancer  4-BMedical  Change  Review  Request  Form
4-CTransplant Authorization Form 4-DHome Health Care CMS Form 485 4-F Policy and
Procedures for Cancer Screening Last Revised – August 2014 Appendix 5-A—CMS-1500
Appendix 5-B—UB-04 Appendix 5-C  Policy and Procedures for Coordination of Benefits
for  Treatment  Costs  for  Non-Work-Related,  Certified  WTC-Related  Health  Conditions:
Coordination  with  Health  Insurance  Appendix  5-D   Policy  and  Procedures  for
Recoupment: Lump-Sum Workers' Compensation Settlements Appendix 5-E  Policy and
Procedures  for  Recoupment  &  Coordination  of  Benefits:  Workers’  Compensation
Payment This Chapter provides a high level overview of the process for submitting and
processing claims for medical benefits under the WTC Health Program. This process is
managed by the Health Program Support (HPS) contractor. A more complete description
of the claims processing function is found in the WTC Health Program Claims Processing
Procedure Manual, found in the WTC Health Program file of record. The sections of the
Public  Health  Service  (PHS)  Act  applicable  to  this  Chapter  include  Section  3312(c),
Payment for Initial Health Evaluation, Monitoring, and Treatment of WTC-Related Health
Conditions,  and  Section  3331,  Payment  of  Claims.  The  sections  of  the  WTC  Health
Program regulations applicable to this Chapter include 42 C.F.R. §§ 88.20, 88.22, 88.23.
The  parties  involved  in  developing,  submitting,  processing,  and  paying  claims  are
described below. The Program uses Plexis Healthcare System’s Quantum Choice claims
processing  software  to  manage  enrollee  and  provider  information  and  to  process
claims. The claims processing function is scaled to the relatively small size of the WTC
Health  Program  and  is  designed  to  quickly,  efficiently,  and  accurately  process  claims
submitted for payment, in accordance with the provisions of the Act. Approximately 90
percent of all claims are submitted to the HPS contractor via EDI using the 837 5010
ANSI standard format. The Program encourages use of EDI as it improves the efficiency
and  effectiveness  of  claims  processing,  reduces  the  potential  for  error,  and  speeds
transaction  times.  CCEs/NPN,  their  TPAs,  and  approved  external  providers  submit
claims to the EDI clearing house using the 837 format. The clearing house then delivers
the claims to the HPS contractor for claims processing. Prescriptions covered under the
Program  are  issued  in  accordance  with  the  WTC  Health  Program-approved
pharmaceutical guidelines and the Program’s formulary. The formulary and guidelines
are  aligned  with  the  Program’s  pharmacy  benefit  plans,  which  are  described  in  WTC
Health  Program  Bulletin  No.  13-2,  “Implementing  Pharmacy  Benefit  Plans  by  Health
Condition  Certification  Status.”  These  plans,  implemented  to  improve  programmatic
oversight  and  minimize  fraud,  waste  and  abuse,  are  documented  in  the  WTC  Health
Program  file  of  record.  As  noted  in  the  Overview  above  and  in  Chapter  4,  Medical
Benefits, billing for covered services under the program is consistent with industry best
practices and uses standard procedures and forms. The categories of health conditions
are  defined  by  ICD-10  diagnosis  codes.  The  medical  services  associated  with  each
covered condition/diagnosis code are defined by Current Procedural Terminology (CPT),
Healthcare  Common  Procedure  Coding  System  (HCPCS),  DRG,  and  Revenue  Coding
Center  (RCC)  codes.  These  codes,  documented  appropriately  on  standard  CMS-1500,
UB-04,  and  EDI  claims,  are  the  basis  by  which  member  claims  are  paid.  The  codes
acceptable  for  submission  of  claims  for  healthcare  services  for  covered  conditions
under the Program have been defined and are documented in the Codebook, found in
the WTC Health Program file of record. Special circumstances apply when considering
the use of a procedure or service code that is not currently listed in the Codebook. On a
weekly  basis,  claim  lines  are  gathered  into  a  claim  payment  run  (or  file)  which  is
transmitted  to  the  payment  contractor.  The  process  is  outlined  in  the  below  graphic.
Using  MicroStrategy’s  business  intelligence  reporting  tool,  Microstrategy  9,  and
Quantum Choice, a variety of reports are generated to provide the WTC Health Program
insight into the claims and payments processed, and to ensure quality assurance of the
claims processing function. Accurate payments and timely payment corrections, when
necessary,  are  important  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  WTC  Health  Program.  The
Program has an established process to ensure payments are accurate. After exhausting
procedural and/or contractual administrative remedies, a CCE or NPN Clinical Director
or affiliated provider may submit a written appeal of a WTC Health Program decision to
withhold reimbursement or payment for treatment found to be not medically necessary
or  not  in  accordance  with  approved  Program  medical  treatment  protocols.   Appeal
procedures  will  be  published  on  the  WTC  Health  Program  website.   Policy  and
Procedures  for  Coordination  of  Benefits  for  Treatment  Costs  for  Non-Work-Related,
Certified WTC-Related Health Conditions: Coordination with Health Insurance Policy and
Procedures for Recoupment: Lump-Sum Workers' Compensation Settlements Policy and
Procedures  for  Recoupment  &  Coordination  of  Benefits:  Workers’  Compensation
Payment The purpose of this chapter is to provide a high-level overview of the Clinical
Centers of Excellence's (CCEs') roles, responsibilities and processes for the WTC Health
Program. In addition to this procedure manual, further details regarding CCE operations
can be referenced in the CCE Clinical Guide and the CCE Operations Manual developed
by  each  CCE,  both  found  in  the  Program's  file  of  record.  Of  note,  the  Nationwide
Provider  Network  (NPN)  is  discussed  separately  in  Chapter  7  of  this  manual.  This
chapter is guided by Sections 3305(a)(1) and 3305(b)(1) of the PHS Act, which describe
requirements for the contracts put in place with the CCEs, as well as various sections of
42 C.F.R. Part 88. In addition, the CCEs play a pivotal role in implementing the general
provisions of the Act, as described below. The roles and responsibilities associated with
the CCEs and providers in the WTC Health Program are detailed below. The WTC Health
Program  CCEs  offer  unique  expertise  in  the  provision  of  healthcare  services  to  NY
metropolitan area-based members. Currently, there are seven CCEs that provide WTC
Health  Program  services:  Five  CCEs  serving  general  responders:  Each  CCE  operates
under contract with the federal government to administer healthcare (within the limited
care model defined by Title XXXIII of the PHS Act) to the responders or survivors of the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. (The NPN, discussed in Chapter 8, provides care
for enrolled members residing outside the NY metropolitan area, including responders
to the plane crashes in Shanksville, PA, and Arlington, VA – the site of the Pentagon.)
Each  CCE  is  responsible  for  all  aspects  of  WTC  Health  Program-related  care  for  each
member they serve. In addition to services provided directly by the CCEs, services are
also  provided  through  the  CCEs  by  external  providers  who  have  expertise  in  the
diagnosis and treatment of 9/11-related health conditions and have been approved by
the CCEs and the Program to provide  WTC Health Program benefits. Section 6 below
provides  more  detail  regarding  external  providers.  Each  CCE  educates  its  staff  and
network providers in WTC Health Program policies and procedures such as the proper
completion  of  paperwork,  limitations  of  coverage,  protocol  changes,  and  benefits
counseling,  and  maintaining  a  complete  Operations  Manual  to  document  them.  CCE
representatives  participate  in  periodic  meetings  with  the  Program  leadership,  their
associated  data  center,  the  HPS  contractor,  and  other  vendors,  as  required,  to
coordinate  activities,  address  and  resolve  issues,  and  share  information.  The  work
performed  by  CCEs  is  grouped  into  the  following  four  categories  and  is  discussed  in
detail,  below:  As  provided  by  the  PHS  Act,  the  WTC  Health  Program  reimburses
providers for healthcare expenses for health conditions that have been certified by the
Administrator of the WTC Health Program as WTC-related or as medically associated to
a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  Health  condition  certification  is  required  for
treatment  services  to  be  paid  by  the  Program.  The  certification  of  a  WTC-related  or
medically  associated  condition  is  based  on  a  review  of  a  CCE  physician’s  clinical
assessment of the relationship between a given Program member’s WTC exposure and
the  type  and  temporal  sequence  of  symptoms,  or  diagnosis,  of  a  qualifying  health
condition.  This  review  must  find  that  the  member’s  exposure  to  airborne  toxins,  any
other hazard, or any other adverse condition resulting from the September 11, 2001,
terrorist  attacks  is  substantially  likely  to  be  a  significant  factor  in  aggravating,
contributing to, or causing the health condition. A list of the ICD-10 diagnosis codes that
correlate  with  the  List  of  WTC-Related  Health  Conditions  and  medically  associated
health  conditions  covered  by  the  Program  is  found  in  the  WTC  Health  Program
Codebook. CCEs provide guidance to external providers on allowable benefits, including
proper use of the WTC Health Program Codebook if disseminated. A member’s health
benefit  profile  is  comprised  of  all  Care  Suites  and  certification  gates  that  reflect  the
conditions  that  have  been  certified  for  that  member  (Care  Suites  are  discussed  in
section  9  of  Chapter  3  of  this  manual).  The  member  benefit  profile  continues  to  be
updated  to  reflect  any  new  conditions  that  are  certified  over  time.  The  claims
processing  system  verifies  that  each  health  care  service  claim  line  maps  a  medical
procedure  to  a  diagnosis  contained  within  the  Care  Suites  and  certification  gates
comprising a member’s benefit profile. 
                                A.   Monitoring and Initial Health Evaluations
                                Each CCE schedules and provides a baseline exam for new
enrollees
 and
 follow-up
 monitoring
 examinations
 to
 WTC
 responder
 and
certified-eligible survivor members as applicable. The purpose of the monitoring exams
is to: (1) provide periodic physical and mental health assessment designed to identify
acute and latent health effects that are WTC-related; (2) serve as an avenue for clinical
data collection, analysis and reporting to ensure that all services provided adhere to the
appropriate protocols; and (3) inform the diagnosis of WTC-related diseases that could
lead to a referral for treatment. The table below describes the extent of these exams.
                             If a test result indicates the presence of a WTC-related condition, or is
inconclusive, the monitoring physician will refer the member for additional diagnostic
testing  and/or  treatment.  The  CCE  medical  monitoring  evaluation  process  consists  of
the  following  tasks:  For  services  provided  by  a  clinician  in  his  or  her  offices,  claims
submitted  on  paper  rather  than  Electronic  Data  Interchange  (EDI)  must  use  a
Professional claim form (CMS-1500). For inpatient or outpatient hospitalizations, claims
submitted  on  paper  rather  than  EDI  should  use  an  Institutional  claim  form  (UB-04).
Professional  services  provided  in  a  hospital  setting  that  are  not  included  in  the
institutional  billing  should  be  billed  on  the  CMS-1500  form.   Paper  claims  originating
with  external  providers  must  first  be  submitted  to  the  appropriate  CCE.  The  CCE  is
responsible for authorizing treatment for the member.  Therefore, the CCE must review
and authorize claims to be processed. A stamp provided to the CCE by the WTC Health
Program is used for this purpose, along with initialing by an authorized CCE approver.
Once  approved  by  the  CCE,  paper  claims  should  be  submitted  to  the  WTC  Health
Program for processing and disposition (i.e., payment, partial payment, or denial). The
information  entered  on  the  claim  form  is  captured  through  an  automated  data
collection  process;  therefore,  all  paper  claim  submissions  must  be  legible  and  of
sufficient quality for imaging. Information must be completed in the appropriate field on
the billing form in order to expedite claims processing.  Pharmacy benefit plans have
been implemented to improve oversight and minimize fraud, waste, and abuse. Each
CCE develops and implements procedures for providing services to its members. The
establishment  and  management  of  the  internal  and  external  provider  network  are
coordinated  through  the  respective  CCEs.  In  order  for  a  provider  to  have  a  claim  for
WTC  Health  Program  services  paid,  the  CCE  must  have  enrolled  the  provider  as  a
participating  provider  in  the  WTC  Health  Program.  Provider  enrollment  into  the  WTC
Health  Program  and  the  management  of  a  reliable  provider  network  are  critical  to
efficient claims processing. The complete and accurate enrollment of providers ensures
that  claims  are  not  suspended  for  review  of  provider  validity  issues,  and  that  claims
may be promptly adjudicated. 
                                Each CCE is responsible for submitting provider enrollment
requests  to  the  HPS  contractor  and  updating  provider  details  when  necessary.  All
medical  providers,  including  physicians,  group  practices,  hospitals,  Durable  Medical
Equipment (DME) suppliers, nursing facilities, hospice services, and others, must enroll
as  participating  providers  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  for  claims  to  be  adjudicated
through the Program’s claims processing system. Each CCE determines the nature of its
provider relationships (i.e., internal or external) and is also responsible for providing the
appropriate  level  of  education  and  information  regarding  the  Program  to  external
providers  so  that  they  may  provide  an  approved  level  of  care  for  WTC  Health
Program-certified conditions.  
                                The HPS contractor uses the information provided by the CCEs to
add providers to the claims system.
                             Financial information is also provided using an EFT Form or other
document  provided  by  the  Program  so  that  providers  may  receive  payment  for  their
claims.  Before submitting the provider enrollment, the CCE confirms: 1) that all data
are  complete  and  accurate;  2)  that  the  provider’s  status  as  either  an  internal  or
external provider is documented; and 3) whether the provider should also be enrolled
with the following specialties:  
                                        Once a provider enrollment has been received and validated
by  the  CCE,  the  CCE  submits  the  enrollment  to  the  HPS  contractor  for  processing.  If
incomplete information is received, the enrollment form will be returned to the CCE for
completion. Chapter 8 provides more detail regarding the steps taken to complete the
enrollment process.
                                     The management and maintenance of the information in a
provider record are the CCEs’ responsibility. Changes to provider information may be
necessary  over  time  (e.g.,  an  address  or  financial  information  changes,  or  a  provider
ceases  her  association  with  the  WTC  Health  Program).  Any  changes  to  provider
information  that  are  received  by  the  CCEs  are  processed  in  the  same  way  as  for  an
initial  enrollment.  Changes  to  provider  information  that  are  not  first  identified  by  the
CCE must be routed to the CCE for validation and to ensure consistency among, and
accuracy  of,  Program  records.  This  could  occur,  for  example,  when  a  claim  being
processed  for  payment  reveals  that  the  provider’s  EFT  information  has  changed
Enrollment  and  management  of  a  reliable  provider  network  is  critical  to  ensure  that
claims will efficiently and accurately adjudicate. In the interest of supporting the CCEs’
responsibility  to  manage  their  provider  and  prescriber  enrollees,  the  HPS  contractor
annually distributes to each CCE a list of all its providers enrolled in the Program. The
CCE must review the list and make any updates or note any discrepancies between the
providers held on record by the Program and those held on record by the CCE. The HPS
contractor  is  responsible  for  working  with  the  CCE  to  resolve  any  discrepancies  in  a
timely  fashion.  Each  CCE  submits  to  the  Program  monthly  status  reports  on  member
and  administrative  services  activities  to  allow  Program  leadership  to  track  the  CCE’s
program  activities  and  progress.  In  addition  to  summarizing  the  activities  and
accomplishments  of  the  past  month,  the  report  identifies  any  potential  risks  to
continued program success and communicates the CCE’s plans to mitigate those risks.
A  variety  of  reports  are  required,  as  detailed  below.  Member  Service  Function
Information  to  Be  Reported  Member  Retention  A  complete  listing  of  activities,
descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all
Member  Retention  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for
these  services  invoiced  to  the  government.  Member  Outreach  and  Education  A
complete  listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and
evaluation of effectiveness of all Member Outreach and Education services performed
during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these  services  invoiced  to  the
government. Program Benefits Counseling A complete listing of activities, descriptions
of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Program Benefits
Counseling  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these
services invoiced to the government. Case Management A complete listing of activities,
descriptions of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Case
Management  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these
services  invoiced  to  the  government.  Social  Services  Functions  A  complete  listing  of
activities, descriptions of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness
of all Social Services Functions performed during the period and the associated cost for
these  services  invoiced  to  the  government.  Member  Transfers  A  complete  listing  of
activities, descriptions of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness
of all Member Transfer services performed during the period (including the status of all
outstanding  requests  for  medical  records)  and  the  associated  cost  for  these  services
invoiced  to  the  government.  Medical  Reviews  A  complete  listing  of  activities,
descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all
Administrative  Services  related  to  Medical  Reviews  that  were  performed  during  the
period and the associated cost for these services invoiced to the government. Workers’
Compensation  Assistance  A  complete  listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,
number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all  Workers’  Compensation
Assistance  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these  services
invoiced  to  the  government.  Other  Member  Services  A  complete  listing  of  activities,
descriptions of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Other
Member  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these
services invoiced to the government. Administrative Service Function Information to Be
Reported  Healthcare  Provider  Network  A  complete  listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of
activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Healthcare Provider
Network  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these
services invoiced to the government. Pharmacy Benefit Management A complete listing
of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of
effectiveness  of  all  Pharmacy  Benefit  Management  services  performed  during  the
period and the associated cost for these services invoiced to the government. Quality
Assurance and Internal Audits A complete listing of activities, descriptions of activities,
number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Quality Assurance and Internal
Audits performed during the period and the associated cost for these services invoiced
to the government. Records Management A complete listing of activities, descriptions
of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all  Records
Management  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these
services invoiced to the government. Transfer of Data and Information (at the end of
the  contract)  A  complete  listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,  number  of
actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Transfer of Data and Information services
performed during the period and the associated cost for these services invoiced to the
government. Attending administrative, steering, benefits, and clinical WTC meetings A
complete  listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and
evaluation of effectiveness of all attendance at administrative, steering, benefits, and
clinical  WTC  meetings  during  the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these  services
invoiced to the government. Report Writing and IRB Submissions A complete listing of
activities, descriptions of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness
of all Report Writing and IRB Submissions that were performed during the period and
the  associated  cost  for  these  services  invoiced  to  the  government.  Data  Entry  for
Claims Submission and to Meet Reporting Requirements A complete listing of activities,
descriptions of activities, number of actions, and evaluation of effectiveness of all Data
Entry services performed during the period and the associated cost for these services
invoiced to the government. Data Entry of Healthcare Information into the DC’s Data
System A complete listing of activities, descriptions of activities, number of actions, and
evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all  Case  Management  services  performed  during  the
period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these  services  invoiced  to  the  government.
Healthcare  Protocol  Development—provide  intellectual  input  on  the  refinement  of
medical  guidance  and  protocols  as  needed  by  the  program  (and  coordinated  by  the
DC),  or  in  support  of  member  treatment  needs  A  complete  listing  of  activities,
descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all
Healthcare  Protocol  Development  services  performed  during  the  period  and  the
associated cost for these services invoiced to the government. Providing Translational
and Interpretive Services 
                                                            A complete listing of activities, descriptions of
activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  all  Providing
Translational and Interpretive Services performed during the period and the associated
cost for these services invoiced to the government.
                                                            General and Administrative Charges
                                                         General and Administrative Charges A complete
listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,  and  evaluation  of
effectiveness  of  all  General  and  Administrative  Charges  during  the  period  and  the
associated  cost  for  these  services  invoiced  to  the  government.  Other  Administrative
Services  A  complete  listing  of  activities,  descriptions  of  activities,  number  of  actions,
and  evaluation of effectiveness of all Other Administrative Services performed  during
the  period  and  the  associated  cost  for  these  services  invoiced  to  the  government.
Operations  Manual  Difficulties  encountered  and  proposed  updates  to  the  Operations
Manual.  Updates  shall  be  approved  by  the  Administrator  of  the  WTC  Health  Program
after  review  and  discussion  of  the  issues,  as  needed.  Complaints  A  summary  of  all
complaints  received  by  the  CCE  during  the  preceding  month  and  the  status  of  their
resolutions. Fraud and Abuse Report A) The CCE shall submit monthly the number of
complaints of fraud or abuse made to the CCE related to covered services that warrant
preliminary investigation by the CCE. B) The CCE shall also submit to the Administrator
of the WTC Health Program the following on an ongoing basis for each confirmed case
of  fraud  or  abuse  it  identifies  through  complaints,  organizational  monitoring,
contractors, subcontractors, providers, and members, etc. related to covered services:
1)  The  name  of  the  individual  or  entity  that  committed  the  fraud  or  abuse;  2)  The
source that identified the fraud or abuse; 3) The type of provider, entity, or organization
that  committed  the  fraud  or  abuse;  4)  A  description  of  the  fraud  or  abuse;  5)  The
approximate  dollar  amount  of  the  fraud  or  abuse;  6)  The  legal  and  administrative
disposition of the case including actions taken by law enforcement officials to whom the
case  has  been  referred;  and  7)  Other  data/information  as  prescribed  by  the
Administrator of the WTC Health Program. Such report shall be submitted when cases of
fraud or abuse are confirmed, and shall be reviewed and signed by an executive officer
of the CCE.
                                                     The roles and responsibilities with respect to the NPN
are detailed below. 
                                The NPN manages a network of providers who are licensed,
credentialed,  insured  and/or  certified  in  accordance  with  the  WTC  Health  Program
requirements. Participating providers receive training on WTC Health Program covered
health conditions and protocols from the NPN. In many cases, an enrollee may receive
care from more than one NPN provider. The chart below describes the process used by
the NPN to select and maintain providers within the NPN provider network.
                             1. Clinical Management Team Searches for Provider 2. Provider
Contacted  3.  Complete  Services  Confirmation  Checklist  4.  Provider  Qualification  5.
Provider  Completes  Subcontractor  Agreement  6.  Collect  and  Verify  Credentialing
Information 7. Update Provider Information Using Workflow Management Technology 8.
Provider  Training  9.  Information  Retrieval  All  contracting  documents,  training  history,
credentialing and licensing reports are maintained for audit access upon request The
NPN  has  a  team  of  individuals  whose  responsibility  it  is  to  ensure  all  Healthcare
Practitioners  (HCPs)  within  the  NPN  are  licensed  within  the  state  where  they  will  be
performing  services.  The  NPN  ensures  that  all  HCPs  have  unrestricted,  valid  current
licenses,  certifications,  and  registrations  as  required  for  their  particular  profession
within  the  state,  district  or  territory  in  which  they  are  performing  services.  The  NPN
uses  both  trained  credentialing  staff  and  an  accredited  Credentialing  Verification
Organization (CVO) to meet the provider credentialing requirements of its WTC Health
Program contract. The NPN tracks the credentialing requirements in its data system for
each  provider  to  ensure  all  documentation  is  accurate  and  current.  A  qualifying
practitioner is not activated within the NPN until the credentialing verification process is
complete and the NPN Clinical Director has provided final approval. The NPN performs
ongoing monitoring to identify any sanctionable activities or instances of malpractice,
fraud,  waste  or  abuse.  HCPs  are  re-credentialed  every  36  months.  All  subcontracted
providers  receive  training  and  monitoring  of  their  quality  of  care  and  overall
performance in the provision of clinical services. All providers receive training from the
NPN’s Medical Provider Training department prior to scheduling appointments. Forms,
procedures,  and  expectations  are  reviewed  in  the  initial  training  session  to  ensure
compliance with WTC Health Program processes. As Chapter 2 details, eligibility for all
members  of  the  WTC  Health  Program  is  determined  by  the  Program.  Members  are
assigned  to  the  NPN  by  the  Program  based  on  their  geographic  location.  These  WTC
Health  Program  members  may  be  newly  enrolled  members  or  members  who  transfer
from a CCE. Newly enrolled WTC Health Program members are assigned to the NPN by
the WTC Health Program’s Member Services Team based on the new member’s location
outside the NY metropolitan area. If a newly enrolled WTC Health Program member who
has not been assigned to the NPN contacts the NPN directly, the NPN will work with the
member  and  the   Program  to  confirm  eligibility  and  assignment.  If  a  WTC  Health
Program member wishes to transfer from a CCE to the NPN or from the NPN to a CCE,
the  NPN  and  relevant  CCE  will  work  together  to  coordinate  the  transfer  using  the
established  WTC  Health  Program  transfer  policy,  detailed  in  the  Member  Services
Operations  Manual.  Coordination  of  member  intake  is  managed  by  the  NPN  case
manager. Ongoing communication with a WTC Health Program member occurs through
a variety of media, as necessary, including telephone, email, and fax, and may include
the  use  of  Integrated  Voice  Recognition  (IVR)  technology.  New  Member:  The  NPN
contacts the member to answer questions and schedule an initial monitoring exam or
initial  health  evaluation.  Since  the  member  is  not  transferring  from  a  WTC  Health
Program CCE, there are no prior medical records to retrieve. Transfer Member: The NPN
contacts  the  member  to  answer  questions  and  encourage  the  member  to  return  the
Medical Record Release Form(s), provided in the Welcome Packet. The NPN makes up
to  six  call  attempts  to  reach  the  member  to  obtain  the  completed  Medical  Record
Release Forms, as necessary. Once the forms are received, the NPN coordinates with
the member’s CCE to collect the medical records via trackable shipping service, enters
information  from  the  records  into  the  NPN  database  and  assigns  a  case  manager  to
review  the  records  and  document  the  member’s  WTC-certified  health  conditions  and
medical history. Upon completion of documentation, the case manager schedules the
intake  interview.  The  intake  process  consists  of  three  parts:  an  intake  interview;
testing; and a monitoring exam or initial health evaluation. 
Intake Interview
                                Since NPN members are located throughout the country,
face-to-face  meetings  are  not  feasible,  so  the  NPN  case  manager  conducts  intake
interviews  by  telephone.  During  the  intake  interview,  the  case  manager  verifies  all
demographic information with the member, making updates when necessary, in order
to  ensure  proper  identification  and  confidentiality.  A  Medical  Health  Questionnaire
(MHQ) is completed by the case manager and typically takes between 45 minutes to 1
½  hours.  The  MHQ  is  completed  for  both  new  WTC  Health  Program  members  and
transfers into the NPN to ensure completeness of NPN documentation. If a member uses
English as a second language and prefers to speak his/her primary language, the NPN
engages  a  company  that  offers  interpreter  services  to  assist  in  interpreting  the
interview.
                             After the MHQ is conducted, the case manager schedules testing and
monitoring exam or initial health evaluation appointments with the assigned provider.
These appointments are scheduled immediately for new members; for transfers into the
NPN,  the  appointments  are  scheduled  based  on  the  due  date  of  the  member’s  next
exam. All eligible members are encouraged to have an annual monitoring exam. 
Testing and Monitoring Exams
                                The initial monitoring exam or health evaluation is consistent with
those performed by the CCEs and includes a review of the completed MHQ, a general
health  assessment,  vital  signs  assessment,  spirometry  testing,  blood  work,  urine
collection, and a chest X-ray. The follow-up monitoring exam, where appropriate for the
type of member, includes the same components as the initial monitoring exam with the
exception of the chest X-ray, which is performed every two years unless an increased
frequency  is  clinically  indicated.  Follow-up  exams  or  additional  testing,  scheduled
through  the  case  manager,  may  be  required  as  a  result  of  the  monitoring  exam  to
complete  a  diagnosis.  Chapter  6  provides  more  detail  on  the  components  of  the
monitoring exams.
                             Within 48 hours of a member completing his/her appointment(s), all
documentation  is  forwarded  from  the  provider  to  the  NPN  so  that  the  NPN  Clinical
Director  may  determine  whether  or  not  to  request  certification  of  a  health  condition.
Chapter  3  provides  detailed  information  regarding  the  certification  process.  The  NPN
scans all received documents and archives them in its database. The completeness of
the  documents  is  reviewed  using  a  system-generated  checklist.  If  any  required
materials  are  missing,  the  NPN  contacts  the  provider  to  retrieve  the  missing
component(s) and/or to complete any missing exam elements. In the event providers
are not completing the exams/evaluations accurately or completely, re-training may be
recommended. 
Inform Member of Results
                                Once all documents are received by the NPN and quality reviews
are completed, the case manager conducts a thorough review of the exam findings and
drafts a letter to the member informing him/her of the results and any referrals to the
treatment program that stemmed from their exam. All exam results are sent no later
than  two  weeks  after  the  monitoring  exam  or  health  evaluation  services  have  been
completed.
                             If referrals are identified, the case manager follows up with the
member within five days after the letter and exam/evaluation documentation has been
sent to the member to discuss the conclusions reached from the initial work-up and the
member’s ongoing participation in the Program. The case manager discusses covered
health  conditions  and  assists  in  the  coordination  of  treatment,  as  necessary.
Additionally, the case manager outlines those health conditions that the member may
have that are not covered under the WTC Health Program and instructs the member to
see his/her primary care provider for treatment of those health conditions. If necessary,
the case manager engages the NPN social worker who assists in the processing of social
work  referrals  and  benefits  counseling  for  the  member.  The  NPN’s  Social  Services
Specialist  will  reach  out  to  provide  assistance  when  a  member’s  answer  to  the  MHQ
either  in  the  mental  health  section  or  social  benefits  section  indicates  it  may  be
needed, when a need is identified by the case manager through conversation with the
member,  or  when  a  monitoring  exam/initial  health  evaluation  physician  identifies  the
need  for  a  social  service  referral.  Areas  of  need  addressed  may  include  utility  needs
such as electricity and heating, transportation needs, mental health needs, assistance
with Victim Compensation Fund questions, coordination of benefits with other programs
such  as  Medicaid  or  workers’  compensation,  provision  of  guidance  in  accessing
resource  programs  such  as  food  stamps  or  financial  assistance,  offering  guidance  in
accessing medication assistance or medical assistance programs, providing assistance
in accessing local resources in other regions of the country, or other items as requested
by  the  member.  If  referrals  are  not  indicated  as  part  of  the  monitoring  exam/initial
health  evaluation,  the  NPN  will  begin  the  process  for  scheduling  the  next  monitoring
exam  60  days  prior  to  its  due  date,  where  appropriate.  If  a  member  is  referred  for
treatment, the NPN will begin the request for certification process for all covered health
conditions  which  the  clinical  director  determines  that  the  member’s  exposure  to
airborne  toxins,  any  other  hazard,  or  any  other  adverse  condition  resulting  from  the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, is substantially likely to be a significant factor in
aggravating,  contributing  to,  or  causing  the  illness  or  health  condition.  Chapter  3
describes  the  process  for  certifying  covered  conditions  under  the  program.  When  a
member’s health condition is approved for certification by the WTC Health Program, the
Program  notifies  the  NPN  electronically  and  sends  the  member  a  letter  to  inform
him/her of the Program’s decision.
                                The NPN also issues a Member ID Card to all NPN members
consistent with the Program’s practices for all members. The card contains a member
identification number and the customer service telephone numbers for the NPN and for
the Pharmacy Benefits Manager (PBM).
                            
4.5 Processing and Paying Claims
The  NPN  reimburses  every  subcontracted  provider  within  30  days  of  receipt  of  their
invoice.  In  order  to  receive  reimbursement,  the  services  rendered  must  be  medically
necessary,  performed  completely  and  in  accordance  with  the  NPN’s  authorization,
protocols, and direction.
Upon receipt of an invoice, the NPN reviews it for accuracy and completeness. Once the
NPN determines that the invoiced services are appropriate and in accordance with WTC
Health  Program  requirements,  the  invoice  is  electronically  submitted  to  the  HPS
contractor  for  processing  and  payment.  If  the  NPN  determines  that  the  invoiced
services  are  not  in  accordance  with  Program  requirements,  it  denies  the  invoice  and
sends the provider a letter of explanation permitting the provider to correct any errors
and,  if  appropriate,  resubmit  a  corrected  claim  to  the  NPN.  See  Chapter  5  for  more
detail on how NPN medical and pharmaceutical claims are processed, paid and can be
appealed.
 
                                The NPN also issues a Member ID Card to all NPN members
consistent with the Program’s practices for all members. The card contains a member
identification number and the customer service telephone numbers for the NPN and for
the Pharmacy Benefits Manager (PBM).
                             The NPN reimburses every subcontracted provider within 30 days of
receipt of their invoice. In order to receive reimbursement, the services rendered must
be  medically  necessary,  performed  completely  and  in  accordance  with  the  NPN’s
authorization, protocols, and direction. Upon receipt of an invoice, the NPN reviews it
for  accuracy  and  completeness.  Once  the  NPN  determines  that  the  invoiced  services
are appropriate and in accordance with WTC Health Program requirements, the invoice
is electronically submitted to the HPS contractor for processing and payment. If the NPN
determines  that  the  invoiced  services  are  not  in  accordance  with  Program
requirements,  it  denies  the  invoice  and  sends  the  provider  a  letter  of  explanation
permitting the provider to correct any errors and, if appropriate, resubmit a corrected
claim  to  the  NPN.  See  Chapter  5  for  more  detail  on  how  NPN  medical  and
pharmaceutical claims are processed, paid and can be appealed. Last Revised – August
2014 Appendix 9-A An Overview of the Appeal Process For Denial of Health Conditions
Certification The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview and description of
the  member  services  provided  through  the  WTC  Health  Program  under  the  James
Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act of 2010 (the Act). A member is defined as
an  individual  who  is  enrolled  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  as  a  responder,
certified-eligible  survivor,  screening-eligible  survivor,  or  eligible  family  member  of  an
FDNY  responder.  The  following  Sections  of  the  Act  are  applicable  to  this  chapter  (42
C.F.R.  pt.  88  does  not  include  any  language  specifically  applicable  to  this  chapter):
Member services are a key function of most WTC Health Program entities. A variety of
activities are implemented to ensure effective and full communication with all Program
stakeholders.  The  Program  has  a  variety  of  mechanisms  in  place  to  communicate
Program benefits to and meet with potentially eligible populations. 9/11 Environmental
Action  WTC  Health  Program  Outreach  and  Education  Activities:  9/11  Environmental
Action's outreach project will use innovative social networking techniques, short upbeat
videos,  as  well  as  traditional  grassroots  outreach  methods,  to  reach  9/11-affected
residents, students and area workers, referred to as WTC survivors. 9/11EA will utilize
its relationships and networks within the NYC Disaster Area to disseminate information
about the World Trade Center (WTC) Health Program, who is eligible and how to apply.
9/11  EA  will  closely  partner  with  the  survivor  organization,  StuyHealth,  to  reach  a
population  of  former  students,  now  young  adults,  locally  and  nationally.  Both
organizations  will  offer  enrollment  guidance.  FealGood  Foundation,  Inc.  WTC  Health
Program  Outreach  and  Education  Activities:  FealGood  Foundation  |Outreach  &
Education (FGF OnE) will assist First Responders in the NYC Area and other identified
areas of need who may have been injured, physically or mentally as a direct result of
their rescue, recovery and clean-up efforts at the World Trade Center Site. FGF OnE will
conduct four large events to assist in registering the Responders in World Trade Center
Health  Program.  New  York  Committee  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NYCOSH)
WTC Health Program Outreach and Education Activities: NYCOSH will reach responders
through one-on-one engagement directed at union members. Establishing one-on-one
contact with these individuals through their organizations and working to ensure that
they understand their potential benefits, how to apply to the program, and are guided
through the application process itself is the critical next phase of this project. Voices of
September  11th  WTC  Health  Program  Outreach  and  Education  Activities:  Voices  of
September 11th (VOICES) provides a wide range of support services and programs to
address  long-term  needs  of  those  impacted  by  9/11.  The  plan  for  outreach  is
broad-based and uses proven engagement techniques, direct-contact printed materials,
web-based  activities  and  social  networks  as  well  as  community-based  and  corporate
presentations,  conferences  and  forums.  The  plan  targets  outreach  to  companies,
organizations,  local  residents,  and  subgroups  such  as  parents,  immigrants,  seniors,
retirees and children. The CCEs and the NPN are responsible for undertaking activities
designed  to  retain  members  in  the  Program.  These  activities  include  maintaining
regular  contact  with  currently  enrolled  members  and  encouraging  these  members  to
continue to participate in the program. See Chapter 6 for additional information about
CCE member retention activities, and Chapter 7 for additional information about NPN
member  retention  activities.  The  Program  has  established  comprehensive  phone
information  services  via  its  Member  Call  Center  to  support  education  and  outreach
activities.  The  Member  Services  team  also  coordinates  appeal  processes  for  the
Program.  Members  may  appeal  decisions  made  regarding  denial  of  enrollment,  a
decision to disenroll the member from the Program, a decision not to certify a health
condition  as  a  WTC-related  condition,  a  decision  not  to  certify  a  health  condition  as
medically  associated  with  a  WTC-related  health  condition,  a  decision  to  decertify  a
health condition, or a decision not to authorize treatment due to a determination by the
 WTC  Health  Program  that  the  treatment  is  not  medically  necessary  for  the  certified
health  condition.  Appeals  are  specific  to  the  type  of  decision  rendered.  A
comprehensive
 discussion
 of
 the
 appeals
 process
 may
 be
 found
 at
 
www.cdc.gov/wtc/appeals.html. Summaries of the appeals processes may be found in
Chapter  2,  Eligibility  and  Enrollment,  for  denials  of  enrollment  and  disenrollments;
Chapter  3,  Certification  of  Health  Conditions,  for  denials  of  certification  of  a  health
condition and decertification; and Chapter 4, Medical Benefits, for denial of treatment
authorization. Appendix 9-A contains a fact sheet, distributed to any members receiving
a  denial  decision  for  certification  of  a  health  condition,  which  outlines  the  appeals
process. Member concerns are addressed through a variety of mechanisms. In addition
to  the  regular  communication  channels  available  to  members  (described  above)
through which concerns may be expressed, the Program also hears concerns through
ad  hoc  meetings  with  stakeholders  and  community  groups  and  via  individual
communications  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Because  of  the  close  working  relationships
and frequent communication between the Program and member groups, the Program
has multiple, regular opportunities to identify and address member concerns. Member
concerns are also reviewed through congressional inquiries and through letters sent by
members  directly  to  the  Program  or  to  the  Administrator.  9-A—An  Overview  of  the
Appeal Process for Denial of Health Condition Certification Last Revised – August, 2014
The purpose of this WTC Health Program Fraud, Waste, and Abuse (FWA) policy is to
describe  the  measures  taken  to  prevent,  detect,  and  deter  the  FWA  of  public  funds.
FWA  activities  target  the  potential  causes  of  FWA  from  inadvertent  errors  to  willful
deception. The scope of the WTC Health Program FWA policy includes all areas of the
WTC Health Program that could be vulnerable to FWA. These areas include, but are not
limited  to  The  Public  Health  Service  Act  The  following  sections  of  Title  XXXIII  of  the
Public
 Health
 Service
 (PHS)
 Act
 are
 applicable
 to
 this
 chapter:
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2015-title42/pdf/USCODE-2015-title42-chap6A-
subchapXXXI.pdf Other laws and statutes also have direct impact on protecting against
FWA.   Federal  laws  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  the  following:  Health  Care  Fraud
Statute  The  Health  Care  Fraud  Statute  makes  it  a  criminal  offense  to  knowingly  and
willfully execute a scheme to defraud a health care benefit program. Health care fraud
is punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years. It is also subject to criminal fines of
up to $250,000. Specific intent to violate this section is not required for conviction.  18
U.S.C.
 §
 1347.
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2015-title18/pdf/USCODE-2015-title18-partI-ch
ap63-sec1347.pdf  False  Claims  Act  The  False  Claims  Act  establishes  civil  liability  for
offenses  related  to  certain  acts,  including  knowingly  presenting  a  false  or  fraudulent
claim to the government for payment, and making a false record or statement that is
material  to  the  false  or  fraudulent  claim.  “Knowingly”  includes  not  only  actual
knowledge but also deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard for the truth or falsity of
the information. No specific intent to defraud the government is required. Depending on
the circumstances, some examples of potential False Claims Act violations in the health
care fraud context include upcoding, billing for unnecessary services, billing for services
or  items  that  were  not  rendered,  and  billing  for  services  performed  by  an  excluded
individual.  31 U.S.C. § 3729. Individuals and entities that make false claims are subject
to civil penalties of up to $11,000 for each false claim, plus three times the amount of
damages  the  government  sustains  by  reason  of  each  claim.  Violation  of  the  False
Claims Act may lead to exclusion from Federal health care programs.  31 U.S.C. § 3729.
Civil  legal  actions  for  penalties  and  damages  under  the  False  Claims  Act  may  be
brought  not  only  by  the  government,  but  by  private  persons,  such  as  competitors  or
employees of a provider, on behalf of the government. If the legal action is successful,
the  private  person  is  entitled  to  a  percentage  of  the  recovery.  The  False  Claims  Act
protects all persons from retaliation for reporting false claims or bringing legal actions
to  recover  money  paid  on  false  claims.   31  U.S.C.  §  3730.  Failure  to  return
overpayments may lead to liability under the False Claims Act. Under section 1128J(d)
of the Social Security Act, persons who have received an overpayment from a Federal
health  care  program  must  report  and  return  the  overpayment  within  60  days  of  the
date  the  overpayment  was  identified.  Failure  to  do  so  may  make  the  overpayment  a
false claim.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7k; 31 U.S.C. § 3729. False claims made knowingly may
also be subject to criminal prosecution. Persons who knowingly make a false claim may
be  subject  to  criminal  fines  up  to  $250,000  and  imprisonment  of  up  to  5  years.   18
U.S.C. §§ 287; 3571. Anti-Kickback Statute The Anti-Kickback Statute, found in Section
1128B(b)  of  the  Social  Security  Act,  prohibits  the  knowing  and  willful  offer,  payment,
solicitation, or receipt of any remuneration, in cash or in kind, to induce or in return for
referring an individual for the furnishing or arranging of any item or service for which
payment  may  be  made  under  a  Federal  health  care  program.  Remuneration  means
anything of value and can include gifts, under-market rent, or payments that are above
fair market value for the services provided. Criminal penalties for violation are a fine of
up to $25,000 and imprisonment for up to 5 years.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b. Compliance
with  the  Anti-Kickback  Statute  is  a  condition  of  payment  in  Federal  health  care
programs.  Claims  that  include  items  or  services  resulting  from  a  violation  are  not
payable and may constitute false or fraudulent claims under the False Claims Act.  42
U.S.C. § 1320a-7b. Under the Civil Monetary Penalties Law, Social Security Act Section
1128A(a)(7),  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Office  of  Inspector
General  (HHS-OIG)  may  impose  civil  penalties  for  violations  of  the  Anti-Kickback
Statute. The penalties are up to $50,000 per violation plus three times the amount of
the  remuneration.  Violation  of  the  Anti-Kickback  Statute  may  also  lead  to  exclusion
from  Federal  health  care  programs.   42  U.S.C.  §  1320a-7a.  The  Anti-Kickback  Statute
provides  safe  harbors  for  certain  arrangements,  such  as  personal  services  and  rental
agreements,  investments  in  ambulatory  surgery  centers,  and  payments  to  bona  fide
employees.  Physicians  with  questions  about  the  Anti-Kickback  Statute  and  these  safe
harbor arrangements should consult the regulations and guidance documents available
from HHS-OIG.  42 C.F.R. § 1001.952. Exclusion Provisions Under Section 1128 of the
Social Security Act, HHS-OIG has authority to exclude individuals from participating in
Federal health care programs, including Medicaid, for various reasons. Exclusions can
be  mandatory,  meaning  HHS-OIG  has  no  choice  about  whether  to  exclude,  or
discretionary, which means the HHS-OIG does have a choice. Exclusion is mandatory for
convictions  of  program-related  crimes,  convictions  related  to  patient  abuse,  felony
convictions  related  to  health  care  fraud,  and  felony  convictions  related  to  controlled
substances.  Exclusion  is  discretionary  for  loss  of  license  due  to  professional
competence  or  financial  integrity,  convictions  related  to  fraud,  convictions  related  to
obstruction of an investigation or audit, misdemeanor convictions related to controlled
substances,  and  participation  in  prohibited  conduct  such  as  kickbacks  and  false
statements.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7. Generally, Federal health care programs will not pay
for  items  or  services  furnished,  ordered,  prescribed,  or  supplied  by  an  excluded
individual or entity.   42 C.F.R. § 1001.1901. Under the Civil Monetary Penalties Law,
Social Security Act Section 1128A, HHS-OIG may impose civil monetary penalties of up
to $10,000 per item or service claimed while excluded. HHS-OIG may also impose an
assessment of up to three times the amount claimed.   42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7a. 1 While a
health  care  professional  who  provides  services  through  Medicaid  may  employ  an
excluded  individual  who  does  not  provide  any  items  or  services  paid  for,  directly  or
indirectly,  by  Federal  health  care  programs,  practitioners  should  exercise  caution.  A
professional who contracts with or employs “a person that the provider knows or should
know is excluded by OIG … may be subject to CMP (Civil Monetary Penalty) liability if
the  excluded  person  provides  services  payable,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  a  Federal
health care program.” The prohibition is not limited to items or services involving direct
patient care, but extends for example to filling prescriptions, providing transportation
services,  and  performing  administrative  and  management  services  that  are  not
separately  billable.  See  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Office  of
Inspector General, “Updated Special Advisory Bulletin on the Effect of Exclusion From
Participation  in  Federal  Health  Care  Programs,”  (May  8,  2013).   Available  at
https://oig.hhs.gov/exclusions/files/sab-05092013.pdf.  If,  for  example,  a  biller  is
excluded from a government health care program, payments on claims submitted by
the  practice  through  the  biller  may  be  considered  overpayments  subject  to
recoupment.  Any  person  who  has  received  an  overpayment  must  return  the  money
within 60 days of the date on which the overpayment was identified. Failure to do so
may subject the person to liability under the False Claims Act and the Civil Monetary
Penalties Law.  42 U.S.C. 1320a-7k. 2 It is in the best interest of physicians and other
providers to screen potential employees and contractors prior to employment or hiring
to ensure they are not excluded from participating in Federal health care programs. In
addition, providers should regularly check the exclusions database to ensure that none
of  the  practice’s  employees  or  contractors  have  been  excluded.  The  Centers  for
Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  has  issued  guidance  to  State  Medicaid  agencies
that  they  should  require  providers  to  screen  their  employees  and  contractors  for
exclusions by checking the database on a monthly basis. The guidance further advises
States  to  require  all  providers  to  report  any  exclusion  information  discovered
immediately.  The  List  of  Excluded  Individuals/Entities  (LEIE)  database  is  available  at
https://exclusions.oig.hhs.gov/  on the HHS-OIG website. Both licensed and unlicensed
individuals may be excluded, so it is best to check for both. In addition to checking the
LEIE, providers should check the Exclusions Extract, which can be accessed by visiting
https://www.sam.gov/   on  the  System  for  Award  Management  website.   Centers  for
Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services,  State  Medicaid  Director  Letter  09-001  (p.  4),  (Jan.  16,
2009).
 Available
 at
https://downloads.cms.gov/cmsgov/archived-downloads/SMDL/downloads/SMD011609.p
df.  Civil Monetary Penalties Law As previously noted, the Civil Monetary Penalties Law,
Section 1128A of the Social Security Act, authorizes HHS-OIG to impose civil penalties
for  violations  of  the  Anti-Kickback  Statute  as  well  as  a  range  of  other  violations.
Penalties range from $10,000 to $50,000 per violation. These violations include, but are
not  limited  to,  the  following:  42  U.S.C.  §  1320a-7a.  Each  suspected  case  of  FWA  is
reviewed  to  categorize  the  allegation  as  Fraud,  Waste,  or  Abuse.  Intent  is  the  key
distinction  between  Fraud  and  Abuse.  An  allegation  of  waste  and  abuse  can  escalate
into  a  fraud  investigation  if  a  pattern  of  intent  is  determined.  Fraud  is  defined  as  an
intentional deception, false statement, or misrepresentation made by a person with the
knowledge that the deception could result in unauthorized benefit to oneself or another
person. It includes any act that constitutes fraud under applicable federal or state law.
It  is  a  crime  to  defraud  the  Federal  Government  and  its  programs.  18  U.S.C.  §  1001.
Punishment may involve imprisonment, significant fines, or both. Criminal penalties for
health care fraud reflect the serious harms associated with health care fraud and the
need  for  aggressive  and  appropriate  fraud  prevention.  In  some  states,  providers  and
health  care  organizations  may  lose  their  licenses.  Convictions  also  may  result  in
exclusion from participation for a specified length of time. Fraud may also result in civil
liability. Examples of Fraud Could Include: Waste is defined as failure to control costs or
regulated  payment  associated  with  federal  program  funding.  Furthermore,  waste
results  in  taxpayers  not  receiving  reasonable  value  for  their  money.  Waste  relates
primarily to mismanagement, inappropriate actions, or inadequate oversight. Examples
of  Waste  Could  Include:  Abuse  is  defined  as  practices  that  are  inconsistent  with
professional standards of care; medical necessity; or sound fiscal, business, or medical
practices. Examples of Abuse Could Include: Detecting, preventing, and reporting FWA
are the responsibilities of everyone associated with the WTC Health Program including
employees, members, providers, and contractors. The WTC Health Program will closely
monitor program activities to detect or prevent any FWA. The WTC Health Program will
report  fraudulent  conduct  to  federal  law  enforcement  agencies  and  violators  may  be
subject to criminal, civil, or administrative penalties. Information concerning suspected
fraud  related  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  by  contractors,  grantees,  health  care
providers,  or  individual  recipients  will  be  reported  to  the  Department  of  Health  and
Human  Services  Office  of  Inspector  General  (OIG)  by  phone  at  1-800-HHS-TIPS
(1-800-447-8477);  online  at  oig.hhs.gov/report-fraud;  or  in  writing  to  the  following
address: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General,
ATTN:  OIG  HOTLINE  OPERATIONS,  P.O.  Box  23489,  Washington,  DC  20026.  The  WTC
Health Program has instituted FWA activities including: The following areas of the WTC
Health  Program  incorporate  measures  and  activities  to  protect  against  FWA:  The  full
application and enrollment process is described in the WTC Health Program Policy and
Procedure Manual (PPM, Chapter 2).  Using an online portal or by submitting a paper
application,  applicants  apply  to  the  program  and  submit  supporting  documentation
related  to  their  activities,  location,  and  time  periods  of  exposure.   Applications  are
reviewed  for  completeness  and  compliance  with  the  relevant  eligibility  criteria
established in Title XXXIII of the PHS Act and 42 C.F.R. part 88.  Quality Control checks
are  built  into  the  workflow  and  there  is  an  appeals  process  for  denials  of  enrollment
(see  42  C.F.R.  §  88.14).   Internal  audits  of  enrollment  are  conducted  on  a  quarterly
basis.  Performance metrics are used to monitor the completeness and timeliness of the
application/enrollment  process,  and  outreach  and  communication  services.  These
Quality  Control  checks  facilitate  the  identification  of  potential  instances  of  FWA.
Outreach  and  education  materials,  including  the  Member  Handbook,  incorporate
information  on  member  FWA  responsibilities,  such  as  avoiding  potential  fraudulent
enrollment.  Various  Program  activities  also  help  to  ensure  that  resources  are  used
efficiently and waste is avoided. The WTC Health Program works strategically with the
Responder and Survivor Steering Committees, Clinical Centers of Excellence (CCEs), the
Nationwide Provider Network (NPN), and the Data Centers (DCs) to evaluate program
participation  and  client  satisfaction.  The  program  seeks  to  maintain  contact  with
currently  enrolled  members  and  to  increase  participation  for  those  who  have  been
inactive  in  program  follow-up.   Together  with  CCEs,  NPN,  DCs,  and  Steering
Committees,  the  WTC  Health  Program  identifies  and  reduces  barriers  that  affect
member participation.  The tools employed include surveys, newsletters, websites, key
informant  feedback,  and  scheduling  reminders.  The  CCEs/NPN  have  primary
responsibility for safeguarding against fraudulent providers. The CCEs/NPN vary in how
they provide medical services; some do most of the services in-house while others refer
many  services  to  outside  providers.  External  providers  affiliated  with  the  CCEs  are
credentialed and enrolled in the Program through a third party provider management
sub-contractor  under  a  WTC  Health  Program  Support  (HPS)  contract.  This  provider
management  sub-contractor  screens  CCE-affiliated  external  providers  against  the
OIG/GSA exclusion lists and/or the CMS Fraud Investigation Database, conducts criminal
background checks, establishes business agreements which include a provision that the
agreement  with  the  WTC  Health  Program  may  be  terminated  immediately  for
fraudulent  billing,  gives  guidance  to  the  providers  on  the  limited  nature  of  the  WTC
Health  Program  and  what  costs  may  be  appropriately  paid,  and  informs  the  network
providers of the authorization and billing requirements for member care including the
following:   External  providers  affiliated  with  the  NPN  are  credentialed  and  enrolled
through  a  separate  third  party  administrator  under  United  Health  Care  (UHC).  NPN
authorizes  provider  bills  in  the  same  manner  as  the  CCEs.   Once  CCEs/NPN  request
registration of a provider in the program, the HPS contractor registers the provider in
the claims system so that they can be paid. As part of this registration process, the HPS
contractor  verifies  the  validity  of  the  provider’s  National  Provider  Identification  (NPI)
number. The WTC Health Program provides a limited health care coverage for qualifying
certified  WTC-related  and  medically  associated  conditions.   Treatment  benefits  are
controlled  through  administrative  certification  of  health  conditions  on  an  individual
member basis (see PPM Chapter 3 for full details).  This process, outlined in Title XXXIII
of  the  PHS  Act  and  in  42  C.F.R.  part  88,  enables  the  mandatory  requirements  for
coverage  to  be  determined  through  a  two-step  process  that  first  entails  a  clinical
diagnostic  evaluation  which  is  subsequently  reviewed  by  a  federal  official  for
certification.  The process has data quality and control checks built into the workflow,
including an administrative appeals procedure (see 42 C.F.R. § 88.21), a decertification
procedure (see 42 C.F.R. § 88.19), member communication regarding health condition
certification denials, and a procedure for the Administrator’s discretionary reopening of
decisions  (see  42  C.F.R.  §  88.25).   The  HPS  contractor  and  CCE/NPN  exchange
certification data to ensure alignment of member information for benefit management.
The two-step process consisting of an initial CCE/NPN physician determination, followed
by a review and certification by the Administrator or designee provides distinct exercise
of  independent  judgement  of  the  relatedness  of  the  medical  diagnosis  with  exposure
information to effect certification of conditions, thus further safeguarding certification
against FWA. The medical benefits available under the program are detailed in Chapter
4  of  the  PPM.  This  chapter  of  the  PPM  includes  FWA  mitigation  procedures  that  help
prevent unnecessary or unauthorized services being paid under the program.  The WTC
Health Program maintains a Code Book of the allowable billing codes by specific benefit
plans.   The  Code  Book  categorizes  the  benefit  plans  for  the  initial  health  evaluation,
periodic medical monitoring, cancer screening, diagnostic evaluation, and treatment of
specific  certified  conditions  (through  “care  suites”).   Further  details  about  benefit
control can be found in Chapter 4.  There is an administrative medical change control
process that ensures oversight for any requested change to the Code Book; and quality
control  checks  are  built  into  the  workflow.   The  Code  Book  is  also  subject  to
modification  based  on  evaluation  of  reasons  for  denied  service  claims,  updates  to
medical guidelines or policy, coding updates from source organizations, and when new
health  conditions  are  added  for  program  coverage.  The  CCEs,  DCs,  and  NPN  must
adhere to an operations manual that specifies how they are implementing the tasks in
their performance work statement.  The elements are addressed in Chapters 6, 7, and 8
of  the  PPM.   These  operations  include  quality  assurance  metrics  for  scheduling,
completion  of  all  components  of  the  examination  and  testing,  notification  and
counseling  about  results  and  providing  professional  referrals  for  further  evaluation  or
treatment compliant with program policy and standards of medical practice. The WTC
Health Program meets with the clinical directors and administrators of the CCEs, DCs,
and NPN on a regular basis to calibrate and clarify medical and administrative policies
and procedures. Minutes of these meetings are taken and sent out to all participants. 
Practice guidelines following principles of medical necessity and community standards
of  care  are  produced  by  the  DCs  in  consultation  with  the  CCEs  and  approved  for
implementation by the WTC Health Program.   Prescription medications are a significant
expenditure for member treatment under the WTC Health Program.  Significant controls
are in place to prevent FWA and ensure that only those drugs in a specific formulary are
authorized and paid by the program. WTC Health Program members receive outpatient
medication  to  control  certified  conditions  and  medically  associated  conditions  arising
from the 9/11 terror attacks.  Members with certified health conditions are assigned a
specific  pharmacy  benefit  plan.   Each  pharmacy  benefit  plan  has  a  closed  formulary,
authorization controls for certain medications, and provides the pharmacist with safety
messaging  and  real-time  claims  processing  at  the  point  of  sale.  Chapter  12  provides
details  regarding  these  benefit  plans  and  the  formulary  change  control  process  that
ensures oversight for requested changes to program formularies.  The plan formularies
undergo  periodic  review  by  the  Medical  Benefits  Team.   The  WTCHP  medical  and
pharmacy  teams  work  with  the  CCEs  and  NPN  to  determine  prescribing  patterns,
medical necessity criteria, safety concerns, and make cost assessments. The pharmacy
team  analyzes  paid  claims  and  conducts  on  site  audits  of  the  CCE’s  to  ensure
prescriptions  are  used  for  certified  conditions.  New  drugs  and  drug  requests  get
reviewed monthly to determine if they should be added to the formulary. The pharmacy
team reviews most frequently prescribed medications, brand vs generic, single source
brand  use,  overrides,  DEF  costs,  coordination  of  benefits  for  survivors,  opioid  use,
pharmacy overrides such as prior authorizations, prescription not covered, and refill too
soon. Claims processing and payment is a critical area in the protection against FWA in
the  WTC  Health  Program.  The  WTC  Health  Program  uses  a  fee-for-service
reimbursement strategy for health care services (see Chapter 5).  The only exception is
a capitated fee for a group of services constituting the standardized initial health and
annual medical monitoring examination for eligible members (see Chapter 4).  The WTC
Health Program pays the approved rates to an enrolled provider, for covered, correctly
coded and correctly billed services, provided to an eligible beneficiary (see 42 C.F.R. §
88.22).  The  claims  processing  system  has  been  designed  to  guard  against  FWA  by
reducing payment errors by preventing the initial payment of claims that do not comply
with  the  WTC  Health  Program  coverage,  coding,  payment  and  billing  policies.   To
maintain  or  improve  provider  compliance  and  lower  the  error  rate,  the  WTC  Health
Program follows these parallel strategies:  The CCEs, the NPN, and the HPS contractors
analyze provider compliance with WTC Health Program coverage and coding rules and
take appropriate corrective action when providers are found to be non-compliant.  For
example,  some  errors  are  the  result  of  provider  misunderstanding  or  failure  to  pay
adequate attention to Program policy.  Other errors may represent calculated plans to
knowingly  acquire  unwarranted  payment.   The  CCEs/NPN  evaluate  the  circumstances
surrounding the errors and proceed with the appropriate plan of correction.  If errors
continue to be repeated, or if the errors suggest potential fraud or a pattern of abuse,
then  more  severe  administrative  action  is  initiated.  The  HPS  contractor  consults  with
industry experts to identify medical practice and technology changes that may result in
improper  billing  or  program  abuse  to  propose  areas  for  data  analysis  and  remedial
action as needed.  Types of service claims are routinely assessed for patterns of waste
or  abuse  include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  While  automation  is  the  preferred  mode  of
operation for the claims processing system to minimize error from human touch, based
on  program  findings,  the  following  types  of  claims  are  routinely  handled  through
manual  processing:  Metrics  are  monitored  that  assess  electronic  claims  submission
accuracy,  claims  processing  time,  auto-adjudication  success  and  accuracy,  claims
volume  and  payment  adjustments,  volume  and  reasons  for  claims  being  denied  or
pended for further resolution, and compliance with the Prompt Payment Act. All points
of sale are connected to the program’s contracted pharmacy benefit manager through
software transmitting claims processing rules and safety notices to the pharmacist at
the point of sale.  The rules require verification of member, pharmacy plan assignment,
an authorized prescriber, a supply limit and prevent early refills, off-formulary product
dispensing,  and  dispensing  of  duplicate  ingredients  or  supplies.   Higher  tier  drugs  or
select products that may be prone to misuse or abuse require additional authorization
by  the  CCE/NPN  in  the  system  before  the  pharmacist  can  fill  the  prescription.  
Prescriptions are filled with generic formulations unless a brand is authorized.  Brand
availability on the formulary is subject to considerations of therapeutic efficacy, allergy
to ingredients, side effect profile, patient adherence factors, safety, and cost.  Continual
monitoring  to  optimize  pharmacy  cost  control  strategies  include  the  following:  The
following  administrative  improvements  enhance  controls  for  FWA.  Title  XXXIII  of  the
PHS Act requires recoupment of treatment costs for WTC-related health conditions and
medically  associated  health  conditions  if  the  condition  is  work-related  (see  also  42
C.F.R. § 88.24).  The WTC Health Program determined that the CCEs and NPN did not
have  the  resources  to  manage  this  requirement,  so  an  alternative  approach  was
implemented  that  utilizes  the  New  York  State  Workers’  Compensation  Board  Health
Insurance Match Program (HIMP) that assists health insurers and health benefits plans
to  set  up  a  system  to  identify  claims  that  they  have  paid  which  may  be  the
responsibility  of  the  employer,  workers'  compensation  insurance  carrier,  or  special
fund,  and  to  obtain  reimbursement  therefore.  The  WTC  Health  Program  awarded  a
contract to HMS Federal to implement the HIMP for our program in September, 2014.
The  WTC  Health  Program  receives  monthly  reports  on  recoupment  activities.  Since
HIMP is a comprehensive and efficient process that interacts directly with the New York
State  Workers’  Compensation  Board  and  insurers,  more  funds  are  recovered  and
verification  of  appropriate  claims  payment  is  increased.  Additionally,  the  WTC  Health
Program  is  in  the  process  of  posting  a  solicitation  to  address  the  provider  payments
accounts receivables aging balances associated with overpayments made to providers
in excess of amounts owed or payments made in error. All overpayments identified as
un-recouped (all efforts to offset have been exhausted) will be turned over to the WTC
Health Program’s debt collection support services contractor to collect the debt owed
the Federal Government. The debt collection support services contract is expected to
be awarded during second quarter of 2018. The WTC Health Program has created an
online  set  of  policies  and  procedures  for  transparency  and  consistency  in  program
administration.  In addition to this PPM chapter on FWA, there are requirements for the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Federal Information
Security Management Act (FISMA). 
                                    Working with the HHS Program Integrity Initiative, the WTC
Health  Program  is  addressing  data  security  and  privacy  (HIPAA  and  FISMA),  resource
alignment  for  performance  requirements  of  CCEs/NPN  to  comply  with  benefit
administration,  streamlining  the  process  of  program  application/processing,  and
program communication.
                                    In addition, the WTC Health Program periodically reviews metrics
that  provide  qualitative  and  quantitative  measures  to  assess  the  Program’s
performance  on  customer  service,  pharmacy  utilization,  claims  processing,  and  cost
efficiency of managing the WTC Health Program. Review of these metrics facilitates the
identification of potential instances of FWA.
                                 The WTC Health Program has a Fraud Prevention Officer (FPO) and
a Fraud Risk Assessment Team (FRAT) in place who adhere to established procedures
for processing allegations pertaining to FWA when received. The FRAT includes the FPO,
the  WTC  Health  Program  Deputy  Division  Director,  the  Office  of  the  General  Counsel
(OGC), and any other relevant parties related to the specific allegation. The WTC Health
Program provides stakeholders with information about the Program’s FWA efforts and
procedures  through  information  included  on  the  WTC  Health  Program  website  and  in
the Member Handbook.  Allegations of FWA are to be reported to the FPO. In addition,
the
 HHS
 OIG
 has
 a
 website
 dedicated
 to
 reporting
 possible
 FWA.
(https://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/report-fraud/index.asp ) If the allegation of FWA comes to the
WTC  Health  Program  from  the  OIG,  the  FPO  will  work  with  the  OIG,  as  requested,  to
assist  with  the  OIG  investigation.  When  an  allegation  of  FWA  is  received  from  any
source other than the OIG by the WTC Health Program, the allegation is immediately
forwarded to the FPO. The FPO will record receipt of the allegation on the FWA Intake
Form, enter the FWA allegation into the FWA Allegation Status Log, and begin an initial
investigation  to  determine  if  the  allegation  should  be  categorized  as  fraud,  waste,  or
abuse. As a result of the initial investigation, if the allegation is categorized as potential
fraud, the FPO will gather any relevant information and forward the case to the OIG for
investigation. The FPO will monitor the status of the OIG investigation and report the
OIG’s findings and resolution to the FRAT. If the allegation is determined to be either
waste or abuse, the FPO will continue the WTC Health Program’s internal investigation
of the allegation with the assistance of any relevant personnel. Once the investigation
is  completed,  the  FPO  will  present  the  results  of  the  investigation  to  the  FRAT  along
with a recommended resolution. The FPO is responsible for ensuring the waste or abuse
allegation is resolved based on the decision of the FRAT. The FPO is also responsible for
ensuring the waste or abuse investigation and resolution are documented and reported
to  the  appropriate  HHS/CDC  contact,  as  required.  Last  Revised  –  August,  2014  The
purpose of this chapter is to describe the relationships and actions among the World
Trade  Center  (WTC)  Health  Program,  other  parts  of  the  National  Institute  for
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH),  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC),  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS),  and  other
government agencies. The WTC Health Program is responsible for providing health care
benefits  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  Zadroga  Act,  including  those  provisions
related  to  WTC  Health  Program  member  eligibility,  enrollment,  benefits,  and
responsibility  for  determining  the  payment  amounts  to  be  disbursed.   The
Administrator,  Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services  (CMS),  is  responsible  for
disbursing  payment  for  the  program.   Administration  of  the  WTC  Health  Program
involves cooperation and coordination with HHS and other government agencies, some
of  which  are  specified  in  the  Zadroga  Act.  The  WTC  Health  Program  must  also
cooperate with, and respond to, program oversight evaluations and audits performed
by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and HHS Office of the Inspector General
(IG). In addition, the WTC Health Program collaborates with other 9/11 programs such
as  the  September  11th  Victim  Compensation  Fund  (VCF)  administered  by  the
Department of Justice.    Office of the Inspector General (IG) (The Zadroga Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 300mm(d)) 
Responsibility:
                                                The Zadroga Act requires the HHS Office of the Inspector
General  (IG)  to  manage  certain  oversight  responsibilities,  including  the  review  of  the
WTC Health Program health care expenditures to detect fraudulent or duplicate billing
and  payment  for  inappropriate  services,  as  well  as  the  review  of  the  WTC  Health
Program for unreasonable administrative costs, including with respect to infrastructure,
administration  and  claims  processing.   In  addition,  the  IG  can  initiate  a  review,  not
specifically  required  by  the  Zadroga  Act,  of  other  components  of  the  WTC  Health
Program.
                                             
Activity:
                                                In August 2011, the HHS IG initiated an audit to review
the WTC Health Program’s controls for awarding and monitoring the Clinical Centers of
Excellence  (CCEs)  and  determine  whether  the  CCEs’  financial  systems  can  provide
reliable  financial  and  performance  data,  including  medical  service  claims  data.  As  of
July 2013, the results of this review had not yet been published.
                                             The Office of the General Counsel (OGC) provides
representation  and  legal  advice  for  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services
(HHS).  OGC  supports  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  Department's
programs  by  providing  legal  services  to  the  Secretary  of  HHS  and  the  organization's
various agencies and divisions. OGC provides legal support and assistance to the WTC
Health Program to ensure the Program is administered in accordance with the Zadroga
Act  and  other  applicable  Federal  laws  and  regulations.   Government  Accountability
Office  (GAO)  (Exhibit  1,  42  U.S.C.  §  300mm-4  and  §  300mm-22)  Responsibility:   The
Zadroga Act required the Comptroller General to submit an analysis to the Committee
on  Energy  and  Commerce  of  the  House  of  Representatives  and  the  Committee  on
Health,  Education,  Labor,  and  Pensions  of  the  Senate  no  later  than  July  1,  2011  on
whether the Centers for Clinical Excellence (CCEs) have financial systems that allow for
the timely submission of claims data (Exhibit 1, 42 U.S.C. § 300mm-4(d)).  In addition,
the  Zadroga  Act  requires  the  GAO  to  study  feasibility,  efficiency  and  effectiveness
issues  related  to  the  WTC  Health  Program,  including:   The  GAO,  like  the  IG,  can  also
initiate a review, not specifically required by the Zadroga Act, of other components of
the WTC Health Program.  Activity:  The Zadroga Act required GAO to report by July 1,
2011,  on  whether  the  CCEs  under  contract  with  the  WTC  Program  Administrator
hadfinancial systems that would allow for the timely submission of health care claims
data  as  envisioned  by  the  act.  According  to  the  WTC  Program  Administrator’s  CCE
contract  awards  schedule,  the  Administrator  would  not  have  awarded  any  contracts
with the CCEs until at least June 30, 2011. Therefore, they could not perform a review of
CCE contractors’ financial systems because no CCE contractors were in place to assess
by  July  1,  2011.  On  July  15,  2011,  GAO  issued  a  briefing  that  focused  on  (1)  the
CDC/NIOSH schedule for awarding contracts to the CCEs, (2) health care claims data for
the CCEs and planned procedures, and (3) the Administrator’s plans for evaluating each
CCE  system’s  health  care  claims  data  capabilities  during  and  after  the  award  of  the
contracts. (Exhibit 3)  The results of the briefing found that: On August 4, 2011, GAO
issued its report regarding (1) the consolidated data center, (2) the use of VA health
care facilities for members living outside the New York metropolitan area, and (3) the
use of an existing federal prescription drug purchasing program.  (Exhibit 2) While the
GAO report did not offer any formal recommendations, its analysis stated that:  On July
23, 2014, the GAO completed an audit on the WTC Health Program's approach to add
cancers  to  the  list  of  WTC-covered  conditions  (See  Exhibit  4).  The  main  objectives  of
this  audit  were:   The  Director  of  CDC  oversees  CDC/NIOSH  responsibilities  under  the
WTC Health Program. CDC Office of the Director staff, as well as other CDC Offices as
appropriate,  are  involved  in  reviewing  performance  plans,  documenting  progress,
identifying  risks,  and  interceding  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  highest  standards  of
performance.  The  CDC  Procurement  and  Grants  Office  provides  assistance  with
acquisitionand related activities to enable the centers, institutes, and offices at CDC to
implement health-related programs, initiatives, and acquisitions. PGO is the only entity
within CDC which can obligate federal funds. PGO contributes to the implementation of
initiatives
 and
 acquisitions
 related
 to
 the
 WTC
 Health
 Program
 through
non-programmatic  management  for  all  Program  financial  assistance  (grants  and
cooperative  agreements)  and  contract  activities.  The  NIOSH  Office  of  Extramural
Programs  (OEP)  facilitates  the  management  of  extramural  grant  and  cooperative
agreement portfolios. OEP is located within the NIOSH Office of the Director under the
direction  of  the  Associate  Director  for  Research  Integration  and  Extramural
Performance. OEP manages the extramural portfolio of cooperative agreements for all
NIOSH activities, including the WTC Health Program. OEP, in coordination with the WTC
Health  Program,  facilitates  the  solicitation,  review,  and  issuance  of  cooperative
agreements related to the September 11th terrorist attacks. This portfolio includes the
awards  for  the  WTC  Health  Registry,  research  projects,  and  outreach  and  education
activities  (Exhibit  1,  42  U.S.C.  §§  300mm-2,  300mm-51,  300mm-52).   Responsibility:  
The  Secretary  of  HHS  delegated  authority  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  to  assume
enrollment  and  eligibility  functions  (Exhibit  5).  Required  eligibility  and  enrollment
activities that were delegated under the Zadroga Act include:  
Activity: The procedures and protocols used to perform WTC Health Program eligibility
and  enrollment  functions  are  detailed  in  Chapter  2,  Eligibility  and  Enrollment.   The
procedures and protocols used to perform Program oversight are detailed in 
                                                    Chapter 12
                                                , Quality Assurance and Program Evaluation.
                                             Responsibility:  The Zadroga Act mandates that any
individual who is on the terrorist watch list maintained by the Department of Homeland
Security  (DHS)  be  disqualified  for  eligibility  within  the  WTC  Health  Program.  The
Zadroga Act incorrectly states that DHS maintains the terrorist watch list. The Federal
Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI),  housed  within  the  Department  of  Justice  (DOJ),
administers  the  Terrorist  Screening  Center  (TSC).   As  such,  the  WTC  Program
Administrator collaborates with the TSC to meet the requirements of the Zadroga Act
regarding qualification for enrollment in the WTC Health Program.  Activity:  The WTC
Health  Program  established  a  process  to  share  WTC  Health  Program  member  and
applicant information with DOJ in order to meet the requirements of the Zadroga Act.  
The  WTC  Health  Program  Contractor  prepares  a  list  of  new  WTC  Health  Program
applicants  on  a  weekly  basis  and  the  list  is  transferred  to  the  TSC.  Based  on  the
information  provided  by  the  TSC,  the  applicant  is  qualified  or  not  qualified  for
enrollment into the WTC Health Program.  Only qualified applicants will be considered
for enrollment into the WTC Health Program based on the Program’s eligibility criteria. 
(See Chapter 2, Eligibility and Enrollment)  Responsibility:  The Zadroga Act prohibits
NIOSH  from  making  payments  for  the  provision  of  WTC  Health  Program  health  care
benefits  (Exhibit  1,  42  U.S.C.  §  300mm-5(14)(B)).   Activity:  The  Secretary,  HHS,
delegated  authority  for  disbursing  payments  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  to  the
Administrator, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) in May 2011. (Exhibit 5,
76 Fed. Reg. 31337 (May 31, 2011)).  The WTC Health Program and CMS established an
interagency agreement for this activity.  See Chapter 5, Claims Processing, for details
regarding the CMS payment function. Responsibility:  As required by the Zadroga Act,
the  WTC  Health  program  reimburses  costs  for  medically  necessary  treatment  for
WTC-related health conditions according to the payment rates that would apply to the
provision of such treatment and services by the facility under the Federal Employees
Compensation Act (FECA).  For treatment for which FECA rates are not available, the
WTC Health Program administrator is required to establish a treatment reimbursement
rate  (Exhibit  6,  42  C.F.R.  §  88.16).   In  no  case  are  the  payments  for  WTC  Health
Program  products  or  services  made  at  a  rate  higher  than  the  Office  of  Worker’s
Compensation  Programs  (OWCP)  in  DOL  would  pay  for  such  products  or  services
rendered  at  the  time  such  products  or  services  were  provided.   Activity:   The  WTC
Health Program consulted with DOL to determine the best policies and procedures to
reimburse for the provision of health care under the WTC Health Program.  Based on
those  policies  and  procedures,  the  WTC  Health  Program  established  a  system  to
process WTC Health Program claims, ensuring claims are paid in accordance with the
Zadroga Act.  In addition to establishing audits  to ensure compliance, the WTC Health
Program  performs  periodic  retrospective  reviews  and  analyses  of  claims  to  audit  the
Program’s performance. More detailed information regarding claims processing can be
found  in  Chapter  5.  Responsibility:   Title  II  of  the  Zadroga  Act  reactivates  the
September  11th  Victim  Compensation  Fund  of  2001  (VCF)  that  operated  from
2001-2004  and  requires  a  Special  Master,  appointed  by  the  Attorney  General,  to
provide  compensation  for  any  individual  (or  a  personal  representative  of  a  deceased
individual) who suffered physical harm or was killed as a result of the terrorist-related
aircraft crashes of September 11, 2001 or the debris removal efforts that took place in
the immediate aftermath of those crashes. On August 31, 2011, DOJ published a Final
Rule regarding the operation of the VCF, as revised by the Zadroga Act, in the Federal
Register (76 Fed. Reg. 54112). 
The  VCF  only  provides  compensation   for  losses  due  to  personal  physical  injury  or
death. An individual who elects compensation from the VCF waives his or her rights to
pursue  litigation  to  seek  damages  for  the  physical  injury  or  death  resulting  from  the
September 11, 2001 attacks. 
Activity:  The  WTC  Health  Program  assists  DOJ  as  outlined  by  a  Memorandum  of
Understanding (MOU) between the VCF and the WTC Health Program. With the specific
authorization  and  consent  of  an  individual  VCF  claimant,  the  MOU  facilitates:  1)  for
those  VCF  claimants  participating  in  both  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  the  VCF,
transmission of the individual’s WTC Health Program  medical information, including the
WTC Health Program’s decisions regarding certification and authorization for treatment,
to  the  VCF  for  purposes  of  facilitating  the  VCF’s  evaluation  of  the  individual’s  VCF
claims; and 2) for those VCF claimants who do not receive care within the WTC Health
Program, review by the WTC Health Program of VCF claimants’ exposure and health 
information to assist the VCF, for the purposes of making compensation determination,
in verifying whether claimants’ health conditions are related to their 9/11 exposures.
 
The  VCF  only  provides  compensation   for  losses  due  to  personal  physical  injury  or
death. An individual who elects compensation from the VCF waives his or her rights to
pursue  litigation  to  seek  damages  for  the  physical  injury  or  death  resulting  from  the
September 11, 2001 attacks. 
Activity:  The  WTC  Health  Program  assists  DOJ  as  outlined  by  a  Memorandum  of
Understanding (MOU) between the VCF and the WTC Health Program. With the specific
authorization  and  consent  of  an  individual  VCF  claimant,  the  MOU  facilitates:  1)  for
those  VCF  claimants  participating  in  both  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  the  VCF,
transmission of the individual’s WTC Health Program  medical information, including the
WTC Health Program’s decisions regarding certification and authorization for treatment,
to  the  VCF  for  purposes  of  facilitating  the  VCF’s  evaluation  of  the  individual’s  VCF
claims; and 2) for those VCF claimants who do not receive care within the WTC Health
Program, review by the WTC Health Program of VCF claimants’ exposure and health 
information to assist the VCF, for the purposes of making compensation determination,
in verifying whether claimants’ health conditions are related to their 9/11 exposures.
 The  VCF  only  provides  compensation   for  losses  due  to  personal  physical  injury  or
death. An individual who elects compensation from the VCF waives his or her rights to
pursue  litigation  to  seek  damages  for  the  physical  injury  or  death  resulting  from  the
September 11, 2001 attacks. 
Activity:  The  WTC  Health  Program  assists  DOJ  as  outlined  by  a  Memorandum  of
Understanding (MOU) between the VCF and the WTC Health Program. With the specific
authorization  and  consent  of  an  individual  VCF  claimant,  the  MOU  facilitates:  1)  for
those  VCF  claimants  participating  in  both  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  the  VCF,
transmission of the individual’s WTC Health Program  medical information, including the
WTC Health Program’s decisions regarding certification and authorization for treatment,
to  the  VCF  for  purposes  of  facilitating  the  VCF’s  evaluation  of  the  individual’s  VCF
claims; and 2) for those VCF claimants who do not receive care within the WTC Health
Program, review by the WTC Health Program of VCF claimants’ exposure and health 
information to assist the VCF, for the purposes of making compensation determination,
in verifying whether claimants’ health conditions are related to their 9/11 exposures.
 
Activity:  The  WTC  Health  Program  assists  DOJ  as  outlined  by  a  Memorandum  of
Understanding (MOU) between the VCF and the WTC Health Program. With the specific
authorization  and  consent  of  an  individual  VCF  claimant,  the  MOU  facilitates:  1)  for
those  VCF  claimants  participating  in  both  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  the  VCF,
transmission of the individual’s WTC Health Program  medical information, including the
WTC Health Program’s decisions regarding certification and authorization for treatment,
to  the  VCF  for  purposes  of  facilitating  the  VCF’s  evaluation  of  the  individual’s  VCF
claims; and 2) for those VCF claimants who do not receive care within the WTC Health
Program, review by the WTC Health Program of VCF claimants’ exposure and health 
information to assist the VCF, for the purposes of making compensation determination,
in verifying whether claimants’ health conditions are related to their 9/11 exposures.
 Activity:  The  WTC  Health  Program  assists  DOJ  as  outlined  by  a  Memorandum  of
Understanding (MOU) between the VCF and the WTC Health Program. With the specific
authorization  and  consent  of  an  individual  VCF  claimant,  the  MOU  facilitates:  1)  for
those  VCF  claimants  participating  in  both  the  WTC  Health  Program  and  the  VCF,
transmission of the individual’s WTC Health Program  medical information, including the
WTC Health Program’s decisions regarding certification and authorization for treatment,
to  the  VCF  for  purposes  of  facilitating  the  VCF’s  evaluation  of  the  individual’s  VCF
claims; and 2) for those VCF claimants who do not receive care within the WTC Health
Program, review by the WTC Health Program of VCF claimants’ exposure and health 
information to assist the VCF, for the purposes of making compensation determination,
in  verifying  whether  claimants’  health  conditions  are  related  to  their  9/11  exposures.
Last  Revised  –  August,  2014  The  financial  management  quality  assurance  standards
plan  is  designed  to  create  the  framework  for  achieving  and  maintaining  financial
management  control  and  performance  standards  in  the  World  Trade  Center  (WTC)
Health  Program.   A  well-executed  quality  assurance  standards  program  creates
awareness of performance standards and emphasizes policies and procedures, controls,
performance  management,  performance  measurement,  efficiency,  and  guidance
measures  to  prevent  waste,  fraud,  and  abuse.    In  addition,  good  quality  assurance
standards provide reasonable assurance that a program’s goals and objectives will be
achieved.       The purpose of this guidance is to create a framework for WTC Health
Program financial controls, performance management, and performance measurement.
This  framework  includes  five  focus  areas  relevant  to  financial  controls,  performance
management, and performance measurement. The five focus areas are as follows: Fund
Control  Management  Scope:  Provide  reasonable  assurance  that  funding  requirements
adhere  to  Appropriations  Law,  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS)
guidelines,  James  Zadroga  9/11  Health  and  Compensation  Act  of  2010  (Zadroga  Act)
and
 James
 Zadroga
 9/11
 Health
 and
 Compensation
 Reauthorization
 Act
(Reauthorization)  requirements  and  intent,  and  prevent  fraud,  waste,  and  abuse.
Measure: 100% compliance with Appropriations Law, HHS guidelines, and Zadroga Act
and Reauthorization requirements. Spend Plan Development and Management Scope:
Coordinate the planning and development of Spend Plans with appropriate staff. Review
prior  fiscal  year(s)  actual  results;  assess  impact  of  known  program  and  budget
issues/decisions;  and  set  priorities  based  on  Program’s  goals  and  mission.   Measure:
Spend Plan developed and submitted to Office and Management and Budget (OMB) for
approval  30  days  prior  to  new  fiscal  year.  Budget  Execution  and  Performance  Scope:
Track, monitor, and report on use of Spend Plan funds; and track, monitor, and report
on  Program  performance  (i.e.,  Clinical  Center  of  Excellence  (CCE)  and  Nationwide
Provider Network (NPN) claims submission and contract invoice submissions). Measure:
Review, approve, and process CCE and NPN invoices within 5 business days of receipt;
and 2.) Review and monitor expenditure trends and produce monthly reports. Analysis
and  Budget  Forecasting  Scope:  Conduct  regular  burn  rate  reviews  of  expenditures  to
determine if current budgets are adequate for balance of performance period. Measure:
Establish notification triggers at 75% and 90% expenditure levels and assess the details
at each level to determine if Program action(s) is required.  Quality Assurance Scope:
Quality assurance encompasses all of the above activities and enables the Program to
achieve  and  maintain  high  performance  levels.  Our  goals  are  to  develop  Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for each step of the invoice reimbursement process and
closely  monitor  other  performance  measures  to  ensure  Program  is  performing
according  to  statutory  requirements.   Measure:  No  deviation  from  Program’s  goals
without  Core  Management  Team  (CMT)  approval.  The  WTC  Health  Program  financial
controls  and  policy  and  procedures  guidance  was  developed  to  assist  Program  and
financial  management  in  accomplishing  fiscal  year  fund  control  objectives.  This
guidance provides fund control procedures and contract clauses for applicable activities
for each fiscal year.      The WTC Health Program works with its contractors, the CCEs
and the NPN, to provide quality care to WTC Health Program members. As the Federal
entity,  the  WTC  Health  Program’s  governing  role  is  to  ensure  that  the  resources
dedicated are properly managed and performance is measured against the Program’s
goals  and  mission  to  improve  financial  efficiency.  Statutory  Authority  Title  I  of  the
Zadroga Act amended the Public Health Service Act to add Title XXXIII and established
the WTC Health Program within the HHS. In December 2015, Title XXXIII of the Public
Health  Act  was  amended  by  the  Reauthorization.  The  Reauthorization  authorized  the
WTC  Health  Program  through  FY  2090.  Fiscal  Year  Spend  Plan/Apportionment  Each
Fiscal  Year’s  Spend  plan  requires  the  approval  of  the  OMB  before  execution.
Responsibility: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)/National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)/WTC Health Program Awards Once the Spend
Plan  is  approved  by  OMB,  the  Grants  Management  Officer  (GMO)  and  Contracting
Officer (CO) can begin the process of issuing awards.  Responsibility: OFR/WTC Health
Program Personnel Personnel projections are based on program priorities and are also
subject  to  the  availability  of  funds.   Responsibility:  NIOSH/WTC  Health  Program
Governance  NIOSH  is  the  responsible  Federal  entity  and  must  exercise  sound
stewardship  of  appropriated  funds.   Responsibility:  NIOSH/WTC  Health  Program/OFR
Performance  The  WTC  Health  Program’s  overall  performance  is  measured  by  how
effectively and efficiently the Zadroga Act’s and Reauthorization’s requirements were
executed. Responsibility: NIOSH/WTC Health Program Reports The Zadroga Act requires
the WTC Health Program to submit annual reports to Congress. OMB requires monthly
report  submissions.   Responsibility:  NIOSH/WTC  Health  Program  Close  out  All  awards
must be closed out at the end of their performance period.  Responsibility: NIOSH/WTC
Health  Program  Note:The  World  Trade  Center  Health  Program  has  a  new  Pharmacy
Benefit  Manager  (PBM),  Express  Scripts,  as  of  June  1,  2022,  and  some  of  the  PBM
policies have updated with this change. This section is currently being updated. In the
meantime, please visit the Program Pharmacy Page, the Coordination of Benefits page,
and  our  FAQ  page  for  current  information  about  WTC  Health  Program  pharmacy
benefits. For more detailed questions, please call our help line at 1-888-982-4748. Last
Revised  –  January  9,  2024  This  chapter  describes  the  pharmacy  benefits  that  are
available through the WTC Health Program under the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and
Compensation  Act  of  2010  (the  Act)  and  its  reauthorization.   Program  regulations
relating to pharmacy benefits are established in the following sections of 42 C.F.R. Part
88: The parties involved in providing WTC Health Program pharmacy benefits and their
responsibilities are detailed below: The WTC Health Program does not have restrictions
on retail pharmacy access. Any pharmacy contracted with the PBM may submit a claim
to  the  Program.  This  includes  most  major  chains  and  many  community  pharmacies.
Members can talk to their respective CCE/NPN or contact the PBM to find a pharmacy.
Members may also visit  https://www.cdc.gov/wtc/pharmacy.html.  The PBM offers home
delivery and specialty pharmacy services to all members that would like to participate.
Home delivery and specialty pharmacy services provide medications at a reduced cost
to  the  Program.  They  can  also  help  improve  health  outcomes  for  members  through
increased medication compliance. The home delivery and specialty pharmacy provides
maintenance  medications  to  the  member  by  mail.  Maintenance  medications  are
prescription  drugs  taken  on  a  regular  or  on-going  basis.  Specialty  medications  are
defined as high-cost prescription medications used to treat complex, chronic conditions
like  cancer  and  often  require  special  handling  (such  as  refrigeration  during  shipping)
and administration (such as infusions).  Home delivery and specialty pharmacy services
provide  many  benefits  to  members.  Prescriptions  can  be  conveniently  mailed  to  the
member’s home or location of choice, with no need to travel to or wait at the pharmacy.
Home delivery and specialty pharmacy services also reduce the risk of running out of
medication  or  missing  a  medication  dose,  while  allowing  for  synchronization  of
medication  refills.  Members  also  have  access  to  expert  pharmacist  advice  24/7.   The
HPS  contractor  is  also  responsible  for  enrolling  and  maintaining  the  WTC  Health
Program  prescriber  networks  (See  Chapter  6,  Section  6:  Provider  Networks).  The  HPS
contactor transfers data on prescribers to the PBM.  If pharmacy claims are submitted
to  the  PBM  by  a  provider  who  is  not  enrolled  in  the  appropriate  CCE’s  prescriber
network  for  the  member  (See   Section  2.3:  Prescriber  Networks),  the  claim  will  be
rejected  at  the  point  of  sale  with  a  message  to  the  pharmacy  stating  “Prescribing
Physician Not in Member Network.” If this occurs, the CCE may override the rejection
for up to 90 days when appropriate to treat the member’s certified WTC-related health
condition, or health condition medically associated with a certified WTC-related health
condition.   This  does  not  apply  to  the NPN/WSC.  CCEs  may  override rejections  when:
The following exceptions apply to the prescriber not-in-network edit:  The PBM system
performs a drug utilization review (DUR) on each claim by screening the drug against
previously  submitted  claims.  The  purpose  of  DUR  is  to  improve  patient  safety  and
prevent waste. DUR rules are utilized by all federal pharmacy programs and managed
by the dispensing pharmacy. If the prescription does not meet the Program’s rules, then
the claim will be rejected at the point of sale. The pharmacy has the ability to override
DUR rules based on their professional judgment. DUR rules enforced by the PBM system
include:  Refill  too  soon  (RTS)  point  of  sale  rejections  mitigate  waste  by  preventing  a
member  from  receiving  more  medication  than  is  medically  necessary.  Seventy-five
percent  of  the  previous  refill  must  be  exhausted  based  on  days’  supply  prior  to  the
adjudication of another fill (e.g., ≥23 days of a 30-day supply, ≥68 days of a 90 day
supply). If the refill is submitted prior to the 75% threshold, the prescription will reject
at the point of sale. The pharmacist may call the PBM for an override in the following
circumstances:  Certain select medications may have limitations on quantities based on
Program  rules  outlined  in  the  formulary.   These  quantity  limits  are  enforced  through
point  of  sale  rules  and  restrictions.  The  Program  has  placed  limits  on  the  number  of
days’ supply allowed for certain medications, with a maximum days’ supply of 90 days
for all medications allowed by the Program. Starting October 1st, 2019, the WTC Health
Program  will  only  allow  up  to  a  30-day  supply  of  medication  for  each  fill  at  retail  or
community pharmacies. For any medication fills over 30 days and up to 90 days, the
member must use home delivery service. For information on home delivery, please visit
https://wtchomedelivery.optum.com/.  Certain select medications on the formulary are
subject to Level 2 Prior Authorization (PA) requirements and must be authorized by the
member’s  CCE/NPN.  If  the  medication  requires  a  Level  2  PA,  the  prescription  will  be
rejected  at  the  point  of  sale  and  require  review  by  the  CCE/NPN.  The  CCE/NPN  can
authorize  the  medication  based  on  medical  necessity  and  prior  authorization  criteria
outlined  in  the  formulary.  As  with  all  prescriptions,  members  should  contact  the
pharmacy  to  make  sure  a  prescription  has  been  processed  prior  to  picking  up  the
medication.  Medications that are not on the formulary will be rejected at the point of
sale  and  require  a  Level  3  Prior  Authorization  (PA).  To  obtain  approval,  the  CCE/NPN
must submit a Request for a Level 3 PA to the WTC Health Program. Once the request is
received, the WTC Health Program will decide whether to approve the Level 3 PA based
on  specific  criteria  outlined  in  the  formulary  and/or  Program  policy.   The  WTC  Health
Program reviews Requests for a Level 3 PA for the following: The NPN has more Level 2
and  Level  3  Prior  Authorization  requirements,  restrictions,  and  point  of  sale  rules  on
medications  than  the  CCEs.  These  restrictions  apply  to  all  members  assigned  to  the
NPN and the William Street Clinic (WSC); WSC pharmacy benefits are administered by
the  NPN  and  have  the  same  rules  and  restrictions  applied  as  the  NPN  for  pharmacy
claims.  These  additional  restrictions  are  in  place  to  permit  the  proactive  review  of
medications  prior  to  claim  adjudication  since  the  NPN/WSC  does  not  have  a  closed
prescriber network (See Section 2.3: Prescriber Networks). All prescriptions dispensed
under the WTC Health Program must be medically necessary to manage, ameliorate, or
cure a certified WTC-related health condition or health condition medically associated
with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  condition.  Please  see  Chapter  4,  Section  4.0  for
more detail on covered conditions.  All treatments, including prescriptions, covered by
the  Program  must  have  documentation  of  medical  necessity.  Documentation  should
include:  In some cases, the member’s certification may be a form of documentation of
medical necessity. For example, if the member is certified for asthma and is receiving a
Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  approved  asthma  inhaler,  the  certification  alone
can  be  used  as  documentation  of  medical  necessity.  If  the  clinical  use  of  the  drug
cannot  be  determined  by  reviewing  the  member’s  certified  condition(s),  then  the
CCE/NPN  should  document  the  certified  condition  being  treated  and  the  rationale  for
medical  necessity.  For  example,  the  CCE/NPN  should  document  when  a  drug  has
multiple  indications,  some  of  which  are  not  WTC-related  health  conditions,  or  if  the
member  is  using  the  drug  to  treat  a  side  effect  or  ancillary  condition  related  to  the
certified  condition.  (See  Chapter  4,  Section  2.4:  Treatment  Benefit  Plan).  All
documentation related to medical necessity for medication should be easily retrievable
and  available  in  the  event  of  audits  or  drug  utilization  reviews.  All  authorizations
performed in the PBM pharmacy claims processing system must have documentation in
the system. The CCE/NPN must also document medical necessity of a medication in the
electronic medical record, and/or other files as determined by the CCE/NPN.  Decisions
made by the CCE/NPN for transactions that require Level 2 Prior Authorization and other
point of sale rules and restrictions must be documented in the pharmacy adjudication
system  provided  by  the  PBM.  This  documentation  must  include:  The  WTC  Health
Program uses benefit plans to determine what kind of treatment a member is eligible to
receive. Benefit plans are groupings developed by the WTC Health Program that define
the acceptable scope of treatment for specific categories of covered health conditions.
For  more  on  benefit  plans,  please  refer  to  Chapter  4,  Section  2.0:  Approved  Benefit
Plans.   The  WTC  Health  Program  assigns  members  to  the  appropriate  Pharmacy
Formulary  based  on  the  member’s  certified  health  conditions,  benefit  plan,  and
membership  type  (e.g.,  responder,  screening-eligible  or  certified-eligible  survivor,  or
immediate family of deceased FDNY firefighters). This section summarizes the current
Pharmacy  Formularies  and  provides  highlights  regarding  formulary  eligibility  criteria
and content. Medications are selected and reviewed on a quarterly basis by the WTC
Health Program. The WTC Health Program selects classes of drugs to be reviewed for
the  quarter  using  the  process  described  in  Section  4.0:  Medical  Necessity
Documentation  Requirements.  At  the  end  of  each  quarter,  the  WTC  Health  Program
presents  the  findings  and  formulary  changes  for  the  CCE/NPN  at  the  Pharmacy  and
Therapeutics (P&T) Forum. Changes in the formulary are implemented 30 days after the
P&T Forum and the new formulary is then distributed to the CCE/NPN. If restrictions are
added for drugs that did not previously have restrictions, members are given a 3-month
grandfathering period to fill the medication to allow time for the CCE/NPN to perform a
clinical  review.  The  WTC  Health  Program  Pharmacy  and  Therapeutics  (P&T)  Forum
meets quarterly to present clinical information researched during the formulary review
process  and  inform  the  CCEs/NPN  of  changes  to  WTC  Health  Program  pharmacy
benefits.  These  changes  could  include  formulary  changes,  point  of  sale  rules  and
restriction changes, policy and/or procedure changes.  The WTC Health Program makes
all decisions related to formulary additions, deletions, or restrictions. The formulary is
updated quarterly to coincide with the P&T Forum.  Generally, formulary changes will
be presented at the P&T Forum prior to being enacted by the Program. The Program will
follow the timeline below. In the event of an exception, the CCEs/NPN will be notified
accordingly.  
                                    The WTC Health Program evaluates all drugs to determine if they
are eligible for coverage. Once a drug is approved as eligible for coverage, it is added
to the WTC Health Program Pharmacy Formulary. In some limited circumstances, a drug
that  has  not  met  the  criteria  for  inclusion  in  the  WTC  Health  Program  Pharmacy
Formulary may be eligible for coverage by the Program if certain other criteria are met.
Full details can be found in the Policy and Procedures for Coverage of Drugs.
                                 Policy and Procedures for Coverage of Drugs  [PDF, 9 pages, 320
KB]  
                                    Prescription drugs marketed in the United States must be
approved by the U.S. FDA. FDA approval is based on the drug’s demonstrated safety
and effectiveness according to criteria specified by FDA regulations. When a provider
prescribes a drug for a use other than the use specified in the FDA-approved drug label
it is considered an “off-label drug use” (OLDU) or an “unapproved use.” The WTC Health
Program may provide coverage of OLDU if such use is considered medically necessary
for the member’s certified WTC-related health condition, or health condition medically
associated with a certified WTC-related health condition. OLDU must be prescribed by a
WTC Health Program provider when certain criteria are met. Full details can be found in
the Medical Coverage Determination for the Coverage of Off-Label Use of FDA-Approved
Drugs.
                                  Medical Coverage Determination for the Coverage of Off-Label Use
of FDA-Approved Drugs   [PDF, 4 pages, 230 KB] The WTC Health Program requires that
generic  medications  be  used  when  available  and  clinically  appropriate  in  order  to
reduce  costs.  Multisource  medications,  or  brand  medications  with  an  FDA-approved
generic, are subject to Level 2 Prior Authorization (PA) rules and restrictions at the point
of sale. The following criteria must be met and rationale should be documented in the
medical  record  for  approval  of  a  multisource  brand  medication:  The  WTC  Health
Program implements step therapy for certain classes of medications. Often drugs used
to treat the same condition, with similar efficacy, have significant variations in cost. The
Program performs cost-effective analysis and clinical and market research to determine
if certain medications should be subject to step therapy rules. Step therapy requires the
member to try less expensive drugs that are equally efficacious before starting higher
cost drugs.  Compounded prescription drugs are a subset of prescription drugs used to
meet  a  member’s  unique  health  needs  that  cannot  be  met  by  an  FDA-approved
medication.  For example, compounded drugs may be prescribed if a member has an
allergy  and  needs  a  medication  to  be  made  without  a  certain  dye,  or  if  a  member
cannot  swallow  a  pill  and  needs  a  medicine  in  a  liquid  form  that  is  not  otherwise
available. Active ingredients in a compound medication that are not on the formulary
will require a Level 3 Prior Authorization (PA). An “active ingredient” is any ingredient in
a medication that has a pharmacologic effect. Most compound medications also contain
“inactive  ingredients”  that  have  no  pharmacological  effect.  Compound  medications
may only be prescribed and approved for use in the Program when: The WTC Health
Program  covers  compound  medications  based  on  the  member’s  assigned  treatment
plan.  Only  FDA  approved  ingredients  may  be  used  in  a  compound  medication.  Bulk
powders (i.e., active ingredients for compounding) are not covered by the WTC Health
Program, as bulk chemicals do not have FDA approval.1  Pharmacies are reimbursed for
compound medications based on their contracted rate of reimbursement with the WTC
Health Program PBM for each ingredient billed in the compound claim. The WTC Health
Program does not manage contracts with individual pharmacies and does not manage
reimbursement rates. If a member has difficulty finding a compounding pharmacy to fill
their prescription, they should contact their CCE/NPN or the pharmacy customer service
line.  The  FDA  has  specified  that  any  drug  that  is  not  a  prescription  drug  is  an
over-the-counter  (OTC)  or  non-prescription  drug.  An  OTC  drug  is  considered  safe  and
effective for use by the general public without a physician’s prescription. An OTC health
care  product  is  a  non-drug,  non-durable  equipment  item  that  is  used  to  aid  in  the
diagnosis  or  treatment  of  a  health  condition  and  which  can  be  purchased  without  a
prescription from a physician (e.g., blood glucose self-testing equipment supplies). The
WTC Health Program provides limited coverage of OTC drugs and healthcare products
to  treat  certified  WTC-related  health  conditions,  or  health  conditions  medically
associated  with  a  certified  WTC-related  health  conditions,  for  medically  accepted
indications.  OTC  drugs  must  be  prescribed  by  a  WTC  Health  Program  provider  and
dispensed  in  conjunction  with  the  quantity  and  dosing  limitations  specified  in  the
Pharmacy  Formulary,  along  with  any  requirements  for  prior  authorization.2   Only  the
following  categories  of  OTC  drugs  are  available  for  coverage:  Only  the  following
categories of OTC healthcare products are available for coverage: Pharmacies submit
claims  for  prescription  medications.  Claims  must  be  submitted  electronically  and  in
compliance with the National Council of Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) standards.
Eligibility  for  claim  payment  is  determined  by  carrier  code  and  matching  member
record. When a match is found, the claim will process. If a match is not found, the claim
will  reject  for  “Member  Not  Eligible.”  All  claims  submitted  by  the  pharmacy  will  be
subject to point of sale rules and restrictions (See Section 3.0, Point of Sale Adjudication
Rules and Restrictions).  Pharmacists have authority to fill and dispense prescriptions
and submit claims based on their professional judgement and discretion. If a member
has issues filling a prescription, they should contact their CCE/NPN provider or the PBM
pharmacy customer service line.  Pharmacy claims must be submitted within 90 days of
the  fill  date;  all  claims  older  than  90  days  will  be  rejected.   The  pharmacy  should
contact the PBM pharmacy customer service line if a prescription is rejected due to the
submission  date  being  more  than  90  days  after  the  fill  date.   Pharmacies  are
reimbursed for claims billed to the WTC Health Program based on their contracted rate
of reimbursement with the WTC Health Program PBM. The WTC Health Program does
not  directly  manage  contracts  with  individual  pharmacies  or  reimbursement  rates.  
Neither the WTC Health Program nor the CCE/NPN nor the PBM can directly reimburse
members  for  medications  that  were  paid  for  out  of  pocket.  All  medications  must  be
billed to the Program at the point of sale. If a medication rejects at the point of sale, the
member  should  resolve  the  issue  with  the  CCE/NPN  or  PBM  customer  service  line  to
determine if coverage is available prior to paying for the medication out of pocket (See 
https://www.cdc.gov/wtc/pharmacy.html).  The Program cannot reimburse members for
other types of services related to prescription medications that are not billed with the
prescription (e.g., delivery charges, additional tax or fees, mailing charges, etc.). Please
contact the CCE/NPN prior to paying for these services out of pocket.   Each pharmacy
has policies and procedures to determine when they will be willing and able to rebill a
medication that has already been dispensed. The WTC Health Program, the CCE/NPN,
and  the  PBM  are  unable  to  facilitate  rebilling  of  prescriptions  at  the  pharmacy.
Furthermore,  if  a  medication  is  rebilled  to  the  WTC  Health  Program  after  dispensing,
there is no guarantee of coverage.  In accordance with statutory requirements, the WTC
Health  Program  must  distinguish  between  how  responder  and  survivor  health  care
claims are billed. The WTC Health Program is the primary payer for responder health
care claims, unless the health condition being treated is the subject of certain workers’
compensation claims.3 The WTC Health Program is the secondary payer on claims for
survivors.  Survivor  claims  require  coordination  with  the  member’s  primary  health
insurance. This means that a member’s primary insurance (e.g., private group health
insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, etc.) must be billed first and only the remaining balance
on  the  claim  will  be  paid  by  the  Program,  if  appropriate.  In  order  to  perform
coordination of benefits (COB) for a pharmacy claim for a survivor, the pharmacy must
have  the  both  survivor’s  primary  insurance  billing  information  and  their  WTC  Health
Program  billing  information  on  file.  The  pharmacy  then  submits  the  claim  to  process
automatically  with  primary  and  secondary  payers.  The  primary  payer  will  be
adjudicated first, and any point of sale rules and restrictions that are applicable to the
plan of the member’s primary payer will be activated.  Each CCE must perform quality
assurance  prescription  claim  reviews  (PCR)  to  ensure  prescriptions  are  being
administered  according  to  Program  policy  for  certified  WTC  Health  Conditions.  There
are two requirements for each CCE:  Review Requirements: 
                Page Last Reviewed: November 30, 2023  Page Last Updated: July 25, 2024
            
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/wtc/ppm.html
