COMMUNITY CASE STUDY — Volume 13 — June 9, 2016 Suggested citation for this
article:  Moran  A,  Krepp  EM,  Johnson  Curtis  C,  Lederer  A.  An  Intervention  to  Increase
Availability  of  Healthy  Foods  and  Beverages  in  New  York  City  Hospitals:  The  Healthy
Hospital  Food  Initiative,  2010–2014.  Prev  Chronic  Dis  2016;13:150541.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd13.150541external  icon.  PEER  REVIEWED  Background
Hospitals serve millions of meals and snacks each year; however, hospital food is often
unhealthy. Hospitals are ideal settings for modeling healthy eating, but few programs
have  sought  to  improve  nutrition  in  all  venues  where  food  is  served.  Community
Context  The  New  York  City  Department  of  Health  and  Mental  Hygiene  created  the
Healthy Hospital Food Initiative (HHFI) to improve the healthfulness of food served in
hospitals. The HHFI built on prior work implementing mandatory nutrition standards for
patient  meals  and  vending  in  public  hospitals.  Public  hospitals  joined  the  HHFI  by
voluntarily  adopting  standards  for  cafeterias  and  cafés.  Private  hospitals  joined  by
implementing  nutrition  standards  for  patient  meals,  food  and  beverage  vending
machines,  and  cafeterias  and  cafés.  Methods  Hospitals  were  recruited  from  2010
through  2014  and  provided  technical  assistance  from  health  department  staff.
Implementation in each of the 4 areas was monitored through on-site assessments and
menu  review.  Twenty-eight  hospital  cafeterias  and  cafés  were  evaluated  at  baseline
and at the end of the HHFI to assess changes. Outcome Sixteen public hospitals and 24
private  hospitals  joined  the  HHFI.  Most  (n  =  18)  private  hospitals  implemented
standards in at least 2 areas. In cafeterias, most hospitals introduced a healthy value
meal  (n  =  19),  removed  unhealthy  items  from  the  entrance  and  checkout  (n  =  18),
increased  whole  grains  to  at  least  half  of  all  grains  served  (n  =  17),  and  reduced
calories in pastries and desserts (n = 15). Interpretation Most New York City hospitals
joined  the  HHFI  and  voluntarily  adopted  rigorous  nutrition  standards.  Partnerships
between  hospitals  and  local  government  are  feasible  and  can  lead  to  significant
improvements in hospital food environments. Top In New York City (NYC), overweight
and obesity affects 56.1% of adults (1). Nearly one-quarter of New Yorkers report fair or
poor dietary habits, 23% of adults drink at least one sugary drink daily, and nearly 90%
consume fewer than 5 servings of fruits and vegetables each day (1). Institutions like
government  agencies,  schools,  and  hospitals  serve  food  to  a  large  number  of  people
and  can  improve  diets  by  modeling  healthful  practices  (2).  NYC  government  has
transformed the institutional food environment by improving the healthfulness of foods
served  in  schools  (3),  limiting  sugary  drinks  in  childcare  settings  (4),  and  issuing
mandatory  standards  for  foods  purchased  and  served  by  government  agencies,
including public hospitals (5). Hospitals are ideal venues for modeling healthy eating —
a  healthful  food  environment  reinforces  clinical  recommendations  and  complements
hospitals’  missions  to  support  community  health.  Hospitals  provide  millions  of  meals
and  snacks  each  year  through  cafeterias,  patient  meals,  and  vending  machines  (6);
however, hospital food is often unhealthy (7–10). Studies show that regular-diet patient
menus do not meet dietary guidelines and are high in sodium (8,9). Hospital contracts
with  fast-food  establishments  can  undermine  public  health  messaging  (11),  and
assessments of vending machines and cafeterias indicate that hospitals are “minimally
conducive”  to  healthy  eating  (10).  Opportunities  exist  to  improve  the  hospital  food
environment, but few programs have sought to improve nutrition in all venues where
food  is  served.  Although  nutrition  standards  for  vending  machines  have  been  widely
adopted,  until  recently  there  were  few  models  for  patient  meals  and  no  models  for
hospital cafeterias, which are important sources of food for employees and are venues
that can influence consumer perceptions of a healthy diet (12,13). Top In 2008, Mayor
Michael Bloomberg issued Executive Order 122, which mandated that all NYC agencies,
including  public  hospitals,  adopt  nutrition  standards  for  foods  purchased  and  served
(NYC Food Standards) (14). Over the following 3 years, nutrition standards for food and
beverage vending machines were adopted. The NYC Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene (health department) oversaw implementation of the NYC Food Standards and
provided technical assistance to agencies. On the basis of successful implementation of
these  standards  in  16  public  hospitals,  the  health  department  explored  working  with
private  hospitals.  In  NYC,  the  health  care  sector  is  the  largest  private  employer  (15),
and  there  are  approximately  60  hospitals  with  potential  to  reach  8.4  million  New
Yorkers  each  year  through  improvements  to  the  food  environment  (16,17).  Thus,  2
private  hospitals  were  recruited  as  a  pilot  program.  Working  with  these  2  hospitals
allowed for refinement of the program and showed that hospitals were willing to adopt
nutrition standards on a voluntary basis. The pilot also led to the development of the
Standards for Cafeterias/Cafés (18), which were created to comprehensively address all
venues  in  hospitals  where  foods  and  beverages  are  served.  In  2010,  the  health
department formally created the Healthy Hospital Food Initiative (HHFI) to improve the
healthfulness of foods and beverages available in NYC hospitals. Private hospitals joined
by  committing  to  implementing  4  sets  of  standards:  Standards  for  Patient  Meals,
Standards for Beverage Vending Machines, Standards for Food Vending Machines, and
Standards for Cafeterias/Cafés. Public hospitals, which were already required to meet
the  Standards  for  Patient  Meals,  Standards  for  Beverage  Vending  Machines,  and
Standards  for  Food  Vending  Machines  as  part  of  Executive  Order  122,  could  join  the
initiative  by  voluntarily  implementing  the  Standards  for  Cafeterias/Cafés.  This  article
describes the process of partnering with hospitals to implement nutrition standards and
assesses key outcomes. First, participation in the HHFI and implementation of each of
the 4 standards is described. Second, because nutrition standards for cafeterias were
newly developed for the HHFI, implementation of each criterion within the Standards for
Cafeterias/Cafés  was  evaluated  at  baseline  and  at  the  end  of  the  HHFI  to  assess
changes made by hospitals in this setting. Top The standards used in the HHFI include
more  than  60  criteria  that  aim  to  comprehensively  improve  the  hospital  food
environment by addressing the nutritional quality of food and beverages purchased and
served. The Standards for Patient Meals apply to regular-diet menus and include criteria
for foods purchased, such as sodium limits for cereals, and guidelines for meals served
(eg, ensuring that 5 servings of fruits and vegetables are offered daily). The Standards
for  Beverage  Vending  Machines  limit  sugary  drinks  and  promote  water  by  reducing
sugary drinks to no more than 2 slots in each machine, limiting portion sizes of sugary
drinks,  eliminating  sugary  drink  advertisements,  and  placing  water  at  eye  level.  The
Standards  for  Food  Vending  Machines  set  requirements  for  nutrients  (eg,  calories,
sodium)  per  package,  and  promote  whole  foods,  such  as  dried  fruit  and  nuts,  over
grain-based snacks. The Standards for Cafeterias/Cafés are 20 criteria to limit sodium,
sugary  drinks,  and  calorie-dense  foods  while  promoting  water,  fruits,  vegetables,  and
whole grains, using a range of strategies. For example, at least half of all grains served
in entrees and sandwiches must be whole grains, and 75% of all beverages available
must  be  low-calorie  (≤25  kcal/8  oz)  (18).  Through  relationships  established  during
implementation  of  the  NYC  Food  Standards  and  in  collaboration  with  the  Health  and
Hospitals Corporation (HHC), which oversees the administration of city hospitals, public
hospitals  were  approached  to  join  the  HHFI  by  agreeing  to  voluntarily  implement  the
Standards  for  Cafeterias/Cafés,  in  addition  to  the  standards  already  implemented  via
Executive  Order  122.  Support  from  health  department  leadership  and  collaborations
with local hospital organizations were key strategies for recruiting private hospitals. The
health  department  cultivated  a  relationship  with  the  Greater  New  York  Hospital
Association (GNYHA) and enlisted the health commissioner to speak directly to private
hospital  leaders  at  a  GNYHA  meeting.  Separately,  after  fostering  a  relationship  with
union  leaders,  the  health  department  sent  joint  letters  from  the  health  commissioner
and the 1199 SIEU Hospital Workers’ Union to hospital leaders, asking them to join the
HHFI. The health department offered technical assistance to hospitals, which included
provision  of  implementation  guides,  promotional  materials,  and  assistance  from  2
full-time  registered  dietitians.  The  health  department  created  an  HHFI  toolkit,  which
included  a  description  of  the  nutrition  standards  and  implementation  guides.
Implementation guides provided general tips for implementing the standards, as well as
detailed  information  to  assist  with  implementation  of  each  individual  criterion.  For
example,  the  implementation  guide  for  beverage  vending  machines  provided  an
example of a diagram that could be shared with vendors, showing how machines should
be  stocked  (18).  The  health  department  encouraged  hospitals  to  communicate  with
employees  about  their  participation  in  the  HHFI.  Hospital  communication  efforts
included  employee  newsletters,  sample  food  tastings  in  the  cafeteria  or  café,  and
cooking demonstrations. The health department created and provided free promotional
materials  for  hospitals  to  display  on  vending  machines  and  in  cafeterias  and  cafés,
including decals for food and beverage vending machines, promotional signage, table
tents (Figure 1), and posters (18).  Figure 1. Promotional signage for hospital cafeterias.
Abbreviation:  NYC,  New  York  City.  [A  text  description  of  this  figure  is  also  available.]
Health department staff, typically a registered dietitian (hereafter, dietitian) and project
coordinator, met with the hospital team at each hospital that joined the HHFI to discuss
their  food  service  operations,  resources,  existing  wellness  initiatives,  and  goals  for
improving the food environment. Detailed questions about the hospital’s food service
operation  and  procurement  were  key  to  developing  a  technical  assistance  plan.  For
example,  health  department  staff  asked  whether  meals  served  to  patients  were
planned  and  prepared  by  the  hospital’s  food  and  nutrition  department  or  contracted
through a food service management company, which distributors were used to procure
food,  and  whether  the  hospital  belonged  to  a  group-purchasing  organization  that
negotiates  discounts  on  products  with  manufacturers  and  distributors.  Health
department  staff  conducted  a  brief  informal  assessment  of  the  hospital  food
environment  to  help  the  hospital  identify  a  feasible  starting  point  and  together,  the
team  distinguished  between  standards  that  could  be  implemented  in  the  short  term
and areas that needed work over a longer period. Consistent communication between
health department staff and hospital staff was key to keeping hospitals engaged in the
HHFI.  At  a  minimum,  monthly  progress  reports  were  sent  to  each  hospital  team,
highlighting  recent  accomplishments  and  identifying  action  items  and  next  steps  for
implementation of each of the 4 standards. Health department dietitians were available
to  provide  ongoing  technical  support  and,  in  some  cases,  worked  so  closely  with
hospital food service staff that they became temporary, integrated team members. For
example,  the  dietitian  could  spend  a  day  in  the  hospital’s  kitchen,  taking  a  detailed
product  inventory  and  identifying  foods  that  did  not  meet  nutrition  standards.  The
dietitian  had  relationships  with  hospital  food  service  distributors,  compiled  lists  of
specific  products  that  met  nutrition  standards  and  were  available  from  the  hospital’s
vendors,  and  facilitated  communication  between  vendors  and  hospital  staff.  The
dietitian could also spend several days at the hospital working with the clinical nutrition
manager, food service directors, and chefs to update purchasing information and menu
analyses. The number of hospitals joining the HHFI and implementing standards in each
of the 4 areas was tracked by using a map of NYC on which each participating hospital’s
location was marked with a star. The stars were color-coded according to the hospital’s
status  in  the  HHFI;  hospitals  were  awarded  a  clear  star  for  joining  the  initiative,  a
bronze  star  for  implementing  nutrition  standards  in  1  area;  a  silver  star  for
implementing standards in 2 or 3 areas; and a gold star for implementing standards in
all  4  areas.  The  map  was  updated  approximately  every  6  months,  circulated  to  the
hospitals, and posted on the health department’s website. The health department also
sent certificates to hospital staff members acknowledging their contribution to the HHFI
and  plaques  with  a  letter  from  the  health  commissioner  to  hospital  senior  leadership
highlighting  achievements.  Implementation  of  the  standards  was  monitored  through
ongoing  conversations  with  hospital  staff,  site  visits,  and  menu  analyses  by  health
department dietitians. Hospitals were required to meet at least 75% of criteria within
each  set  of  standards,  with  the  goal  of  eventually  meeting  100%.  To  monitor
implementation  of  the  Standards  for  Patient  Meals,  hospitals  submitted  regular-diet
patient  menus  and  health  department  staff  completed  an  on-site  inventory  of
purchased food, in which nutrient data were recorded from the Nutrition Facts Labels of
all foods stocked in the hospital kitchen and served to patients. For the Standards for
Food  and  Beverage  Vending  Machines,  hospitals  were  asked  to  provide  a  diagram  of
products stocked in each machine. Health department staff assessed a sample of up to
5  food  and  5  beverage  vending  machines  in  each  hospital,  recording  the  name  and
package size of each product in the machine, placement of beverages, and presence of
advertising.  Items  were  entered  into  a  database,  and  nutrient  data  from  the
manufacturer’s  website  were  used  to  calculate  the  nutrient  composition  of  each
product.  Compliance  with  the  Standards  for  Cafeterias/Cafés  was  monitored  through
site visits and menu analyses by health department dietitians and is described in detail
below. Twenty-eight hospital cafeterias, representing all hospitals that agreed to begin
working to improve nutrition in this area, were assessed to evaluate implementation of
the Standards for Cafeterias/Cafés during the HHFI. Health department staff assessed
cafeterias  at  baseline,  defined  as  the  time  the  hospital  agreed  to  begin  work  in  the
cafeterias  or  cafés  (January  2012–June  2014),  and  at  end  line  (July  2014–September
2014). Both assessments followed the same protocol. An environmental scan developed
for  the  HHFI  was  conducted  to  assess  compliance  with  each  of  the  20  standards  (
Table). For criteria requiring nutrient analysis, hospitals submitted monthly menus (for
the month of assessment) or cycle menus (if the menu repeated every several weeks),
recipes  for  each  menu  item,  and  nutrient  data  for  each  product.  Health  department
dietitians  conducted  nutrient  analysis  of  recipes,  favoring  nutrient  information  taken
directly from the nutrition facts label of the product purchased by the hospital, when
available.  To  minimize  researcher  bias,  detailed  definitions  were  developed  for  each
standard  to  ensure  consistent  assessment  and  implementation  across  sites.  At  each
assessment,  photographs  were  taken  and  checked  by  a  health  department  staff
member  to  ensure  accurate  documentation.  The  number  of  hospitals  implementing
each standard was recorded at baseline and end line, and changes were assessed using
Pearson’s χ2 tests. All analyses were conducted using Stata statistical software, version
13 (StataCorp LP). Top At the end of the HHFI (September 2014), 16 public hospitals
and  24  private  hospitals  were  participating.  Participating  hospitals  represented  more
than 60% of all acute-care facilities in NYC and by 2014 were located in each borough
of  NYC  (the  Bronx,  Brooklyn,  Manhattan,  Staten  Island,  and  Queens).  All  16  public
hospitals  had  implemented  the  standards  for  patient  meals,  beverage  vending,  and
food vending before the HHFI, but none had made changes in cafeterias or cafés. By
September 2014, 2 (12%) of the 16 public hospitals had implemented the Standards for
Cafeterias/Cafés. Although many private hospitals had begun to improve the nutritional
profile  of  foods  served  before  the  HHFI,  none  were  implementing  the  HHFI  criteria
before joining the initiative. At end line, 17 (71%) private hospitals had implemented
the Standards for Patient Meals, 14 (58%) had implemented the Standards for Beverage
Vending  Machines,  12  (50%)  had  implemented  the  Standards  for  Food  Vending
Machines,  and  16  (67%)  had  implemented  the  Standards  for  Cafeterias/Cafés.  The
progress  of  each  participating  public  and  private  hospital,  according  to  number  of
standards implemented, is represented by star status (Figure 2). Public hospitals began
at silver star status for having already implemented 3 sets of standards, and 2 hospitals
reached  gold.  For  private  hospitals,  9  (38%)  reached  gold,  7  (29%)  reached  silver,  3
(13%) reached bronze, and 5 (21%) joined the HHFI but did not implement standards in
any of the 4 areas.  Figure 2. Number of New York City hospitals at each star status at
the end of the Healthy Hospital Food initiative (HHFI). The figure represents the number
of hospitals participating in the HHFI that achieved each star status as of September
2014.  Clear  indicates  the  hospital  joined  the  HHFI  but  did  not  implement  nutrition
standards  in  any  of  the  4  areas.  Bronze  indicates  that  the  hospital  implemented
nutrition  standards  in  1  area;  silver  indicates  implementation  in  2  or  3  areas;  gold
indicates  implementation  in  all  4  areas.  [A  tabular  version  of  this  figure  is  also
available.]  Results  from  the  cafeteria  evaluation  show  that  hospitals  improved  the
nutritional quality of their offerings (Table). At baseline, most hospitals offered at least
4 different fruit choices (24 [86%]), leafy green salads with a vinegar-based dressing
option (25 [89%]), a trans fat–free menu (22 [79%]), and a low-sodium vegetable dish
(18  [64%]).  No  hospitals  were  meeting  the  criteria  for  sodium  or  whole  grains  in
sandwiches,  salads,  and  entrees,  and  no  hospitals  provided  a  healthy  value  meal  at
baseline.  At  end  line,  6  hospitals  (21%)  met  the  sodium  criterion,  17  (61%)  met  the
criterion for whole grains, and 19 (68%) offered a healthy value meal. Between baseline
and end line, a substantial number of hospitals implemented the breakfast pastry and
dessert standards (15 [54%] for each), removed unhealthy foods and beverages from
the  entrance  and  checkout  of  the  cafeteria  (18  [64%]),  offered  proportionally  priced
half-size  sandwiches  (17  [61%]),  offered  only  soups  that  met  the  sodium  limit  (11
[39%]),  and  labeled  all  menu  items  with  calories  (11  [39%]).  Many  hospitals  reduced
sugary drinks to 25% of all beverages (11 [39%]) and reduced portion sizes of sugary
drinks  to  16  ounces  or  smaller  (12  [43%]).  Fewer  hospitals  completely  removed  the
deep-fat fryer (3 [11%]), met the criteria for sodium in sandwiches, salads, and entrees
(6 [21%]), or met the criteria for pre-packaged snacks (8 [29%]). All hospitals meeting a
criterion at baseline were also meeting the criterion at end line. Top Many NYC hospitals
joined  the  HHFI  and  voluntarily  adopted  rigorous  nutrition  standards,  which  led  to
significant improvements in hospital cafeterias and cafés. Two-thirds of NYC hospitals
joined the HHFI, indicating that the recruitment strategy, which included working with a
local  hospital  association  and  hospital  workers’  union,  was  effective.  Using  the
standards  provided  by  the  health  department,  hospitals  made  substantial  healthy
improvements  in  their  cafeterias,  including  labeling  items  with  caloric  information,
reducing  availability  of  sugary  drinks,  increasing  whole  grains  in  sandwiches  and
entrees,  and  reducing  sodium.  Participation  in  the  HHFI  likely  benefitted  from  the
context in NYC at the time the initiative was launched. Nutrition policies, such as those
requiring  city  agencies  to  meet  nutrition  standards  for  foods  purchased  (17),
eliminating  sugary  drinks  in  childcare  settings  (4),  restricting  trans  fat  in  restaurant
foods  (19),  and  requiring  calorie  labels  on  menu  boards  in  chain  restaurants  (20),
preceded  the  HHFI.  The  HHFI  was  part  of  a  multisectoral  effort  to  improve  the
healthfulness  of  foods  and  beverages  citywide  and  was  implemented  alongside
programs in workplaces, childcare settings, and food retailers. The health department’s
work  in  hospitals  was  supported  by  high-level  officials,  including  the  health
commissioner  and  HHC  leadership,  which  was  integral  to  connecting  with  hospital
leaders  and  encouraging  participation.  Despite  high  participation,  there  were
challenges to making changes in hospitals, particularly in the retail environment. First,
nearly all vending machines were managed by outside vendors, and early in the HHFI
there  was  limited  availability  of  products  that  met  the  nutrient  criteria.  However,
because  many  hospitals  contracted  with  the  same  vendor,  there  was  increasing
demand to supply products meeting the HHFI criteria as participation in the initiative
increased. Second, most hospital cafeterias were operated by each hospital’s food and
nutrition  department,  but  several  were  franchisees  of  a  larger  chain,  which  made  it
difficult to make local changes when decisions were made at the corporate level. Thus,
no  hospitals  with  franchised  cafeterias  had  implemented  the  Standards  for
Cafeterias/Cafés at the end of the HHFI. Lastly, few hospitals tracked nutrient content of
foods  purchased  for  the  cafeteria  or  had  nutrient  analysis  of  the  cafeteria  menus  at
baseline, requiring an intensive investment of staff time and technical assistance from
health  department  dietitians.  For  the  health  department,  the  HHFI  supported  work  to
improve  the  health  of  New  Yorkers  by  improving  the  food  environment  citywide.
Additionally,  implementing  standards  in  hospitals  that  are  consistent  with  what  is
required  of  city  agencies  helped  to  ensure  that  healthful  foods  are  available  in  all
institutional food service settings, and increased demand for healthful items from food
service  vendors.  For  hospitals,  the  HHFI  provided  a  comprehensive  framework  for
improving  the  food  environment.  Hospitals  benefited  from  individualized  technical
assistance,  access  to  promotional  materials,  and  public  recognition  for  their
accomplishments,  which  are  resources  that  could  be  leveraged  by  other  local  health
departments  seeking  to  partner  with  hospitals  on  similar  initiatives.  The  HHFI  shows
that  hospitals  are  willing  to  partner  with  local  government  to  voluntarily  implement
rigorous  nutrition  standards,  which  can  lead  to  significant  changes  in  hospital  food
environments.  Top  The  HHFI  was  supported  by  the  Community  Transformation  Grant
(grant  no.  1U58DP003689)  and  Sodium  Reduction  in  Communities  (grant  no.
1U58DP003067) from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. This publication
is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views  of  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Top  Corresponding  Author:
Alyssa  Moran,  MPH,  RD,  Harvard  T.H.  Chan  School  of  Public  Health,  Department  of
Nutrition,  677  Huntington  Ave,  Boston,  MA  02115.  Telephone:  617-684-5487.  Email:
ajm978@mail.harvard.edu.  Author  Affiliations:  Erica  M.  Krepp,  Arlington  County
Government,  Arlington,  Virginia;  Christine  Johnson  Curtis,  Consultant,  Huntington
Beach,  California;  Ashley  Lederer,  Thoughtful  Food  Nutrition,  New  York,  New  York.  All
the  authors  were  affiliated  with  the  New  York  City  Department  of  Health  and  Mental
Hygiene,  Long  Island  City,  New  York,  when  the  study  was  conducted.  Top  Top
Abbreviations:  NYC,  New  York  City;  HHFI,  Healthy  Hospital  Food  Initiative;  fl  oz,  fluid
ounce. a P values are for Pearson ?2 tests comparing proportions of hospitals meeting
each criterion at baseline and end line. b “Low calorie” defined as =25 kcal per 8 fl oz. c
Contain per package: =200 kcal, =7 g fat, =2 g saturated fat, =200 mg sodium, =10 g
sugar,  =2  g  fiber  if  grain-  or  potato-based.  d  Healthy  value  meal  must  contain  one
entrée  of  =600  kcal  and  =800  mg  sodium,  a  fruit  or  vegetable,  and  water.  Top  The
opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the
opinions  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  the  Public  Health
Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the  authors’  affiliated
institutions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/15_0541.htm
