Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. The views expressed in written materials or publications and
by  speakers  and  moderators  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  official  policies  of  the
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  nor  does  the  mention  of  trade  names,
commercial  practices,  or  organizations  imply  endorsement  by  the  U.S.  government.  
Date of session: 12/16/20 Facilitator
Triona Henderson, MD, MPH
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Didactic speaker
Vinita Parkash, MBBS, MPH
Yale New Haven Hospital
vinita.parkash@yale.edu  TRIONA  HENDERSON:  So  good  afternoon.  My  name  is  Triona
Henderson, and I’m the clinical pathologist and the facilitator of this ECHO pilot project.
I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  you  from  the  Division  of  Laboratory  Systems  at  the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia. Thank you for joining us
today. The topic for this interactive web discussion is anatomic pathology and surgical
pathology.  Our  subject  matter  expert  is  Dr.  Vinita  Parkash,  who  will  present  today’s
topic. Dr. Parkash is an Associate Professor of Pathology, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences at Yale School of Medicine, and an instructor in Health Policy and Management
at the Yale School of Public Health where she teaches quality and safety in healthcare
organizations. Thank you for joining us today, Dr. Parkash. So here is some technical
information about the ECHO session. So before introductions and the presentation, we
will  have  —  so  most  of  you  are  muted.  If  you  are  able  to  use  your  video,  which
enhances interaction, we would really appreciate it. It’s very helpful to put a name to
the face while we are having dialogue. All microphones are now currently muted during
this  discussion  section.  Please  unmute  yourself  to  speak.  If  you  are  connecting  by
phone  only  and  would  like  to  speak,  please  announce  yourself  by  name  and
organization before you begin. If you are experiencing any technical difficulties, you can
reach out directly via private chat to Johanzynn Gatewood, labeled as DLS ECHO Tech,
and  she’s  waving  to  you  right  now.  She  will  do  her  best  to  respond  to  your  issue.
Finally,  we’ve  designed  these  relevant  sessions  based  on  your  evaluation.  We  would
like to encourage you to complete this final post-session evaluation. For those of you
requiring P.A.C.E.® credits for continuing education, you are offered that option at the
end to either receive a certificate of participation or your P.A.C.E.® certificate. If you
have  any  additional  comments  or  questions  or  any  feedback  for  us  on  these  ECHO
sessions, please send us an email directly at DLS, that’s D-L-S-E-C-H-O, at cdc.gov. So
again,  and  many  of  you  have  heard  these.  How  are  these  sessions  different  than  a
regular expert lecture teleconference or webinar? It’s because their case discussions,
and just open discussion being the main feature. Subject matter experts hope to share
some of their work that may be transferable to you in your individual laboratories and
institutions. These ECHO sessions will focus exclusively on the clinical laboratories and
clinical laboratory issues in the United States and US territories. Once again, we value
your feedback, and discussion amongst all of you that ensues and would encourage you
to  share  your  own  experiences  and  challenges  on  this  topic.  We  thank  you  for  your
interest and participation. So here is the line out of the process today. So there will be a
presentation  by  the  subject  matter  expert.  Then  there  will  be  clarifying  questions  by
me. Then we will open up the floor for ideas, shared experiences, and comments by our
subject  matter  expert.  Then  we’ll  have  closing  comments  and  then  adjourn.  Today’s
session  is  being  recorded.  If  you  do  not wish  to  be recorded,  please disconnect now.
Closed captioning is now also available and you can find the link in the Zoom chat box.
Here  is  the  biosketch  of  Dr.  Parkash.  She’s  received  her  undergraduate  degree  in
chemical  engineering  from  the  University  of  Nevada.  She  attended  medical  school  at
the University of Toledo. Following residency in Anatomic and Clinical Pathology at East
Carolina University. Really? I did not know. Is that correct? No, I didn’t think so. I was
like, wait. No. We will have to fix that, Vinita. Now we’ll invite Dr. Parkash to begin her
presentation. Dr. Parkash? VINITA PARKASH: Easily introduced. I’ve been at Yale all my
professional life. HENDERSON: That’s what I thought. I was like, wait. PARKASH: Well,
you know. What are you going to do? Sometimes things happen. All right. Should I get
started? HENDERSON: The floor is yours. PARKASH: Thank you. Can everyone hear me?
OK. So I’m going to be talking about diagnostic error and anatomic pathology. So the
National  Academies  of  Medicine  define  diagnostic  error  as  a  diagnosis  that  is  either
inaccurate,  not  communicated  to  the  patient,  or  not  timely.  So  as  you  can  see,  the
mnemonic there is A-C-T. So accurate, communicated to the patient, and timely. And
diagnostic error has been recognized recently as a leading concern in US healthcare by
a number of organizations, including ECRI, which is a patient safety organization that is
federally funded and works with the AHRQ. The estimates for diagnostic error vary. We
don’t really know what they are. Some people estimate as many as four million cases,
resulting in 1.7 million deaths in the United States. I’m not sure I quite buy that. But
importantly,  diagnostic  error  is  a  very  expensive  error.  It’s  very  expensive  both  in
human  cost  and  financial  cost.  So  this  chart  here  shows  the  analysis  of  over  10,000
cases from Covaris, which is a malpractice carrier. And it breaks up all of their cases,
those 10,000 cases, claims, over a five-year period from 2013 to 2017. As you can see,
diagnosis-related errors is the number one error that results in claims. And what did I
do? Sorry, I went backwards. And in addition to that, what is important here is to see
that the indemnity paid for diagnostic errors is very high because these are generally
high  severity  errors.  So  if  you  look  at  the  National  Association  of  Insurance
Commissioner’s  scores,  an  abnormally  large  number  of  cases  fall  in  the  six  to  nine
range, which is either severe disability or death. So there’s very heavy human cost with
respect to patients, and also heavy human costs for the provider. We accept systems
errors a little bit easier than diagnostic errors, which are very personal to us and related
to clinical judgment. This is the breakup of by the area where in the patient journey the
error  happened.  And  as  you  can  see,  lab  tests  are  a  very  large  component  of  it.
Whether  it’s  ordering  the  lab  test,  performance,  received  or  transmittal,  or
interpretation of test results by the care provider. And that makes sense, right? I mean,
tests drive 70% of the diagnosis. So it makes sense that if there is a misdiagnosis, that
area  would  be  susceptible.  And  the  top  three  diseases  that  are  associated  with
diagnostic error are cardiovascular, infection, and cancer. And cancer is primarily where
anatomic  pathology  comes  in.  And  we’re  the  final  word,  so  we  carry  an  unduly  high
number of percentage of non-dismissal for cases. If we make a diagnosis, there’s a 40%
chance that it will go to payment. And we have a very high number of outlier awards,
which is more than a million dollars in awards, and it’s only second to GYN. So as I said,
we’re a low volume field relative to lab medicine. Lab medicine is about 7 billion tests a
year. So if you think about it, one test per population or person in the world. Anatomic
pathology is just 350 million tests in the US annually, which is one per person in the
United States, more or less. But we’re a very high impact field. We’re a final word for
certain  high  impact  diagnoses,  primarily  cancer.  And  that’s  why  we  have  this  God
complex. So this was a painting — I went into the oncologist’s office and a patient had
made this painting, so I asked her if I could take a picture of it. So because we’re a high
impact  field,  it  stands  to  reason  we’re  a  high  penalty  field.  The  misdiagnosis  is
devastating. If we inaccurately make a false negative diagnosis, the cancer is missed, it
progresses, it can sometimes result in death. If we give a false positive diagnosis, that
is  also  bad  because  it  results  in  very  toxic  therapies  for  the  patients.  Cancer  is  an
aggressive disease, so the patients either get additional surgery that they didn’t need
with  attendant  side  effects  or  potentially  chemo  and  radiation  therapy,  which  might
have long-term effects. Even an ambiguous diagnosis is problematic. So if I say atypical
cells, or I can’t make a diagnosis, that also imposes a penalty on the patient because
the patient ends up having to repeat invasive procedures because most of our biopsies
require an invasive procedure. Not advancing. So it’s important to note how and where
errors occur in anatomic pathology in order to be able to decide how we are going to
reduce  them.  So  this  is  the  test  cycle  that  everybody  is  familiar  with,  with  the
pre-analytic, analytic, and post-analytic phase. And I’ve also put in the five part cycle
that some people use. So there is a pre-pre and a post-post added to the cycle. And this
is  because  it  includes  whether  the  diagnosis  is  communicated  to  the  patient.  Most
post-analytic analysis will stop at, did the physician get the report, and then it becomes
the physician’s problem. And the pre-pre phase is basically in the clinician’s head. Did
they select the right test? And while that might not directly be our problem, if you look
at the health system as a whole, we are perhaps situated to address that overuse or
inaccurate utilization. So in lab medicine, pre-analytic errors are responsible for about
70% of all errors. In anatomic pathology, it’s stated to be 40%. In our lab it’s actually
15%.  So  why  is  that?  Well,  primarily  because  we’re  a  small  field.  So  most  of  our
specimens  generate  from  two  or  three  types  of  sites.  So  the  OR,  some  surgical
physician offices, whereas lab tests are done in every office, every floor, everywhere.
So it’s just lower opportunity for error. The second is we don’t have that selection of
tests and ways to preserve tissue that you do. It’s basically either fixed or unfixed. And
so both of those make it a little bit easier for us to deal with. Our biggest problem was
with specimen loss. At our institution, we have been able to reduce that immensely by
basically  putting  in  a  computerized  order  and  tracking  system.  And  obviously,  the
investment was made because we had lost some critical specimens. Now lab medicine
analytic tests make up only about 15% of the errors, whereas in anatomic pathology,
it’s 30% and potentially even higher. And then post-analytic errors in lab medicine are
only  about  15%,  whereas  ours  are  about  30%.  In  our  lab,  they  are  around  45%  and
maybe higher. And again, that’s because there’s greater complexity to the results that
we issue. And also, pathologists initiated additional testing, which then will inform the
original diagnosis. So to my knowledge, we are the only test field that issues amended
diagnoses  because  additional  test  results  came  back.  We  try  to  give  an  integrated
diagnosis and so the loop is a little bit more complicated in that sense. So, one other
thing to think about is that a number of — there is disagreement amongst experts as to
where analysis starts. So, a number of labs will classify grossing errors as pre-analytic. I
disagree. I think that once the specimen has reached a professional’s hand, like once
the specimen has been accessioned, the test has begun, and so it starts with grossing.
And  in  our  lab,  about  70%  of  the  errors  are  lab  grossing  errors  and  about  30%  are
interpretive  errors.  So  digging  a  little  bit  deeply,  lab  processing  errors  happen  for  a
couple of reasons. Our process is very manual and it has many hand-offs. So here is a
uterus  with  a  cancer.  So,  a  pathologist’s  assistant  or  potentially  a  resident  will  gross
this  tissue  and  then  the  tissue  will  be  loaded  on  a  machine,  and  then  it  will  make  a
block. So, the embedding will be done by a histotech, and a third histotech might cut it
and make it into slides. So as we know in quality, more the hand-offs and more manual,
the  more  likely  the  incidents  of  error.  The  highest  penalty  errors  in  this  setting  are
contamination errors. So what do I mean by contamination error? So this is a case that
we  had.  And  tissue  from  this  case  was  transferred  onto  —  so  this  is  an  endometrial
curettage specimen — and tissue from this case transferred into another case. And this
second specimen is an endocervical curettage specimen, and histologically, there is no
way to know that the tissue doesn’t belong to the patient. Discovering these errors, I
feel,  has  become  harder  over  time  because  we’ve  subspecialized.  When  we  were
generalists,  the  specimens  were  cut  in  different  orders.  You  saw  a  GI  specimen,  and
then you saw a GYN, and then maybe a lung. So it was a little bit easier to say, OK, this
tissue  didn’t  come  from  this  case.  But  now  that  our  breast  pathologist  only  looks  at
breast cases, if there’s a breast to breast contamination, you’re just not going to know,
at least not on histology. These type of errors are more likely to occur with cases that
what I refer to as litter fragment biopsies. They’re just like litter, these tiny fragments of
tissue and one piece can be transported there to another case at any point in a very
manual process. The result of this is essentially an identity error. So the diagnosis of
cancer might issue to the incorrect patient. Patient ends up having a surgery that they
did  not  need.  And  in  many  cases,  it  might  not  be  known  because  the  slide  has  true
tumor on it. There’s no way to know whether it belongs to the patient or not. And so
some  of  these  cases,  I  think,  these  are  false  positives.  But  we  have  no  good  way  of
knowing  how  many  false  positives  we  have.  To  my  knowledge,  there  isn’t  literature
looking  at  this.  There  is  some  literature  with  respect  to  what  is  called  provenance
testing.  There  are  commercial  companies  that  offer  patients  —  so  they  take  a  swab,
buccal swab. The patient takes their own swab and then it is sent off to the company
and stored there, and then the biopsy is done. If the biopsy turns out to have cancer,
then you do provenance or identity testing and the tumor tissue should match with the
patient’s  normal  tissue.  Most  of  us  don’t  use  these  type  of  testing.  In  part  because
they’re  not  reimbursed.  This  would  be  considered  quality  improvement  or  quality
maintenance by CMS. Plus, it would be really tedious to do it for every single specimen
that we do. So as of right now, I think it’s primarily education and insisting that people
follow protocols recognizing that education and telling people to do certain things when
they’re  working  at  a  rather  rapid  pace  is  not  very  effective.  Education  is  low  in  the
hierarchy  of  controls  to  reduce  errors.  The  second  error  that  we  deal  with  is  an
exhausted  biopsy  sample.  So  we’re  in  a  peculiar  time,  right?  So  what’s  happening  is
that the instruments to do biopsies are becoming smaller and smaller. So, we’re getting
tinier  and  tinier  tissue  fragments,  but  the  amount  of  testing  for  that  tiny  tissue
fragment  has  increased  immensely.  So  as  an  example,  when  we  were  doing  brain
biopsies, we treated them as regular biopsies, and we would get three cuts on every
biopsy. But now, since 2016, all brain tumors have to get a molecular diagnosis and we
issue an integrated diagnosis. So we reviewed our process and we ended up deciding —
we only cut a single section on our brain biopsies, and when we cut that single section,
automatically ten unstained slides are produced because if the diagnosis is malignancy,
then  molecular  studies  can  be  activated.  So  this  way  we’ve  been  able  to  avoid  what
would  happen  in  the  past,  which  was  a  repeat  invasive  procedure.  Now  interpretive
errors are the ones that cause the greatest amount of tension and difficulty, and they
fall into two categories. The first one is what we call a perceptual error or put another
way, I missed it. My computer’s stuck again. So here is a case, again, this is what I call
the  litter  fragment  biopsies.  You’ve  got  thousands  of  fragments,  and  if  one  tiny
fragment  is  cancer,  humans  miss  things.  And  so  you  would  miss  it  and  of  course,
humans are subject to all sorts of cognitive pressures. And so looking at this biopsy at 3
o’clock, you’re more likely to miss it. It happens very infrequently so you’re not looking
for  it.  I  mean,  it’s  like  those  luggage  checks  that  we  go  through  when  we’re  going
through airports. Those people are really good at finding water bottles because that’s
what they find most of the times. They’re actually not as good at finding guns as they
should be, but that happens very infrequently. So sort of like that, we miss them, if it is
a single fragment. I think that this is where AI will be really useful because computers
don’t  tire.  A  second  type  of  perceptual  error,  which  is  perhaps  even  more  difficult  is
when it occurs within the tissue itself. So the tumor itself is very sneaky. So here is a
case  of  a  gastric  biopsy  and  the  tissue  looks  inflamed.  You  can  see  there’s  chronic
inflammation  here.  And  actually  this  case  did  get  signed  out  as  chronic  gastritis,  but
was reviewed and the other pathologist was a little more concerned about it. And so
they did a keratin stain and all those brown dots are cancer cells that are infiltrating
between normal cells. And this was a very unusual case. The patient had breast cancer,
lobular  breast  cancer,  but  she  had  not  yet  presented  —  this  was  her  presentation  of
breast  cancer.  The  vast  majority  of  our  inaccurate  diagnoses  are  where  an  accurate
diagnostic  label  was  not  applied  to  the  case.  So  most  of  these  are  interobserver
variability or variation amongst experts. But these still qualify as errors because they
can  result  in  a  different  treatment  depending  on  who  saw  the  case.  But  the  patient
either has the disease or doesn’t have the disease. And so these do qualify as errors.
They may not be errors that would meet a legal definition of error, as in a breach of
standard  of  care,  but  they  are  errors  from  a  patient’s  perspective.  So  why  does  this
happen? This happens because the natural history of disease is a continuum. So you’ve
got the yellow, which is benign and change is occurring until you get to cancer, which is
the red. But treatment is bend. Do something, don’t do something, watch. And so we
draw these lines based on risk. But if anybody can — something here versus something
here  would  basically  result  in  interobserver  variability  and  potentially  will  result  in
intervention, depending on who saw it and not intervention in another person. A very
small subset of errors occur because there’s a knowledge gap or failure, as in I don’t
know. What I don’t know, I don’t see. Most often this happens when somebody who’s
trained in one specialty is dealing with a lesion that generated in another specialty, and
so  they’re  not  familiar  with  it.  The  vast  majority  of  errors  that  we  see  are  actually
communication errors. For us, it’s about 70%. And they fall into a few categories. The
first  one  is  delivery  errors.  So  report  did  not  get  delivered  to  the  ordering  physician.
This is no longer a concern for most institutions. High tech required that to certify any
EHR,  they  had  to  have  a  foolproof  mechanism  of  making  sure  that  the  result  was
delivered to the physician. But that does not mean that the physician looked at it, so
that’s the problem. The problem is no longer electronic delivery, but did the physician
actually  look  at  it.  The  other  problem  is  with  complexity  of  care,  the  report  was  not
received by the treating physician. Joint Commission says that the report should get to
the  responsible  and  active  care  provider.  Who  do  we  send  the  report  to?  The
interventional radiologist did the biopsy and our report goes back to the interventional
radiologists.  We’re  done.  I  mean,  we  delivered  the  report,  but  the  patient’s  left  the
interventional  radiologist  who  was  just  a  proceduralist,  and  gone  on  to  another
physician. Did the report follow the patient? We don’t know. In the end, the important
thing is that the cycle stops with the patient. And of the cancer malpractice cases, 16%
of those cases are because the cancer diagnosis was not communicated to the patient.
So  this  is  our  sort  of  reporting  cycle.  Patient  comes  to  the  physician,  is  sent  to  an
interventionalist who does a biopsy, and then they throw it over the wall to me. I catch
it. Then I send maybe a piece of it off to the molecular pathologist. In the meantime, I
throw back a report which goes back to the radiologist, who hopefully sends it back to
the  physician.  But  now  the  molecular  —  And  well,  the  physician  now  refers  to  the
patient  to  the  oncologist.  In  the  meantime,  the  molecular  pathologist  sends  me
something  back.  So  I  change  my  report,  which  I  again  send  to  the  radiologist,  who
hopefully sends it to the doctor, who then hopefully forwards it to the oncologist. So this
is a very convoluted report delivery process that we have. And so many hand-offs, so
errors  are  likely.  The  second  type  of  error  with  respect  to  communication  are
comprehension and integration errors. So we have such long reports. Our breast cancer
reports are 12 pages long. And this becomes really complicated when you are using the
EHR because the HER — our reports are basically, we just repurposed our paper reports
and put them into the computer. Looking at 12 pages on the computer is very different
from looking at 12 pages of paper in your hand. The other problem that the EHR creates
is  that  people  just  cut  and  paste  this.  So  one  clinician  cuts  and  pastes  it  into  their
record, and the subsequent clinician gets the result from that cut and paste rather than
getting it from the actual pathology report. Also, the reports are truly incomprehensible
to the clinicians. Every specialty has developed its own terminology. So this is a paper
that my colleague did. This is when — I forget who was from Mars and who was from
Venus  —  book  had  come  out  and  surgeons  misunderstood  the  pathologist’s  reports
30%  of  the  times  and  this  has  been  validated  by  other  reports.  There  is  also  the
problem of inadequate clinician education. Mike Laposata has written about it. We’ve
gone  to  organ  based  rather  than  subject  based  education.  And  so  medical  students
don’t get exposure to lab medicine or surgical pathology to an amount that is needed
for  patient  management.  So  they  learn  it  just  by  following  their  mentors  and
supervisors, and so there are gaps in the clinician’s knowledge. The other thing that is
contributing  to  this  is  the  explosive  increase  in  information  that  we  now  have.  So
apparently medical knowledge is supposed to double every three months. So we would
need  an  extra  two  months  of  the  year  to  know  what  we  need  to  know.  So  this  is  an
example– This is Sue and Patrick Sheridan. This is a very well-known case. And I met
Sue because I watched a movie. This movie, To Err is Human came out, it was tagged
as a patient safety documentary. And this case was discussed, and I contacted Sue and
she  gave  me  permission  to  use  this  example.  So  Patrick  developed  a  neck  mass.  He
went to see his doctor who referred him to a very reputable large institution where he
saw a neuropathologist and this was the original pathology report that was delivered.
Atypical spindle cell neoplasm. Please see note. Pending neuropathology consultation.
The clinicians notes read that I have the pathology report which states that this is an
atypical tumor. Very pleased with the outcome. The patient is sent back home. But then
here’s the final report. The final report is that the patient has a malignant spindle cell
neoplasm  consistent  with  synovial  sarcoma.  Now  if  you  translate  the  original  report,
atypical spindle cell tumor, it means very little to just someone who’s using translation
of English words. Not typical. OK, spindle cell, it’s a tumor of some site abnormal growth
of  cells.  To  a  general  medical  person  who’s  not  a  soft  tissue  pathologist,  it’s  not
atypical.  It’s made up  of spindle cells.  Yes,  it’s a  tumor.  I  knew  it was a  tumor.  Most
tumors are benign. Clinically, it was benign. So it’s probably benign. When a pathologist
says atypical spindle cell tumor, this is what they look like. We are just freaking out. It’s
badness. We’re praying that it’s wrong. And additional studies will prove that it is or is
not.  And  so  this  is  a  misunderstood  test  result.  The  pathologist  did  not  think  they’d
issued  a  final  result.  They  had  communicated,  in  their  mind,  that  they  were  worried
about this tumor, but somehow the clinician understood it to not mean very much. So
the  solutions  to  reduce  error,  artificial  intelligence  will  certainly  address  perceptual
errors. But their implementation and actually, legal issues as to if the AI machine says
it’s a gun, but you think it’s a water bottle, which diagnosis takes precedence. And if
the  AI  calls  it  a  water  bottle  and  it  turns  out  to  be  a  gun,  who  is  going  to  take
responsibility  for  that  diagnosis.  Another  possibility  is  having  cases  looked  at  by  a
second  pathologist.  Certainly  that  would  help  some,  but  it  raises  issues  of  efficiency.
Groupthink. In groups, we tend to think alike. Also, there’s some big dog effect where
we  defer  to  whoever  is  the  senior  most  person,  but  that  doesn’t  make  the  diagnosis
right.  Coordination  errors  are  perhaps  addressed  by  creating  diagnosis  management
teams.  And  this  is  something  that  I  strongly  support.  The  equivalent  in  anatomic
pathology  is  multidisciplinary  tumor  boards,  but  there  are  issues  of  process
standardization and efficiency. And the literature is mixed on whether it helps or not. I
do  think  that  the  last  two  are  really  important.  We  need  to  change  our  pathology
reports. It needs to be a lay report that anybody can understand. And we also need to
explore  direct  communication  of  results  to  patients.  Basically,  that’s  based  on  three
very important quality principles. The shortest distance between two points is a straight
line. hand-offs increase errors. Redundancy reduces the risk of oversights. So instead of
doing this, if we did that, that would be straight. So you’ve told the patient the report
followed its routing and also got to the clinician, but hopefully we would avoid patient
errors. Some of that is what drove the Cures Act, which was supposed to go into effect
in November, now in April. But I still find it problematic because they’re going to make
reports  available  on  the  patient  portals,  but  this  doesn’t  improve  integration  or
understanding  of  the  report.  And  I  wrote  this  piece  in  US  News  and  World  Report
basically  saying  that  we  need  to  come  up  with  a  mechanism  where  there  is  direct
communication  of  reports  to  patients.  Because  the  non-communication  and  even
electronic communication of reports penalizes the most marginalized patients who tend
to be more ER users who do not have a single care provider. They don’t have access to
internet  to  visit  their  patient  portals.  In  New  Haven,  we’re  dealing  with  a  situation.
We’ve gone all online for students. 20% of our students don’t have reliable internet or
computers to access learning. I imagine the parents are even worse off, perhaps. And
obviously, it doesn’t address comprehension errors. So to my mind, the pathologist and
the laboratory professional are critical elements of the patient’s diagnosis management
team. And they’re also the patient’s doctors, so we should have direct communication
of  results.  And  to  that  end,  I’m  involved  in  actually  a  community-based  participatory
research project where we are selecting the marginalized community to get their idea
on  how  reports  are  best  communicated  to  them  in  the  hope  that  we  can  develop  a
structure  where  they  do  get  their  reports.  And  this  is  sort  of  being  used  for  COVID
testing so the positive results are not communicated by the patient’s care provider. But
we have a call center that is manned by nurses that is calling those results. Thank you,
and I think I went over time. I apologize. Just when I practice, it was a lot shorter. What
can  I  say?  HENDERSON:  No,  thank  you  so  much,  Vinita.  That  was  exceptional.  And
really highlighted a lot of points that I know our community and rural participants may
have in their head. And I hope you guys are getting your questions ready. But I have a
question,  and  I  don’t  expect  you  to  provide  the  answer.  Then  the  world  would  be
beautiful. But where do you see — especially now as you mentioned, COVID, you know
we’ve seen a lot of things going on with the marginalized communities. But why do you
think that the bridge between the pathologist and the patient has not been built in a lot
of institutions and then only partially established in some? PARKASH: So I find that very
interesting. I grew up in India. My chair is from China. And we’ve actually discussed this.
So  in  other  countries,  patients  get  their  pathology  report  from  the  pathologist  and
basically  then  go  to  see  the  oncologist.  I  think  in  our  healthcare  system,  first  of  all
information  is  knowledge.  So  clinicians  want  to  maintain  control  of  that.  From  the
pathologist’s  perspective,  it’s  a  non-reimbursed  activity,  so  sure,  I  send  it  to  the
physician. It’s easier to communicate with physicians than it potentially is with patients.
So  I  think  that  our  reimbursement  system  drives  the  process  to  some  extent.  And  in
doing  so,  it  penalizes  patients,  especially  marginalized  patients.  HENDERSON:  Thank
you. And we’re going to open the floor up now for feedback and questions. But before I
do that, I want to welcome our VIP participants who participated in this ECHO session
earlier  in  the  year,  Dr.  Jim  Crawford  and  Dr.  Susan  Weiss.  If  you  want  to  see  their
sessions, you can log in to our website and see them. But please everyone, either you
can  raise  your  hand  or  you  can  use  the  chat  box.  Please  remember  when  you  are
speaking, introduce yourself, and if possible, turn your camera on. Thank you. JZ, I need
you  to  help  me  man  the  —  if  not,  I  can  ask  another  question.  PARKASH:  Go  for  it.
HENDERSON: So in that final part of the presentation, as you spoke about getting to the
patient. I know you’ve done the Fellowship with SIDM, and we’ve had discussions here
of how to engage the patient. And we actually have a very active patient advocate on
the CLIAC Federal Advisory Committee. And one of the questions that she always brings
up is patients want to be able to read their reports and have access to it. And as you
said,  it  needs  to  be  in  a  form  that  they  can  read.  Do  you  think  this  is  a  time  where,
probably  now  more  than  ever,  that  the  patient  safety  advocates  are  necessary  in
helping  to  establish  that  bridge?  PARKASH:  Yeah,  so  I  think  that  pathologists  and
actually  malpractice  carriers  and  patient  safety  organizations  need  to  collaborate  on
this. Because patients bear the ultimate cost of an inaccurate or lost test result. So they
are invested in this. I actually think that malpractice carriers should be pushing for this
because they bear the malpractice charges when a result is inaccurate or misplaced. I
also think that pathologists should do it because of their commitment to patients. And
with the three groups working together, hopefully there will be a change. With respect
to terminology, I think pathologists need to work on that. And I think radiologists have
started doing some of the work. So for mammography reports, they have to issue a lay
report  and  a  technical  report  so  that  the  patient  can  understand  it.  They’re  also,  I
believe  for  radiology,  there  are  some  programs  that  people  are  developing  that  can
take that technical report and translate it so that the patient can have access to a lay
report. But that’s something that we definitely need to work on. I actually worry that
our  clinicians  have  difficulty  with  our  report,  like  you  know–  So  my  gynecologists
understand  my  report,  my  gynecological  oncologist.  But  I’ve  had  instances  where  a
general gynecologist has called me up and said, I don’t know what this means. What
should I do with this report? And that’s on me. I don’t believe — you know, we need to
separate record keeping from reporting. The purpose of a report is to communicate with
the clinician, with the patient, so that the right next step can be taken. Billing and all of
that is record keeping. And I think we need to look to technology to help us separate
the  two  and  refine  the  process.  HENDERSON:  That’s  really  good.  Thank  you  for  that.
Aurora  Rock.  I  saw  you  put  your  camera  on.  Did  you  have  a  comment  or  question?
Maybe, maybe not. Dr. Crawford, can I put you on the spot for comments? Is everyone
here, but not here today? PARKASH: Well, certainly in the Northeast, we’re expecting a
really  large  storm.  HENDERSON:  That’s  true.  PARKASH:  People  are  trying  to  get
whatever  they  need  to  get  done  so  that  they  can  get  out.  I  know  that  some  of  my
colleagues  are  trying  to  get  some  of  tomorrow’s  work  done  today  because  we  don’t
know what tomorrow will be like. HENDERSON: I’m spoiled. I’ve forgotten the Northeast
already. PARKASH: Warm weather is the best. HENDERSON: It is, and I am enjoying. Any
final comments or questions from the line? I know we have some of our rural partners
from Louisiana on the line. North Carolina. Any comments before we wrap up this pilot
project? Vinita has been exceptional. I always love your presentations and your passion
for quality improvement, which is also mine. So I definitely admire the work that you do.
And  this  has  been  an  awesome  finale  for  this  pilot  project.  PARKASH:  Thank  you.
HENDERSON:  You’re  welcome.  Going  once,  going  twice.  Let  me  just  check  the
comments.  No.  PARKASH:  So  even  though  I  went  over,  we’re  ending  early.  That’s
perfect. Christmas present. HENDERSON: Exactly. It always happens like that, doesn’t
it? Everything works out. But to you Vinita, and then all the past presenters on the line
and even to the participants, we really want to thank you for participating today. We
really hope that you found this important to your work in your individual laboratories.
We  first  started  this  project  at  the  beginning  of  2021,  and  we  weren’t  anticipating
having  to  confront  a  global  pandemic.  But  we  appreciate  each  of  you  and  your
continued participation every month. We considered pivoting to COVID. But based on
the feedback, a lot of you really wanted the reprieve of still maintaining some type of
normalcy in the continuing education that you receive. And so we pushed ahead and
continued this pilot project every month since we’ve gone into COVID everything. Next
year,  we  will  begin  analyzing  the  qualitative  and  the  quantitative  data  that  we’ve
collected. And thank you for participating in the post-session surveys to determine our
initiative’s future, whether we will continue or will we modify the model. If you’d like to
listen to the previous sessions, as I mentioned, we’ve posted the audio and transcripts
on  the  ECHO  website.  So  Extension  for  Community  Health  Care  Outcomes  Project
website. And if you have any feedback for us, please feel free to reach out to us via
email,  individually  or  to  dlsecho@cdc.gov.  So  now  we  will  adjourn.  Thank  you  again.
Thank you, Vinita. And happy holidays everyone. Oop, I think I see a question. Oh my
goodness. Oh, so somebody would like your email address for direct questions to you.
PARKASH: Sure. It’s vinita.parkash@yale.edu. So my first name dot last name at Yale
dot edu. And [INTERPOSING VOICES] I know that this is sort of a left-field topic. So I am
interested  in  hearing,  sort  of  the  other  side,  you  know  how  people  on  the  other  side
think  so  that  we  can  come  up  with  a  solution  for  our  patients.  So  please  feel  free  to
send as many emails. HENDERSON: Perfect. And that was one of our main purposes for
this, bringing you, the experts, to the community when they usually would not have had
a  chance  to  meet  you  at  national  meetings  or  other  organization  meetings  that  they
may  not  have  access  to.  So  we  really  appreciate  your  time  and  your  effort  and  then
sharing  your  contact  information  and  facilitating  that  open  discussion.  So  thank  you,
everyone.  And  hopefully,  we’ll  see  you  in  2021.  PARKASH:  Thank  you.  HENDERSON:
Take care. Bye.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/labquality/echo/anatomic-surgical-pathology-transcript-audio.html
