Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations and Reports / July 16, 2021 / 70(3);1–27
Christina A. Nelson, MD1; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD2; Shannon Fleck-Derderian, MPH1;
Katharine  M.  Cooley,  MPH1;  Patricia  A.  Yu,  MPH3;  Paul  S.  Mead,  MD1  (View  author
affiliations) Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table
4 Table 5 Table 6 Table 7 Table 8 Table 9   This report provides CDC recommendations
to  U.S.  health  care  providers  regarding  treatment,  pre-exposure  prophylaxis,  and
postexposure prophylaxis of plague. Yersinia pestis, the bacterium that causes plague,
leads to naturally occurring disease in the United States and other regions worldwide
and is recognized as a potential bioterrorism weapon. A bioweapon attack with Y. pestis
could  potentially  infect  thousands,  requiring  rapid  and  informed  decision  making  by
clinicians  and  public  health  agencies.  The  U.S.  government  stockpiles  a  variety  of
medical  countermeasures  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  a  bioterrorism  attack  (e.g.,
antimicrobials, antitoxins, and vaccines) for which the 21st Century Cures Act mandates
the  development  of  evidence-based  guidelines  on  appropriate  use.  Guidelines  for
treatment  and  postexposure  prophylaxis  of  plague  were  published  in  2000  by  a
nongovernmental work group; since then, new human clinical data, animal study data,
and U.S. Food and Drug Administration approvals of additional countermeasures have
become  available.  To  develop  a  comprehensive  set  of  updated  guidelines,  CDC
conducted a series of systematic literature reviews on human treatment of plague and
other relevant topics to collect a broad evidence base for the recommendations in this
report.  Evidence  from  CDC  reviews  and  additional  sources  were  presented  to  subject
matter experts during a series of forums. CDC considered individual expert input while
developing these guidelines, which provide recommended best practices for treatment
and prophylaxis of human plague for both naturally occurring disease and following a
bioterrorism  attack.  The  guidelines  do  not  include  information  on  diagnostic  testing,
triage decisions, or logistics involved in dispensing medical countermeasures. Clinicians
and  public  health  officials  can  use  these  guidelines  to  prepare  their  organizations,
hospitals, and communities to respond to a plague mass-casualty event and as a guide
for  treating  patients  affected  by  plague.  Top  Yersinia  pestis,  the  causative  agent  of
plague,  is  a  nonmotile,  gram-negative  coccobacillus  that  persists  in  the  natural
environment in sylvatic cycles. Sporadic epizootics can sicken large numbers of rodents
and other mammals and spill over to incidental hosts, including humans (1). Y. pestis
can  be  transmitted  to  humans  through  the  bite  of  an  infected  vector,  namely  the
Oriental  rat  flea  (Xenopsylla  cheopis)  and  other  flea  species.  Humans  also  can  be
infected  via  direct  contact  with  infected  tissues  or  fluids  or  inhalation  of  infectious
droplets. In infected persons, the primary clinical form of plague depends on the route
of  transmission  (1,2).  Primary  clinical  presentations  of  plague  include  bubonic,
pneumonic,  septicemic  (fever  and  sepsis  without  localizing  signs),  meningeal,  and
pharyngeal  (pharyngitis  with  or  without  cervical  lymphadenopathy)  (2).  The  most
common  clinical  presentation  of  plague  in  humans  is  bubonic  plague  (2,3).  Following
the bite of an infected flea or direct contamination of a skin lesion, bacteria enter the
host  and  are  phagocytosed  by  macrophage  and  neutrophil  cells  (4).  Surviving  in
macrophage cells, Y. pestis is then transported via lymphatics to regional lymph nodes
(4,5). Numerous antiphagocytic factors protect Y. pestis from human immune responses
and  allow  reproduction  and  spread  of  the  bacteria  (6).  Within  the  lymph  node,  the
bacteria  multiply,  producing  a  tender  swelling  or  “bubo”  (5).  Persons  with  bubonic
plague might experience additional symptoms of fever, chills, malaise, and headache
2–8  days  after  initial  infection  (7).  If  not  treated  promptly,  rapid  multiplication  of
bacteria  in  the  lymph  nodes  causes  destruction  of  the  lymph  node  architecture  and
necrosis.  Hematogenous  spread  of  bacteria  might  lead  to  secondary  septicemic,
pneumonic, or meningeal plague. Left untreated, the fatality rate of bubonic plague is
66%; however, with antimicrobial treatment, the fatality rate decreases substantially to
13% (3). Primary pneumonic plague develops following inhalation of Y. pestis from an
infected  animal  or  human.  Within  1–3  days  after  inhalation,  the  infected  person
experiences  fever,  dyspnea,  and,  in  late  stages,  a  productive  cough  with  purulent  or
bloody  sputum  (6,8,9).  Unless  antimicrobial  treatment  is  initiated  promptly,  patients
with pneumonic plague progress to respiratory failure, sepsis, and rapid death (9–11).
Untreated pneumonic plague is almost always fatal (9,10). Primary septicemic plague is
characterized  by  Y.  pestis  infection  of  the  bloodstream  without  appreciable
lymphadenopathy,  pneumonia,  or  other  localizing  signs.  Patients  often  present  with
fever  and  gastrointestinal  symptoms  such  as  abdominal  pain,  nausea,  vomiting,  or
diarrhea (1,2). Septicemic plague is frequently associated with delays in diagnosis and
has  a  higher  fatality  rate  than  primary  bubonic  plague  (1–3).   Less  common  clinical
presentations of plague include meningitis and pharyngitis. Plague meningitis typically
occurs as a complication of delayed or inadequate treatment of another clinical form of
primary  plague  and  is  characterized  by  fever,  nuchal  rigidity,  and  confusion  (2).
Cerebrospinal fluid neutrophilic pleocytosis combined with Y. pestis bacteria visible by
Gram stain is a hallmark of plague meningitis. In one case series of 105 U.S. patients
with plague, 6% developed meningitis, which most commonly appeared 9–14 days after
the  onset  of  acute  Y.  pestis  infection  among  patients  aged  10–15  years  (12).  Plague
pharyngitis  occurs  following  contamination  of  the  oropharynx  with  Y.  pestis-infected
materials  such  as  inadequately  cooked  meat  of  infected  animals;  typical  symptoms
include pharyngeal inflammation and cervical lymphadenopathy (2). Before the advent
of antibiotics, treatment of plague primarily consisted of supportive care, and fatality
rates were high, between 66% and 93%, for all clinical forms (3,13). The development
of sulfonamide antibiotics in the 1930s revolutionized the treatment of plague. Patients
with  pneumonic  plague,  previously  considered  incurable,  were  able  to  recover  when
treated within the first 24 hours of symptom onset (14,15). In the subsequent decades,
the  availability  of  aminoglycosides,  followed  by  chloramphenicol,  tetracyclines,  and
fluoroquinolones,  offered  additional  options  for  plague  treatment  (16–18).  Naturally
occurring  plague  frequently  affects  children.  Among  658  patients  with  plague  and
recorded  age  identified  in  a  systematic  literature  review,  265  (40%)  were  aged  <18
years (19). However, children with plague do not appear to be at greater risk for death
or  serious  complications  compared  with  adults  (16,19),  although  some  evidence
indicates children might be more likely to develop secondary plague meningitis (12,20).
Pregnant  women  with  plague  have  experienced  hemorrhage  (i.e.,  postpartum
hemorrhage  and  hemorrhage  into  tissues  discovered  on  autopsy),  intrauterine  fetal
demise, preterm birth, and stillbirth. Maternal-fetal transmission of Y. pestis has been
reported  for  untreated  mothers,  although  not  when  an  infected  mother  received
appropriate antimicrobial therapy (21). Information is limited on plague in other special
populations,  such  as  immunocompromised  patients.  Pneumonic  plague  is  the  only
clinical form that is transmissible from person to person (2,9). Y. pestis is transmitted
via  large  respiratory  droplets  that  do  not  remain  suspended  in  the  air  for  prolonged
periods.  For  this  reason,  health  care  providers  should  use  respiratory  droplet
precautions when caring for patients with pneumonic plague (8). No evidence exists for
airborne transmission of Y. pestis, as occurs with the measles virus or other pathogens
that  require  airborne  precautions  to  prevent  exposure  to  others  from  an  infected
patient (2). Person-to-person transmission of Y. pestis requires exposure within 6 feet
(2) and has been reported most commonly among an infected patient’s caregivers or
others living together (10,22).  A review of surveillance data during 1900–2009 yielded
an estimated basic reproductive number (R0, the average number of secondary cases
per case) of 1.18 for pneumonic plague in the United States, indicating that a patient
with pneumonic plague will on average infect approximately one additional person (23).
However, the average value obscures the high variability in the transmission potential
of individual patients. The majority of U.S. patients do not transmit disease; however,
this is offset by occasional superspreading events (9,23). All recorded superspreading
events in the United States occurred before 1925, and it is likely that poor ventilation in
residences and hospitals contributed to the propagation of these events (9). R0 can be
reduced to <1 by implementing standard control measures, such as avoiding proximity
to a coughing patient and instructing both the patient and those in their proximity to
wear  a  surgical  mask  or  cloth  mask  made  of  tightly  woven,  multilayered,  breathable
fabric (2,9,23). During the initial 24 hours after a person has inhaled Y. pestis, risk for
transmission is minimal because bacterial load in the lungs is low and cough has not yet
fully developed (9). Asymptomatic person-to-person transmission of pneumonic plague
has  not  been  documented  (5,9).  Transmission  risk  increases  as  pneumonic  plague
progresses  and  is  highest  during  mid-to-late  stages  of  infection  when  patients  cough
sputum containing large amounts of bacteria (2,24). During terminal stages of infection,
when  patients  are  near  death,  the  risk  for  transmission  is  likely  reduced  because
patients  can  no  longer  cough  vigorously  and  expel  infectious  droplets  (2,24).
Person-to-person transmission of plague has occurred after patients with unrecognized
pneumonic  plague  came  into  close  (<6  feet)  contact  with  family  members,  medical
providers, or others. In 2014, the first possible case of person-to-person transmission in
the  United  States  since  1924  was  documented  in  a  woman  who  had  extended  close
contact  with  an  infected  man  while  he  was  coughing  bloody  sputum.  She  recovered
after treatment with levofloxacin, streptomycin, and doxycycline (25). Person-to-person
transmission of pneumonic plague also has been documented in Madagascar (10,26),
Peru  (27),  China  (28,29),  and  Uganda  (22).  Y.  pestis  is  categorized  as  a  Tier  1
bioterrorism Select Agent, the highest risk category of biologic agents and toxins with
the potential to pose a severe threat to public health and safety (30). This designation
is due in part to its low infectious dose, high case-fatality rate in untreated infection,
and history of use as an agent of bioterrorism (31,32). The most concerning scenario for
a  bioterrorist  attack  involves  dispersing  Y.  pestis  into  the  air,  leading  to  primary
pneumonic plague among exposed persons. The World Health Organization (WHO) has
estimated that a release of 50 kg of Y. pestis into the air over a city of 5 million persons
could  result  in  150,000  cases  of  pneumonic  plague  and  36,000  deaths  (33,34).
Moreover,  infection  of  animals  with  Y.  pestis  after  such  an  attack  could  spark  a  local
epizootic,  resulting  in  primary  bubonic  plague  among  persons  who  handle  infected
animal carcasses or are bitten by infected fleas. Intentional contamination of the food
or  water  supply  with  Y.  pestis  also  has  been  raised  as  a  potential  concern  and  could
lead to primary pharyngeal, bubonic, or septicemic plague. Efforts to use Y. pestis as a
biological  weapon  have  occurred  for  centuries.  As  early  as  1346  CE,  the  Tartar  army
succeeded  in  conquering  the  Genoese  port  city  of  Caffa  (present-day  Theodosia,
Ukraine) after hurling plague-infected corpses over the city’s walls, thereby initiating an
outbreak  of  plague  among  its  inhabitants  and  causing  their  subsequent  retreat  (35).
During  World  War  II,  a  covert  branch  of  the  Japanese  army,  known  as  Unit  731,
conducted  several  aerial  strikes  by  dropping  millions  of  plague-infected  fleas
throughout China as part of its biologic warfare research program. Thousands of people
became ill as a result of the ensuing outbreaks of plague, establishing these events as
some of the largest and deadliest uses of Y. pestis as a bioweapon (35,36). In the 1970s
and  1980s,  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics  manufactured  large  quantities  of
antibiotic-resistant Y. pestis for dissemination into the air as a bioweapon (37). In light
of these and recent events involving terrorist organizations (38,39), the United States
and other countries must be prepared for a bioterrorism attack involving Y. pestis. The
U.S.  Government  has  committed  substantial  resources  to  research,  develop,  procure,
and  stockpile  medical  countermeasures  (MCMs)  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  possible
chemical,  biologic,  radiologic,  and  nuclear  threats  to  the  public.  These  MCMs  are
maintained  in  the  Strategic  National  Stockpile  (SNS)  for  use  during  public  health
emergencies  and  can  also  be  deployed  for  individual  cases  or  small  outbreaks  if
necessary (40). Under the 21st Century Cures Act, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human  Services,  specifically  CDC,  develops  and  maintains  timely  and  accurate
guidelines  for  use  of  MCMs  to  treat  and  prevent  diseases  caused  by  bioterrorism
agents.* Existing guidelines for antimicrobial treatment and postexposure prophylaxis
of plague in the United States are based largely on recommendations published in 2000
by the Working Group on Civilian Biodefense (8). Those recommendations incorporated
input  from  CDC  plague  subject  matter  experts  and  others  in  the  fields  of  clinical
medicine,  bioterrorism  preparedness,  and  public  health.  However,  since  that
publication, there have been many developments in plague treatment and prophylaxis.
Additional human clinical data and animal study data have become available, and the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved several fluoroquinolones for prophylaxis
and  treatment  of  plague  during  2012–2015  (41–43).  Moreover,  additional  safety  data
about  serious  adverse  effects  of  various  antimicrobials  used  to  treat  plague  have
become available (44). In light of these developments, CDC re-examined the evidence
on treatment and prophylaxis of plague and developed updated guidelines through a
systematic  process.  These  guidelines  are  intended  to  provide  U.S.  clinicians,  public
health practitioners, and first responders with evidence-based recommendations for the
treatment and prophylaxis of plague in the event of an intentional release of Y. pestis.
This  report  also  outlines  recommendations  for  management  of  naturally  occurring
plague.  The  guidelines  could  be  adapted  for  use  in  other  countries,  with  appropriate
considerations  for  local  health  care  practices  and  antimicrobial  availability.  These
recommendations are not intended as a substitute for professional medical judgment or
risk-benefit  analysis  for  individual  patients.  Although  these  guidelines  incorporate
considerations for emergency situations, they do not include detailed recommendations
for  crisis  standards  of  care,  defined  as  a  substantial  change  in  usual  health  care
operations and the level of care possible to deliver, made necessary by a pervasive or
catastrophic (e.g., pandemic influenza or hurricane) disaster (45). Top CDC developed
these guidelines after reviewing existing data on treatment and prophylaxis of plague,
collecting
 and
 summarizing
 additional
 evidence,
 and
 gathering
 input
 from
approximately 90 experts in numerous fields, including infectious diseases, emergency
medicine,
 pharmacology,
 neonatology,
 obstetrics
 and
 gynecology,
 geriatrics,
microbiology,  epidemiology,  and  crisis  standards  of  care.  A  CDC  steering  committee,
comprising 10 experienced CDC and Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness
and  Response  (ASPR)  staff  members  with  diverse  expertise,  provided  oversight  and
direction  throughout  the  clinical  guideline  development  process.  The  guideline
development  process  included  three  major  components:  1)  systematic  literature
reviews,  2)  two  topic  sessions,  and  3)  one  expert  forum.  To  ensure  these  guidelines
were  based  on  the  best  available  evidence,  CDC’s  Plague  Clinical  Guidelines  Team
conducted  a  systematic  literature  review  of  published  cases  of  human  plague  with
associated  antimicrobial  treatment  information.  Individual-level  data  from  published
case  reports,  case  series,  cohort  studies,  and  randomized  controlled  trials  were
included.  The  resulting  published  review  described  762  patients  with  plague  who
received  antimicrobial  treatment  (19).  A  separate  review  of  aggregate-level  data  on
treatment of plague also was compiled and published (46). U.S. surveillance data also
informed development of these guidelines. Plague is a nationally notifiable condition in
the United States (47), and most case reports submitted to CDC include information on
antimicrobial treatment and outcome of patients. To contribute to the evidence base on
treatment  of  plague,  epidemiologists  from  CDC’s  Division  of  Vector-Borne  Diseases
analyzed treatment and outcomes among 533 reported U.S. cases of plague (16). To
inform  specific  recommendations  for  pregnant  women,  the  Plague  Clinical  Guidelines
Team and other contributors conducted systematic literature reviews of plague among
pregnant  women  (21)  and  of  existing  published  safety  data  regarding  antimicrobials
suggested for the treatment and prophylaxis of plague among pregnant women (48). In
August  2018,  CDC  convened  two  topic  sessions  consisting  of  approximately  40  key
subject matter experts and agency representatives each. The first session focused on
the  treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  plague  among  adults  and  children,  and  the  second
focused on neonates, breastfeeding infants, and pregnant or lactating women. During
each  session,  attendees  reviewed  summarized  data  and  provided  individual  input  on
clinical  considerations  and  recommendations  for  treatment  and  prophylaxis.  CDC
developed draft treatment and prophylaxis recommendations incorporating input from
these sessions and under the direction of the CDC steering committee, with the goal of
further  review  and  refinement  of  the  recommendations  during  an  expert  forum  with
clinical  and  public  health  experts.  In  May  2019,  CDC  convened  an  expert  forum
consisting  of  approximately  90  clinical  and  public  health  subject  matter  experts  and
agency  representatives.  Federal  representatives  from  CDC,  FDA,  ASPR  (including  the
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority), the National Institutes of
Health  (NIH),  and  the  U.S.  Department  of  Defense  were  in  attendance.  Clinical
organizations  represented  included  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics,  American
College of Emergency Physicians, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(ACOG), American Geriatrics Society, Infectious Diseases Society of America, Society of
Critical  Care  Medicine,  and  the  Society  for  Maternal-Fetal  Medicine.  Public  health
organizations represented included WHO, Pan American Health Organization, Council of
State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists,  Association  of  State  and  Territorial  Health
Officials,  and  the  National  Association  of  County  and  City  Health  Officials.  Experts  on
plague  and  emergency  preparedness  from  domestic  and  international  universities,
clinics, and hospitals also were in attendance to provide their expertise and opinions.
During the expert forum, subject matter experts from CDC, other federal agencies, and
clinical  organizations  presented  data  from  systematic  literature  reviews  and  U.S.
surveillance  reports.  Information  on  antimicrobial  risks  and  adverse  effects  also  was
reviewed  and  considered.  Breakout  sessions  were  held  to  discuss  specific  topics  and
special  populations  in  further  detail.  Individual  expert  opinions  on  treatment  and
prophylaxis  options  were  recorded  and  reviewed;  no  attempt  was  made  to  achieve
consensus because final decisions about recommendations were determined solely by
CDC.  Published  data  and  gray  literature  on  U.S.  studies  of  antimicrobial  treatment  of
plague  in  nonhuman  primates  also  were  considered  during  topic  session  and  expert
forum  discussions.  This  included  animal  efficacy  data  from  NIH  that  supported  FDA’s
approval of plague treatment and prophylaxis indications for ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin,
and  moxifloxacin.  Evidence  from  these  studies  is  summarized  elsewhere  (49).  The
Plague  Clinical  Guidelines  Team  also  reviewed  existing  guidelines  from  WHO,  the
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, and select countries where plague
is  endemic.  All  nonfederal  staff,  subject  matter  experts,  and  representatives  from
clinical organizations who participated in guideline development activities completed a
questionnaire  to  review  and  mitigate  potential  competing  interests.  All  federal
employees,  including  CDC  staff,  are  subject  to  the  Standards  of  Ethical  Conduct  for
Employees  of  the  Executive  Branch.†  Although  all  antimicrobials  listed  in  these
recommendations are FDA approved, some might not be readily available in the United
States  because  of  limited  production.  These  antimicrobials  were  included  to  provide
multiple options for treatment and prophylaxis of plague, especially in the event of a
large-scale  intentional  release  of  Y.  pestis.  In  this  case,  domestic  supply  of  specific
antimicrobials  might  need  to  be  augmented  through  manufacturing  surge  and
importation. These antimicrobials also can be useful in the setting of non-U.S. plague
outbreaks. Top Since the publication of plague guidelines in 2000, FDA has approved
ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin for treatment and prophylaxis of plague in
humans  on  the  basis  of  the  Animal  Rule  (49).  FDA  can  rely  on  adequate  and
well-controlled animal efficacy studies to support approval of a drug or licensure of a
biologic product under the Animal Rule when human efficacy studies are not ethical and
field  trials  are  not  feasible  (50,51).  Several  clinical  studies  on  treatment  of  plague  in
humans also have contributed to advancements in the field. A randomized controlled
trial published in 2006 compared gentamicin with doxycycline for treatment of plague
in Tanzania among 65 enrolled adults and children (17). Recent case series also have
reported on the use of ciprofloxacin for treatment of bubonic and pneumonic plague in
Uganda  (18)  and  compared  streptomycin  with  gentamicin  for  treatment  of  human
plague  in  New  Mexico  (52).  On  the  basis  of  new  developments,  expert  forum
discussions,  and  other  considerations,  CDC  made  the  following  overarching  changes
compared  with  the  guidelines  published  in  2000  by  the  Working  Group  on  Civilian
Biodefense (8): Simplified the guidelines to treatment (intravenous [IV], intramuscular
[IM], or oral options) and prophylaxis scenarios, similar to clinical guidelines for other
biologic threats. Previously, guidelines were divided into contained casualty (all IV or IM
treatment) versus mass-casualty (all oral treatment) scenarios (8). The rationale behind
this  shift  is  that  it  might  not  be  clear  initially  how  large  the  outbreak  will  be  (i.e.,
whether it will remain a contained casualty event or evolve to a mass-casualty event).
Because of this uncertainty, it might be advisable at the outset to treat patients with
mild-to-moderate illness with oral therapy to conserve IV medications and supplies and
avoid  the  risks  for  IV  access  to  the  patient,  such  as  infection  and  bleeding.  This  new
approach  provides  greater  flexibility  for  responding  to  uncertain  situations.  Added
recommendations for treatment and prophylaxis of clinical forms of plague other than
pneumonic,
 including
 bubonic,
 septicemic,
 pharyngeal,
 and
 meningeal.
 The
recommendations  were  expanded  because  both  intentional  release  of  Y.  pestis  and
naturally  occurring  infections  can  lead  to  various  clinical  manifestations.  Added
recommendations for neonates and breastfeeding infants. The recommendations were
expanded  to  add  these  populations  because  they  might  be  impacted  by  naturally
occurring  infections  or  a  bioterrorism  attack  and  require  different  considerations  for
treatment  and  prophylaxis.  Listed  ciprofloxacin  as  a  first-line  (preferred)  agent  for
treatment  of  plague  rather  than  an  alternative  option  because  more  data  are  now
available to support its use. Levofloxacin and moxifloxacin, which were not included in
previous guidelines, are listed as first-line agents or alternatives for both treatment and
prophylaxis.  Added  several  same-class  alternatives  to  first-line  fluoroquinolones,
aminoglycosides,  and  tetracyclines  to  expand  the  repertoire  of  treatment  and
prophylaxis  options  to  meet  surge  capacity,  if  needed.  Although  direct  evidence  of
efficacy  in  humans  or  animals  is  lacking  for  some  of  these  antimicrobials,  those  with
similar mechanisms of action to first-line agents would be expected to be effective for
plague  and  are  supported  by  in  vitro  data.  Added  the  sulfonamide  drug
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  as  an  alternative  option  for  prophylaxis  of  plague
because  of  evidence  of  efficacy  in  humans  (19,46)  and  its  use  as  prophylaxis  during
naturally  occurring  plague  outbreaks  internationally  (26,53).  Added  recommendations
for  pre-exposure  prophylaxis  in  addition  to  revising  postexposure  prophylaxis
recommendations. A bioterrorism attack with Y. pestis could have a devastating impact
on  U.S.  society.  Intentional  release  of  Y.  pestis  could  occur  via  air,  food,  or  even  the
release  of  infected  fleas,  with  resultant  clinical  presentations  of  affected  persons
depending  on  route  of  exposure  (34).  Children  might  be  at  greater  risk  for  infection
after a bioterrorism attack compared with adults because of increased respiratory rate,
larger  relative  body  surface  area,  closer  proximity  to  the  ground  and  other  surfaces,
and additional factors (54). A covert release of Y. pestis into the air would cause illness
in infected persons within 1–3 days (6,34). Initial manifestations would be nonspecific
(i.e., fatigue, fever, cough, and dyspnea) and mimic many respiratory illnesses. Chest
radiographs  of  affected  patients  would  reveal  nonspecific  disease  processes  such  as
nodular
 or
 patchy
 infiltrates,
 lobar
 pneumonia,
 pleural
 effusion,
 or
 hilar
lymphadenopathy  (9).  Recognition  of  a  bioterrorist  attack  would  occur  after  an
abnormal pattern of disease is detected and results of agent-specific diagnostic tests
(e.g.,  polymerase  chain  reaction)  become  available.  Following  a  plague-related
bioterrorism  event,  health  care  providers  should  treat  symptomatic  patients  with  two
distinct classes of antimicrobials, at least one of which is considered first-line (Tables 1
and  2),  until  sensitivity  patterns  of  the  infecting  Y.  pestis  strain  are  known.  Although
naturally occurring antimicrobial resistance is extremely rare in Y. pestis (55,56), there
is  potential  for  engineered  resistance  as  part  of  an  intentional  bioterrorism  release
(8,57–59).  Treating  initially  with  two  distinct  classes  of  antimicrobials  increases  the
likelihood  that  the  patient  will  receive  at  least  one  effective  agent.  Once  information
from  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  becomes  available,  this  will  be  a  factor  in
determining  which  antimicrobials  should  be  continued  or  instituted.  Antimicrobial
susceptibility  testing  might  not  be  required  for  all  patients  when  initial  susceptibility
results are available, if the attack is determined to be a single release. In the aftermath
of  an  intentional  release  of  Y.  pestis,  antimicrobial  prophylaxis  also  should  be
considered for potentially exposed persons. Risk stratification and eligibility criteria for
receipt of antimicrobial prophylaxis among exposed persons would be developed and
determined by federal, state, and local public health agencies on the basis of the nature
and  extent  of  the  incident,  available  resources,  and  an  ethical  framework  similar  to
other  countermeasures.  A  variety  of  antimicrobial  classes  are  effective  for  plague.
FDA-approved  antimicrobials  for  treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  plague  include
streptomycin,  ciprofloxacin,  levofloxacin,  moxifloxacin,  and  doxycycline.  Although
gentamicin,
 chloramphenicol,
 and
 trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
 are
 not
 FDA
approved  for  plague,  they  are  considered  to  be  effective  on  the  basis  of  clinical
experience  and  animal  data.  Aminoglycosides  in  particular  have  a  long  history  of
successful use for all predominant forms of plague as well as robust published human
clinical data (19,46,60,61) and animal data supporting efficacy (49,62). Among reported
U.S.  cases  of  plague,  61  (84%)  of  73  patients  survived  when  treated  with
aminoglycoside  monotherapy,  defined  as  receiving  no  additional  antimicrobial
considered to be effective for treating plague. In addition, a retrospective case series
comparing streptomycin with gentamicin among 50 patients with plague in New Mexico
found  that  patients  treated  with  gentamicin  had  similar  fever  duration,  number  of
complications, and survival rates compared with those who received streptomycin (52).
However, aminoglycosides might be less desirable than other antimicrobials in certain
instances because of the lack of oral formulations and potential for adverse effects such
as nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity (63,64). When treating patients with aminoglycosides,
clinicians should check drug concentrations as indicated on the basis of dosing strategy
(e.g.,  extended  interval  or  traditional  dosing)  and  adjust  dose  and  dosing  interval
accordingly  (65).  Tetracyclines,  sulfonamides,  and  chloramphenicol  also  have  been
used to treat plague successfully for many years. A review of published cases of plague
found  that  survival  rates  of  patients  treated  with  tetracycline,  sulfonamide,  or
chloramphenicol  monotherapy  were  90%  (n  =  44  of  49),  70%  (n  =  151  of  216),  and
75%  (n  =  15  of  20),  respectively  (19).  Analysis  of  533  U.S.  cases  of  plague  reported
during  1942–2018  demonstrated  survival  rates  of  patients  treated  with  tetracycline,
sulfonamide, or chloramphenicol monotherapy were 98% (n = 50 of 51), 82% (n = 9 of
11), and 78% (n = 7 of 9), respectively. Multivariable adjustment controlling for primary
clinical  form  of  plague  (bubonic  versus  nonbubonic),  time,  secondary  plague
manifestations, and illness complications found that tetracyclines were associated with
the
 highest
 adjusted
 odds
 of
 survival
 (aOR:
 6.2;
 95%
 confidence
 interval
[CI]  =  2.6–15.1)  among  469  patients  receiving  any  antimicrobial  treatment  (16).
However,
 absolute
 survival
 rates
 of
 patients
 treated
 with
 sulfonamides
 or
chloramphenicol  might  be  artificially  decreased  because  of  time  bias,  since  these
antimicrobials  were  primarily  used  before  1980.  In  recent  years,  investigators  have
performed additional studies to evaluate the efficacy of fluoroquinolones for pneumonic
plague  in  nonhuman  primates  with  promising  results  (49,66,67).  Moreover,  a  case
series published in 2017 described five Ugandan patients with culture-confirmed plague
who  survived  after  oral  ciprofloxacin  treatment.  One  of  these  successfully  treated
patients  had  pneumonic  plague  with  hemoptysis  and  bilateral  infiltrates  on  chest
radiograph (18). Penetration of antimicrobials varies by tissue type and specific drug,
and  some  human  and  animal  data  suggest  that  the  relative  efficacy  of  various
antimicrobials  differs  by  clinical  form  of  plague  (16,19).  For  these  reasons,  treatment
recommendations are separated into those for pneumonic and septicemic, bubonic and
pharyngeal,  and  meningeal  plague.  Recommendations  for  pneumonic  and  septicemic
plague are combined because these are the most severe and rapidly progressive forms
of  disease,  and  patients  with  septicemic  plague  can  have  subclinical  pneumonic
infection  (68).  Recommendations  for  pharyngeal  plague  are  combined  with  those  for
bubonic  because  it  is  a  milder  form  of  disease  often  accompanied  by  focal
lymphadenopathy (61,69). Clinicians should use their judgment and these guidelines to
decide whether to initiate parenteral or oral antimicrobials to treat patients with plague,
depending  on  the  severity  of  disease  and  whether  the  patient  can  tolerate  oral
medications.  Patients  initially  treated  intravenously  can  be  transitioned  to  the  oral
route,  if  deemed  appropriate  by  the  health  care  team,  when  clinical  improvement  is
apparent.  Except  for  ciprofloxacin,  all  oral  antimicrobials  recommended  in  these
guidelines  can  be  administered  via  alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube
and gastric tube). Treatment duration for all clinical forms of plague should be 10–14
days total; treatment duration can be extended for patients with ongoing fever or other
concerning  signs  or  symptoms.  Among  158  published  cases  of  primary  pneumonic
plague  analyzed  as  part  of  a  systematic  literature  review,  patients  who  received
aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, or tetracyclines, alone or in combination with other
antimicrobials had the highest survival rates: 83% (n = 81 of 98), 82% (n = 28 of 34),
and  82%  (n  =  23  of  28),  respectively  (19).  Survival  rates  of  patients  who  received
chloramphenicol and sulfonamides, alone or in combination with other antimicrobials,
were 78% (n = 25 of 32) and 65% (n = 28 of 43), respectively. When limited to patients
who  received  monotherapy  only,  survival  rates  were  81%  (n  =  26  of  32)  for
aminoglycosides,  80%  (n  =  4  of  5)  for  fluoroquinolones,  83%  (n  =  5  of  6)  for
tetracyclines,  67%  (n  =  8  of  12)  for  chloramphenicol,  and  50%  (n  =  13  of  26)  for
sulfonamides  (19).  A  total  of  97  patients  with  primary  pneumonic  and  septicemic
plague  were  reported  to  CDC  during  1942–2018  via  U.S.  surveillance  (16).  Among
these, survival rates were highest for patients treated with sulfonamides (100%; n = 5
of 5), tetracyclines (93%; n = 39 of 42), and fluoroquinolones (91%; n = 21 of 23) alone
or  in  combination  with  other  antimicrobials.  Survival  rates  for  patients  treated  with
aminoglycosides and chloramphenicol were 80% (n = 49 of 61) and 60% (n = 9 of 15),
respectively. However, these observed differences in survival rates might be attributed
in  part  to  differences  in  when  patients  initially  sought  care  and  the  severity  of  their
illness  at  presentation.  For  example,  patients  with  mild-to-moderate  infections  might
have  been  preferentially  treated  with  an  oral  antimicrobial  such  as  doxycycline,
whereas sicker patients might have been more likely to receive aminoglycosides (16).
Studies of nonhuman primates have raised questions about the efficacy of tetracyclines
for treating pneumonic plague in humans (49). Three distinct studies of African green
monkeys yielded poor outcomes; however, each was complicated by pharmacokinetic
anomalies. In the first study, 44% (4 of 9) of African green monkeys treated with oral
doxycycline 6–6.5 hours after fever onset survived. Measured drug serum levels were
below those expected in humans (49). In two follow-up studies with adjusted dosing of
oral or IV doxycycline, none of 10 monkeys survived. Toxicity due to drug accumulation
in the animals could not be excluded (49). Switching to cynomolgus macaques, a study
found  that  88%  (7  of  8)  of  macaques  treated  with  IV  doxycycline  survived  when
treatment was initiated 6 hours after fever onset. Similarly, 75% (6 of 8) of macaques
treated with IV doxycycline survived when treatment was initiated 15 hours after fever
onset (49). On the basis of these animal model data and expert opinion, doxycycline is
listed  as  an  alternative  option  for  treatment  of  pneumonic  or  septicemic  plague.
Additional fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides can serve as within-class alternatives
to first-line agents for primary pneumonic and septicemic plague in humans. Plazomicin
has  been  shown  to  be  effective  for  treatment  of  pneumonic  plague  in  African  green
monkeys  (70).  Tobramycin,  amikacin,  and  ofloxacin  are  believed  to  be  effective  by
extrapolation  of  data  from  first-line  aminoglycosides  and  fluoroquinolones.  However,
these  recommendations  do  not  include  an  exhaustive  list  of  all  potential  within-class
alternatives. Additional existing or new antimicrobials within the same class of first-line
agents  could  be  considered  along  with  expert  consultation  should  the  need  arise.
Treatment recommendations for patients with septicemic or pneumonic plague, either
naturally occurring or following intentional release of Y. pestis, are summarized (Table
1). If clinical and exposure history clearly indicate naturally occurring plague (e.g., close
contact [<6 feet] with a severely ill and coughing patient with known naturally acquired
pneumonic plague, or close or direct contact with an animal with plague), health care
providers  can  consider  treating  patients  with  mild-to-moderate  disease  with  a  single
recommended  antimicrobial  agent.  For  patients  with  severe  septicemic  or  pneumonic
disease, clinicians should institute dual therapy with two distinct antimicrobial classes,
with  narrowing  of  therapy  to  a  single  antimicrobial  after  clinical  improvement.  When
caring for patients with naturally occurring pneumonic plague, if diagnosis is uncertain,
health  care  providers  should  include  antimicrobial  coverage  for  community-acquired
pneumonia until results of diagnostic testing are available. Levofloxacin or moxifloxacin
are  particularly  good  options  in  these  circumstances  because  they  have  robust  lung
penetration  (71–73)  and  activity  against  gram-positive  bacteria,  gram-negative
bacteria, and atypical pathogens that cause community-acquired pneumonia (74,75). 
Naturally  occurring  resistance  of  Y.  pestis  to  antimicrobials  typically  used  to  treat
plague is rare worldwide and has not been reported in the United States (55,56,76,77).
However,  engineered  resistance  in  Y.  pestis  has  been  demonstrated  and  remains  a
potential  threat  (8,37,59).  Therefore,  these  guidelines  include  recommendations  to
treat  patients  with  two  distinct  classes  of  antimicrobials  if  there  is  reason  to  suspect
antimicrobial resistance was engineered as part of a bioterrorism attack. For children
aged  ≥3  months  to  17  years,  moxifloxacin  is  recommended  as  an  alternative
antimicrobial rather than a first-line agent because of lack of FDA approval for use in
children  and  higher  reported  rates  of  prolonged  QTc  interval  compared  with  other
fluoroquinolones (78–80). Moreover, plazomicin is not recommended as an alternative
antimicrobial for children aged ≥1 month to 17 years because no published data exists
on  its  use  and  dosage  in  the  pediatric  population.  Because  of  concerns  about  tooth
staining or enamel hypoplasia, clinicians have been hesitant to prescribe doxycycline to
children  aged  <8  years  (81).  However,  this  tetracycline  class  warning  was  based  on
clinical  experiences  with  older  tetracyclines  that  bind  calcium  more  readily  than
doxycycline. A recent study found no evidence of dental staining or enamel hypoplasia
among children who received short-term courses (≤21 days) of doxycycline compared
with those who never received doxycycline (82). For life-threatening infections such as
plague,  use  of  doxycycline  in  children  aged  <8  years  is  justified  on  the  basis  of  a
favorable  risk-benefit  ratio.  Other  tetracycline  class  drugs,  such  as  tetracycline  and
minocycline, should only be used for children aged <8 years when other treatment or
prophylaxis  options  have  been  exhausted.  In  general,  treatment  for  bubonic  and
pharyngeal plague, either naturally occurring or after an intentional release of Y. pestis,
is  similar  to  pneumonic  and  septicemic  plague.  Antimicrobials  with  demonstrated
robust  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  activity  against  Y.  pestis  are  preferred  for  treatment  of
bubonic  and  pharyngeal  plague  (Table  2).  However,  a  notable  difference  in  the
recommendations for bubonic and pharyngeal disease is that doxycycline is considered
a first-line treatment. Although certain studies have demonstrated reduced doxycycline
efficacy  for  pneumonic  plague  (49,67),  doxycycline  remains  a  safe  and  effective
treatment  for  primary  bubonic  plague  among  patients  who  have  not  progressed  to
severe  secondary  septicemic  or  pneumonic  plague.  In  a  randomized  clinical  trial  in
Tanzania comparing gentamicin with doxycycline, 29 (97%) of 30 patients with bubonic
plague  survived  after  oral  doxycycline  treatment.  The  one  death  in  the  doxycycline
group  was  attributed  to  advanced  disease  in  a  woman  with  a  recent  spontaneous
abortion,  a  retained  dead  fetus,  hemorrhage,  and  renal  failure  at  the  time  treatment
was initiated (17). Moreover, an analysis of U.S. surveillance data demonstrated that,
among a subset of 45 patients with bubonic plague treated with tetracyclines and no
other antimicrobial classes effective for plague, 44 (98%) survived (16) (Supplementary
Appendix 1, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427). On the basis of this demonstrated
clinical  efficacy  and  in  vitro  activity  against  Y.  pestis  (55,76,83),  doxycycline  is
recommended  as  a  first-line  antimicrobial  for  treatment  of  patients  with  primary
bubonic  or  pharyngeal  plague.  Abscesses  such  as  buboes  have  lower  pH  than  most
human tissues (reported pH range: 5.5–7.2) (84). In acidic environments, transport of
aminoglycosides into the bacterial cell is reduced, leading to suppressed activity of the
drug (85,86). This has raised the question of whether aminoglycosides are effective for
treatment of bubonic plague. However, clinical evidence on use of aminoglycosides for
bubonic plague does not demonstrate marked reductions in efficacy. In the previously
mentioned  Tanzania  trial,  33  (94%)  of  35  patients  with  bubonic  plague  survived  with
gentamicin  treatment  (17).  The  two  fatalities  in  the  gentamicin  group  had  advanced
disease and died within 4 hours of the first dose of gentamicin (17). Among reported
U.S. cases of primary bubonic plague, 50 (91%) of 55 patients survived when treated
with aminoglycoside monotherapy (i.e., received no additional antimicrobial considered
to  be  effective  for  treatment  of  plague).  In  comparison,  eight  (80%)  of  10  patients
treated with sulfonamide, 44 (98%) of 45 patients treated with tetracycline, and all four
patients  treated  with  fluoroquinolone  monotherapy  for  bubonic  plague  survived,
although treatment bias and other factors might have contributed to some differences
in survival rates (Supplementary Appendix 1, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427).
In a systematic literature review of published cases of plague, 57 (83%) of 69 patients
with primary bubonic plague survived when treated with aminoglycoside monotherapy.
In  comparison,  survival  of  patients  with  primary  bubonic  plague  treated  with
sulfonamide, tetracycline, or fluoroquinolone monotherapy was 75% (119 of 159), 95%
(36 of 38), and 100% (14 of 14), respectively (19). Because of their overall efficacy and
demonstrated in vitro activity against Y. pestis (55,76,83), streptomycin and gentamicin
remain  first-line  agents  for  treatment  of  bubonic  plague.  However,  clinicians  can
consider alternative or dual therapy for patients with bubonic disease, particularly for
those with large buboes. Surgical incision and drainage might be necessary if the bubo
becomes suppurative (2). If needed, additional tetracyclines can serve as within-class
alternatives  to  the  first-line  agent  doxycycline  for  primary  bubonic  and  pharyngeal
plague.  Tetracycline  is  considered  effective  for  treatment  of  bubonic  plague  on  the
basis  of  previous  successful  use  in  humans  (16,19).  Omadacycline,  minocycline,  and
eravacycline  are  believed  to  be  effective  primarily  by  extrapolation;  one  study  of
omadacycline  demonstrated  in  vitro  activity  against  Y.  pestis  and  in  vivo  efficacy  for
postexposure  prophylaxis  in  mice  (87).  Patients  presenting  with  naturally  acquired
primary  bubonic  or  pharyngeal  plague  who  are  stable  and  do  not  show  signs  of
secondary septicemic or pneumonic plague can be treated with a single antimicrobial
agent.  Patients  who  present  with  primary  bubonic  or  pharyngeal  plague  that  has
progressed to secondary pneumonic or septicemic plague should be treated according
to  the  recommendations  for  pneumonic  and  septicemic  plague  (Table  1).  Plague
meningitis is an uncommon clinical manifestation, reported to occur among 0.2%–7% of
patients with naturally occurring plague (12). However, in the event of an intentional
release  of  Y.  pestis  infecting  many  persons,  numerous  patients  could  develop  this
manifestation.  Antimicrobials  used  to  treat  plague  meningitis  must  demonstrate
efficacy against Y. pestis and cross the blood-brain barrier to achieve sufficient levels
within the cerebrospinal fluid. Chloramphenicol has a long history of successful use for
treatment of plague, specifically plague meningitis (12,52,88,89). Because moxifloxacin
and  levofloxacin  have  robust  activity  against  Y.  pestis  and  excellent  central  nervous
system  penetration  (90),  these  drugs  should  be  effective  for  treatment  of  plague
meningitis (Table 3). However, no human data are available on the use of moxifloxacin
or levofloxacin for plague meningitis. When possible, dual therapy with chloramphenicol
and  moxifloxacin  or  levofloxacin  should  be  used  for  initial  treatment  of  patients  with
plague who present with signs of meningitis (e.g., nuchal rigidity). If chloramphenicol is
not available, a nonfluoroquinolone first-line or alternative antimicrobial for treatment
of septicemic plague can be substituted (Table 1). For patients who develop secondary
plague  meningitis  while  already  receiving  antimicrobial  therapy,  chloramphenicol
should  be  added  to  the  patient’s  existing  antimicrobial  treatment  regimen  for  plague
(Table 3). If chloramphenicol is not available, or clinicians would prefer to avoid using
this  drug  in  young  children  because  of  potential  adverse  effects,  moxifloxacin  or
levofloxacin  can  be  added  to  the  patient’s  existing  treatment  regimen  instead.  After
chloramphenicol, moxifloxacin, or levofloxacin have been added, the entire regimen of
antimicrobials the patient is receiving for plague should be continued for an additional
10 days. Standard precautions should be used when caring for all patients with plague.
Pneumonic plague can spread from infected patients to others by respiratory droplets
during close (<6 feet), sustained contact (2,9). Therefore, droplet precautions should be
used  in  addition  to  standard  precautions  when  providing  care  to  patients  with
suspected  or  confirmed  pneumonic  plague  (8,91).  Droplet  precautions  can  be
discontinued when patients with pneumonic plague have received antimicrobials for at
least 48 hours and have shown clinical improvement with markedly decreased sputum
production (8). Consistent with standard precautions, health care providers should wear
a mask, eye protection, and face shield when performing procedures likely to generate
sprays  or  splashes,  such  as  bubo  aspiration  (91).  Because  no  evidence  exists  of
airborne transmission of Y. pestis, particulate filtering facepiece respirators such as N95
respirators are not necessary when providing routine care for patients with pneumonic
plague;  however,  these  might  be  considered  as  an  added  precaution  for  health  care
providers performing aerosol-generating procedures. Pre-exposure prophylaxis for first
responders and health care providers who will care for patients with pneumonic plague
is  not  considered  necessary  as  long  as  standard  and  droplet  precautions  can  be
maintained. In cases of surgical mask shortages, patient overcrowding, poor ventilation
in  hospital  wards,  or  other  crisis  situations,  pre-exposure  prophylaxis  might  be
warranted if sufficient supplies of antimicrobials are available (Table 4). Potential risks
for  antimicrobial  pre-exposure  prophylaxis  must  be  carefully  considered.  No  data  are
available  on  optimal  duration  of  pre-exposure  prophylaxis;  however,  on  the  basis  of
pathophysiology  of  Y.  pestis  and  animal  studies,  prophylaxis  can  be  discontinued  48
hours  after  the  last  perceived  exposure  (92).  Although  potentially  helpful  in  certain
situations, pre-exposure prophylaxis should not replace essential protective measures
for  first  responders  and  health  care  providers,  such  as  wearing  personal  protective
equipment  and  isolating  patients  with  suspected  pneumonic  plague  when  possible.
Postexposure  prophylaxis  should  be  considered  for  persons  who  had  close  (<6  feet),
sustained  contact  with  a  patient  with  pneumonic  plague  and  were  not  wearing
adequate  personal  protective  equipment  (Table  4).  Antimicrobial  postexposure
prophylaxis  also  can  be  considered  for  laboratory  workers  accidentally  exposed  to
infectious materials and persons who had close (<6 feet) or direct contact with infected
animals,  such  as  veterinary  staff,  pet  owners,  and  hunters.  Postexposure  prophylaxis
should be given for 7 days. In the event of an intentional release of Y. pestis, persons
who  were  likely  exposed  should  be  provided  with  postexposure  prophylaxis  rapidly.
Monotherapy  is  recommended  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  in  the  aftermath  of  an
intentional  release,  with  targeting  of  drug  of  choice  as  indicated  if  engineered
resistance has been detected. First responders and health care providers who followed
standard and droplet precautions while caring for patients with pneumonic plague do
not need to take postexposure prophylaxis. Similarly, laboratory workers who followed
standard procedures while handling specimens from patients with plague and who were
not exposed by other means need not take postexposure prophylaxis. Exposed persons
can  be  placed  on  fever  watch  if  desired.  Special  populations,  including  pregnant  or
lactating  women,  neonates,  the  elderly,  immunocompromised,  and  obese  patients,
have
 unique
 considerations
 that
 should
 be
 addressed
 when
 recommending
antimicrobial  treatment  and  prophylaxis  for  plague.  These  populations  exhibit
physiologic differences that might influence their susceptibility to plague and severity
of  disease  as  well  as  their  metabolism  of  and  response  to  certain  antimicrobial
regimens.  Pregnant  women  experience  physiologic  changes  during  pregnancy,
including  alterations  in  immunity,  pulmonary  function,  gastrointestinal  motility  and
absorption,  renal  function,  and  cardiovascular  output.  These  changes,  along  with
increased  plasma  volume  and  variations  in  drug  metabolism,  should  be  considered
when selecting the type, dose, frequency, and route of administration of antimicrobials
recommended  for  treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  plague  among  pregnant  women.
Clinicians  also  should  consider  available  safety  data  related  to  use  during  pregnancy
when  selecting  antimicrobials;  however,  fetal  safety  concerns  should  not  prevent
access to rapid treatment or prophylaxis for pregnant women during a plague outbreak.
Data  on  the  severity  of  and  antimicrobial  treatment  for  Y.  pestis  infection  during
pregnancy  are  limited.  A  recent  systematic  literature  review  identified  160  published
cases  of  plague  during  pregnancy  and  found  an  overall  high  proportion  of  fatalities
(67%)  and  pregnancy  loss  (74%)  among  those  who  did  not  receive  antimicrobial
treatment  (21).  As  expected,  antimicrobial  treatment  was  associated  with  decreased
maternal fatality and pregnancy loss (29% and 62%, respectively). In addition to death,
pregnant women with plague also were at risk for preterm birth and hemorrhage (i.e.,
postpartum  hemorrhage  and  hemorrhage  into  tissues  discovered  on  autopsy).
Maternal-fetal  transmission  of  Y.  pestis  in  the  absence  of  maternal  antimicrobial
treatment  appears  possible,  although  the  frequency  at  which  this  occurs  is  unknown
(21). These data have substantial limitations, including potential biases resulting from
reliance  on  case  reports  and  often  incomplete  data  elements.  Nevertheless,  these
findings  suggest  pregnant  women  experience  severe  consequences  of  plague  and
warrant timely and effective treatment and prophylaxis, similar to nonpregnant women.
Because plague has a high case-fatality rate, CDC recommends antimicrobial treatment
and  prophylaxis  be  given  to  affected  pregnant  women  when  indicated,  even  if
antimicrobial  use  by  pregnant  women  carries  some  risks  for  adverse  events  to  the
fetus. Effectiveness of the antimicrobial(s) should be the primary driver of antimicrobial
choice.  When  different  antimicrobial  classes  are  available,  safety  profiles  of  various
antimicrobials  can  inform  selection  of  those  that  maximize  benefit  to  the  pregnant
woman  while  minimizing  potential  risk.  Data  are  minimal  on  the  effectiveness  of
antimicrobials recommended for treatment and prophylaxis of plague. In the systematic
review  cited  previously,  survival  among  pregnant  women  treated  with  streptomycin
was  92%  (12  of  13  pregnant  women),  whereas  73%  (11  of  15  pregnant  women)
survived  when  treated  with  sulfonamides.  Pregnant  women  also  were  treated  with
penicillins (n = 3; 67% survival), tetracyclines (n = 3; 67% survival), gentamicin (n = 1;
100% survival), and chloramphenicol (n = 1; 100% survival); however, interpretation of
these  data  are  limited  by  very  small  numbers.  A  review  of  the  safety  of
fluoroquinolones  during  pregnancy  did  not  find  evidence  of  an  association  between
maternal fluoroquinolone exposure and pregnancy loss or birth defects (93). A separate
systematic  review  examined  the  safety  of  nonfluoroquinolone  antimicrobials  used  for
the  treatment  of  plague  and  found  that  several  were  potentially  associated  with
adverse maternal or fetal outcomes (48). Consequently, although the risks for plague
underscore  the  need  for  antimicrobial  treatment  of  pregnant  women  to  approximate
recommendations for the nonpregnant population, several modifications are warranted
in  settings  where  there  are  no  antimicrobial  shortages.  For  treatment  of  all  forms  of
plague,  gentamicin  is  preferred  over  streptomycin  because  of  the  greater  risk  for
irreversible  fetal  ototoxicity  documented  with  streptomycin  use  during  pregnancy
(Tables 5 and 6). For aminoglycosides, clinicians should check drug concentrations as
appropriate  and  adjust  dose  and  duration  accordingly  because  the  increased  plasma
volume and increased glomerular filtration rate observed in pregnancy might decrease
the  drug  exposure.  Similarly,  both  ciprofloxacin  and  levofloxacin  are  preferred  over
moxifloxacin because of the lack of safety and efficacy data available on moxifloxacin
use in pregnant women. However, if neither ciprofloxacin nor levofloxacin are available,
moxifloxacin  should  be  used  when  indicated  for  treatment  or  prophylaxis  to  prevent
morbidity  and  mortality.  Because  of  the  increased  renal  clearance  of  ciprofloxacin
during  pregnancy,  more  frequent  dosing  is  recommended  (Table  5).  The  risks  for
aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones might vary by trimester of pregnancy; however,
additional data are needed to further characterize these differential risks. Because of
the  potential  for  high  maternal  morbidity  and  mortality  from  plague,  the  risk  for
perinatal  transmission,  and  the  lack  of  data  on  pharmacokinetics  of  various
antimicrobials  among  pregnant  women,  dual  therapy  with  distinct  classes  of
antimicrobials is recommended for treatment of plague in pregnant women caused by
either  naturally  acquired  infection  or  intentional  release  of  Y.  pestis.  Specifically,
gentamicin combined with either ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin is the preferred regimen.
Parenteral  administration,  when  applicable,  is  the  preferred  route  for  initial  plague
treatment  because  of  the  frequent  inability  of  pregnant  women  to  tolerate  oral
medications and the decreased GI absorption and motility that commonly occur during
pregnancy. For pregnant women with obesity, additional dosing recommendations are
available  (see  Persons  Who  Are  Obese  or  Underweight).  For  pregnant  women  with
secondary  plague  meningitis,  chloramphenicol  should  be  added  to  the  existing
antimicrobial treatment regimen for all trimesters of pregnancy because it penetrates
the blood-brain barrier and is the standard of care for nonpregnant patients. Although
chloramphenicol  carries  a  potential  risk  for  serious  blood  dyscrasias  and  gray  baby
syndrome  when  given  to  neonates,  occurrence  resulting  from  in  utero  exposure  is
exceedingly  rare  (41).  To  facilitate  parenteral  administration  of  antimicrobials  and
monitoring  for  preterm  labor  and  maternal  hemorrhage,  hospitalization  of  pregnant
women should be considered, particularly for those with pneumonic plague and those in
the second and third trimester. As with other severe systemic infections, preterm labor
might  occur  in  pregnant  women  with  plague.  Administration  of  corticosteroids  to
pregnant women experiencing preterm labor to promote fetal lung maturity might be
considered, in accordance with ACOG guidelines (94) and as deemed appropriate by the
clinical care team. In addition to the antimicrobial recommendations included in these
guidelines, standard guidelines for maternal sepsis should be followed when managing
plague in pregnant women with associated signs of sepsis (95). Pre- and postexposure
prophylaxis  recommendations  for  pregnant  women  reflect  those  for  the  nonpregnant
population, with the exception that moxifloxacin and doxycycline should be considered
alternatives
 rather
 than
 first-line
 antimicrobials
 (Table
 7).
 Monotherapy
 for
postexposure prophylaxis is preferred for management of exposures to Y. pestis., with
targeting  of  drug  choice  as  indicated  if  engineered  resistance  is  detected  in  the
aftermath  of  a  bioterrorism  attack.  Enhanced  antepartum  fetal  monitoring  of
asymptomatic pregnant women is not needed on the basis of potential exposure to Y.
pestis.
 Some
 studies
 have
 identified
 an
 association
 between
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole exposure in the first trimester among pregnant women
not taking folic acid supplements and the development of fetal neural tube defects (48).
However, this drug is used regularly during pregnancy. In the United States, all women
capable of becoming pregnant are encouraged to consume at least 400 μg of folic acid
daily from supplements, fortified foods, or both, in addition to folate-rich foods from a
varied diet, to reduce the risk for neural tube defects during early pregnancy (96). For
women in the United States with known or suspected pregnancy and Y. pestis infection
or  exposure,  the  risk-benefit  profile  favors  the  use  of  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
during any trimester. For pregnant women prescribed trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in
the third trimester, clinicians caring for the infant after delivery should be informed of
this drug exposure so that they are aware of the risk for hyperbilirubinemia. Plague in
neonates has rarely been documented. One report described a 7-day-old female who
presented with fever and listlessness; 2 days earlier a red macule was observed on her
knee, which was assumed to be the route of exposure via flea bite. She had a “septic
appearance,” questionably full fontanel, and no lymphadenopathy. She recovered after
treatment  with  ampicillin,  gentamicin,  and  later  streptomycin  (97).  Another  report
described  a  1-month-old  male  with  primary  plague  meningitis  who  presented  with
fever, convulsions, bulging fontanel, and no lymphadenopathy. He died on the 17th day
of illness despite sulfathiazole therapy; autopsy revealed thick fibrino-purulent exudate
covering the surface of the brain and spinal cord (98). It is unknown whether neonates
with  plague  have  distinct  clinical  manifestations  compared  with  the  general  pediatric
population. Treatment should be initiated as soon as possible for symptomatic neonates
who have been infected with Y. pestis before, during, or after birth (Tables 7 and 8). For
these  recommendations,  neonates  are  defined  as  full-term  infants  aged  ≤28  days  or
preterm infants 37–44 weeks postmenstrual age. IM administration should be used only
if IV administration is not possible because of lack of IV access or resource constraints.
Ofloxacin is not included as a treatment alternative because it is only available as an
oral  formulation.  However,  if  first-line  and  alternative  treatment  options  have  been
exhausted,  clinicians  can  consider  using  ofloxacin  as  a  last  resort.  Plazomicin  and
moxifloxacin have not been evaluated for use in neonates but could also be considered
if  other  antimicrobials  are  not  available.  In  cases  of  diagnostic  uncertainty,  neonates
with  possible  plague  versus  nonplague  sepsis  can  be  treated  with  ampicillin  and
gentamicin,  which  would  cover  both  Y.  pestis  and  other  pathogens  that  commonly
cause  sepsis  among  neonates.  Although  chloramphenicol  is  generally  contraindicated
for  infants  aged  <6  months  because  of  the  risk  for  serious  blood  dyscrasias  or
circulatory collapse (gray baby syndrome), it is still an appropriate option for treatment
of plague meningitis in neonates because of the severity of this clinical presentation.
Levofloxacin  also  can  be  used  for  treatment  of  plague  meningitis  (Table  3).
Postexposure  prophylaxis  should  be  given  to  all  neonates  exposed  postnatally  to  Y.
pestis (Table 9). Prophylaxis also should be considered for asymptomatic neonates born
to mothers infected with Y. pestis during the last 7 days of pregnancy if the mother was
untreated  or  treated  <48  hours  before  delivery  (Supplementary  Appendix  2,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427). Careful observation, rather than antimicrobial
prophylaxis,  is  acceptable  for  asymptomatic  neonates  born  to  infected  but
appropriately  treated  mothers  and  for  asymptomatic  neonates  born  to  mothers
exposed
 to
 Y.
 pestis
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 2,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427). Three important factors should be considered
when selecting antimicrobials for treatment and prophylaxis of plague among neonates.
First, many medications must be given to neonates via the IV route to ensure that the
full  desired  dose  is  successfully  administered.  Some  neonates  regularly  experience
gastroesophageal reflux (spitting up), making it difficult to administer a full medication
dose  orally.  Moreover,  neonates  regularly  ingest  breast  milk  or  formula,  which  have
substantial amounts of calcium and other minerals that can inhibit absorption of some
antimicrobials. For example, bioavailability of oral fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines is
reduced  by  ingestion  of  milk  (99,100).  Although  ofloxacin  has  not  been  examined
directly,  reduced  bioavailability  with  co-ingestion  with  milk  is  possible  because  it  is  a
fluoroquinolone.  Second,  many  antimicrobials  have  not  been  specifically  evaluated  or
approved  for  use  in  neonates.  Third,  some  antimicrobials  also  carry  specific  or
enhanced  risks  for  neonates,  such  as  bilirubin  displacement  and  the  potential  for
kernicterus associated with sulfonamides. Antimicrobial use in neonates also can lead
to  general  adverse  reactions  such  as  disruption  of  the  gut  microbiome  (101,102).
Breastfeeding has many benefits including maternal-infant bonding; ideal nutrition for
the  infant;  and  boosting  of  the  immune  system  via  immunoglobulins,  cytokines,
probiotic  bacteria,  and  other  protective  immunologic  factors  contained  in  breast  milk
(103,104). Therefore, any potential risk related to transmission of infectious pathogens
via  breast  milk  must  be  balanced  against  the  protective  effects  of  breastfeeding.
Although no studies have directly assessed the presence of Y. pestis in breast milk of
infected mothers, no reports exist of suspected Y. pestis transmission from mother to
child through breast milk. Therefore, the risk for Y. pestis transmission through breast
milk  is  believed  to  be  low.  Mothers  with  bubonic  or  septicemic  plague  and  mothers
taking antimicrobial prophylaxis after exposure to Y. pestis can continue to breastfeed
their infants if able. A mother with pneumonic plague can continue to breastfeed if she
is receiving antimicrobial treatment and her infant is receiving antimicrobial treatment
or  postexposure  prophylaxis  for  Y.  pestis.  Because  of  the  risk  for  person-to-person
transmission of pneumonic plague, for infants not receiving antimicrobial treatment or
prophylaxis  for  Y.  pestis,  mothers  with  pneumonic  plague  should  avoid  direct
breastfeeding  until  they  have  received  antimicrobial  treatment  for  ≥48  hours  and
demonstrated  clinical  improvement.  Regular  expression  of  breast  milk  via  hand  or
mechanical pump by the mother should be encouraged and supported during this time;
expressed breast milk can be given to the infant. Some mothers might need lactation
support  to  promote  milk  supply,  support  the  breastfeeding  relationship,  and  prevent
breast infections. Clinicians selecting antimicrobials for lactating mothers who require
treatment or prophylaxis for Y. pestis should take into account transmission of the drug
or metabolites to the infant via breast milk and potential consequences to the infant.
Apart from chloramphenicol, the majority of antimicrobials recommended for Y. pestis
treatment  or  prophylaxis  produce  low  concentrations  in  breast  milk  and  have  an
acceptable
 safety
 profile
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 3,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427). Fluoroquinolones are present in breast milk in
quantities  far  below  the  usual  pediatric  dosage  for  these  medications.  Among  the
fluoroquinolones, the best studied are ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin, which are present in
breast milk at concentrations two orders of magnitude lower than a typical therapeutic
infant  dose  (105,106).  In  addition,  absorption  of  fluoroquinolones  from  breast  milk  is
expected  to  be  reduced  because  of  the  high  concentration  of  calcium  in  breast  milk
(102,105,106).  The  theoretical  risk  for  complications  from  fluoroquinolones  can  be
reduced by timing breastfeeding to correspond with the time of lowest concentration of
the  drug  in  breast  milk;  for  ciprofloxacin,  this  is  3–4  hours  after  each  dose,  and  for
ofloxacin  4–6  hours  (105,106).  Aminoglycosides  are  poorly  absorbed  by  the
gastrointestinal tract and, like fluoroquinolones, are only present in breast milk in very
low  quantities.  Gentamicin,  amikacin,  tobramycin,  and  streptomycin  are  detected  in
concentrations of 0.4–5.2 mg/L in breast milk (107). Tetracyclines also are present only
in very low levels in breast milk, and the calcium in breast milk might inhibit absorption
by infants (108,109). The best studied antimicrobials in this class is tetracycline. One
study of mothers on a steady state dose found that tetracycline reached a peak breast
milk  concentration  of  only  2.58  mg/L  and  was  undetectable  in  the  serum  of  their
breastfeeding  infants  (110).  Nevertheless,  tetracycline  should  only  be  prescribed  for
short-term  use  with  avoidance  of  repeated  courses.  Doxycycline  is  now  considered
acceptable for short-term use even in children aged <8 years, and because of the low
concentrations of all tetracyclines found in breast milk, significant adverse reactions are
unlikely (110). Minocycline has been associated with black discoloration of breast milk
believed to be caused by iron pigment deposition in macrophages (111,112). Although
this is not likely to pose a risk for mothers or infants, this effect might be worrisome to
patients  and  might  be  a  reason  to  choose  another  agent  when  available.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  is  found  in  very  low  levels  in  breast  milk,  with  infant
drug levels in breast milk an order of magnitude lower than the therapeutic dose (113).
There  is  substantial  clinical  experience  in  using  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
near-term and during breastfeeding in mothers living with HIV, and an extensive review
has found no adverse events in this population (114). Nevertheless, a theoretical risk
for bilirubin displacement exists in susceptible infants, including those aged ≤28 days
and  those  with  pre-existing  jaundice,  prematurity,  glucose-6-phosphate  deficiency,  or
other vulnerabilities (115). Alternative agents should be selected for these populations,
if available. Chloramphenicol has the potential for serious adverse reactions in infants,
and  other  drugs  should  be  used  preferentially  for  breastfeeding  mothers  (116,117).
Chloramphenicol is expressed in breast milk at an average maximum concentration of
6.1 mg/L, and the drug has high oral absorption (118). Gray baby syndrome has only
occurred in children receiving >200 mg/day (117). On the other hand, aplastic anemia
is  believed  to  be  dose  independent  and  is  a  theoretical  risk;  however,  no  cases  of
aplastic anemia have been reported to date among infants of nursing mothers receiving
chloramphenicol. If a nursing mother must be treated with chloramphenicol, the infant
should  be  monitored  for  gastrointestinal  distress,  adequacy  of  nursing,  and  blood
dyscrasias (using a complete blood count with differential panel) (116). Breastfeeding
infants  who  are  given  antimicrobials  and  whose  mothers  also  require  treatment  or
prophylaxis for plague can receive antimicrobials via two sources: direct administration
and  indirectly  via  breast  milk.  This  can  lead  to  higher  doses  than  intended  of  one
antimicrobial or drug-drug interactions between two different antimicrobials. However,
the risk for inadvertently administering a toxic dose of any antimicrobial via breast milk
is  low  for  every  drug  except  chloramphenicol.  Fluoroquinolones,  aminoglycosides,
tetracyclines,  and  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  are  all  excreted  in  breast  milk  in
minute  quantities  relative  to  therapeutic  dosing  levels.  Similarly,  the  risk  for  a
dangerous drug-drug interaction also is low. Therefore, the antimicrobial regimen of the
lactating  mother  typically  should  not  influence  antimicrobial  selection  for  the
breastfeeding  infant.  Among  762  patients  with  plague  summarized  in  a  systematic
literature review, 19 (2%) were aged ≥65 years. These elderly patients with plague had
a 42% case fatality rate, more than twice the 19% case-fatality rate found for patients
aged  <65  years  (19).  Survival  rates  for  19  patients  aged  ≥65  years  who  received
antimicrobial monotherapy or combination therapy were 100% with chloramphenicol (n
=  2),  80%  with  tetracyclines  (n  =  5),  80%  with  streptomycin  (n  =  5),  67%  with
fluoroquinolones (n = 3), 50% with gentamicin (n = 8), and 40% with sulfonamides (n =
5). However, interpretation is limited by small numbers of cases, combination therapy,
and  potential  treatment  bias  (19).  Data  on  plague  among  immunocompromised
patients  are  limited.  One  notable  case  of  plague  in  a  patient  with  potential
immunocompromising  factors  occurred  in  1992.  A  man  aged  44  years  who  had
undergone
 splenectomy
 and
 was
 receiving
 chemotherapy
 for
 idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura (vinblastine sulfate and daily prednisone) was scratched by
a  Y.  pestis-infected  cat  and  developed  bubonic  plague.  Symptoms  included  fever,
nausea, vomiting, fatigue, an enlarged axillary lymph node, and swelling in the distal
epitrochlear  node.  The  patient  recovered  without  complications  after  treatment  with
gentamicin and doxycycline (89). Eight additional patients with plague and underlying
conditions (e.g., diabetes, renal insufficiency, histiocytosis X, alcoholism, and hepatitis
B  infection)  also  have  been  described  (119–126),  four  of  whom  died  (120–122,126),
although the severity of these underlying conditions and whether they contributed to
immunocompromise  is  unknown.  Treatment  recommendations  for  patients  who  are
elderly or immunocompromised do not differ from those for adults. However, treating
clinicians should recognize the potential for decreases in glomerular filtration rate and
presence  of  polypharmacy,  with  resultant  drug-drug  interactions,  and  adjust
antimicrobials  accordingly.  Treating  clinicians  should  carefully  monitor  patients  with
plague who are elderly or immunocompromised and extend therapy duration as needed
on  the  basis  of  their  clinical  judgment.  For  prophylaxis  of  elderly  persons,  clinicians
should consider using doxycycline preferentially over fluoroquinolones because of the
risks  for  QTc  prolongation,  neuropsychiatric  disturbances  including  dizziness  and
imbalance,  hypoglycemia,  aortic  rupture,  and  damage  to  connective  tissues  with
fluoroquinolone use (44). Trimethoprim, alone or in combination with sulfamethoxazole,
is  associated  with  increased  risk  for  acute  kidney  injury  and  hyperkalemia.  This  risk
appears  to  be  magnified  when  used  concurrently  with  an  angiotensin-converting
enzyme  inhibitor,  angiotensin  II  receptor  blocker,  or  potassium-sparing  diuretic  (127).
Body  weight  can  affect  both  volume  of  distribution  as  well  as  metabolism  and
elimination  of  antimicrobials.  In  general,  adjustments  in  dose  are  most  important  for
drugs  with  a  narrow  therapeutic  index.  These  adjustments  are  independent  of  those
related  to  alterations  in  hepatic  or  renal  function.  Aminoglycosides  have  a  narrow
therapeutic  index  and  require  therapeutic  drug  monitoring  to  avoid  toxicity.  For
patients who are underweight (Body mass index [BMI] <18.5), initial dosing should be
based  on  total  body  weight  (TBW).  For  patients  who  are  obese  (BMI  ≥30.0),  initial
dosing  should  be  based  on  adjusted  body  weight  (ABW),  calculated  as  ideal  body
weight (IBW) plus 40% of excess body weight: ABW = IBW + ([TBW-IBW] x 0.4) (128). In
addition,  once  daily  dosing  of  aminoglycosides  might  not  be  appropriate  for  patients
with  severe  obesity  (BMI  ≥40).  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  also  should  be  dosed
according  to  ABW  in  obese  adults  when  prescribing  doses  >8  mg/kg/day
(Supplementary
 Appendix
 4,
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427)
 (128).
Ciprofloxacin should be dosed at the upper end of the dosing range for patients who are
obese.  No  dosing  adjustment  is  necessary  for  levofloxacin  or  moxifloxacin.  Similarly,
tetracyclines do not require dose adjustment for patients who are obese or underweight
(128).  Chloramphenicol  should  be  dosed  according  to  TBW  in  all  cases,  and  serum
concentration  monitoring  should  be  performed  when  available,  especially  in  children
(129). For children, less specific dosing information is available. Evidence indicates that
aminoglycosides  can  be  dosed  according  to  ABW  for  children  who  are  obese  (as  for
adults), whereas all other agents should be dosed according to TBW (130–132). In all
cases, total dose for children should not exceed the maximum dose for an adult (133).
Top  Future  efforts  should  attempt  to  address  remaining  gaps  in  the  prevention,
recognition,  and  clinical  management  of  plague.  Emergency  preparedness  should
include  planning  for  bioterrorism  events  that  could  exhaust  U.S.  antimicrobial,
ventilator,  and  other  supplies  in  clinical  settings  and  in  stockpiles.  In  terms  of
prevention,  efforts  to  develop  a  plague  vaccine  effective  against  all  forms  of  the
disease should continue, and the need for scaling up such a vaccine for potential broad
distribution should be anticipated. Previously available vaccines against Y. pestis have
not demonstrated sufficient efficacy for pneumonic plague (134). Newer formulations of
plague vaccines are in development or available for experimental use (135). Additional
research to expand antimicrobial options, formulations and administration routes (e.g.,
inhaled gentamicin) (136), and adjunct therapies such as steroids also would be helpful.
Development and application of algorithms capable of identifying high-risk patients and
strategies  for  optimizing  triage  and  resource  allocation  could  play  a  crucial  role  in
improving the ability to appropriately prepare for and respond to a mass-casualty event
involving  Y.  pestis.  As  new  research  or  other  data  become  available  regarding
treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  Y.  pestis,  these  guidelines  will  be  revised  and  updated.
Top  These  guidelines  are  subject  to  at  least  three  limitations.  First,  many  of  the
recommendations are based on systematic review data derived from case reports and
case series, both of which are widely recognized as low quality and biased sources of
data. Large randomized controlled trials of antimicrobial safety and efficacy in humans
with  plague  are  notoriously  challenging,  because  of  resource  constraints  and  the
sporadic  nature  of  plague  outbreaks.  Second,  small  numbers  of  patients  in  certain
treatment groups hindered the ability to compare efficacy and survival rates between
different  antimicrobials.  Third,  nonhuman  primate  data  considered  as  part  of  the
guideline  development  process  are  informative  but  do  not  fully  replicate  the  human
experience. Top Plague has a high case-fatality rate but is treatable with antimicrobials
and supportive care. Thus, early recognition of disease and administration of effective
antimicrobials  to  treat  plague  are  paramount  to  saving  lives.  In  addition,  persons
exposed to Y. pestis can avoid illness if given effective antimicrobial prophylaxis in a
timely
 manner.
 Aminoglycosides
 and
 fluoroquinolones
 are
 the
 mainstays
 of
antimicrobial treatment for plague. Depending on the clinical form of disease and the
age  and  pregnancy  status  of  the  patient,  tetracyclines,  chloramphenicol,  and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole also might be suitable antimicrobials for treatment. In
the event of a bioterrorist attack using a strain of Y. pestis engineered for resistance,
dual therapy with distinct classes of antimicrobials is recommended. These guidelines
provide  recommendations  for  the  antimicrobial  treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  plague
resulting from either naturally occurring transmission or a bioterrorism-related event. In
addition  to  aiding  health  care  providers  caring  for  patients  with  plague,  these
recommendations  can  strengthen  and  support  emergency  response  plans  by  local,
state,  and  federal  organizations.  Top  The  authors  acknowledge  Joanna  Taliano,  MLS,
and Camay On, PharmD, for support with literature reviews and Deloitte for assistance
with  topic  session  and  expert  forum  management  and  logistics.  Co-Chairs:  Christina
Nelson,  MD,  Dana  Meaney-Delman,  MD,  CDC.  Members:  Ben  Beard,  PhD;  Paul  Mead,
MD; Nicki Pesik, MD; Brett Petersen, MD; Joanna Prasher, PhD; Sam Groseclose, DVM;
Susan Gorman, PharmD; Janet Cragan, MD; Georgina Peacock, MD; Thomas Clark, MD;
Sascha Ellington, PhD. Co-Leads: Christina Nelson, MD, Dana Meaney-Delman, MD, CDC.
Members: Victoria Carter, PhD; Katharine Cooley, MPH; Shannon Fleck-Derderian, MPH;
Shana  Godfred-Cato,  DO;  Valerie  Johnson,  MPH;  Paul  Mead,  MD;  Chloe  Oram;  Nadia
Oussayef, JD; Anna Perea, MS; Dale Rose, PhD; Zachary Russell, MA; Caroline Seman,
MPH;  Paul  Smith,  MS;  Helen  Talley-McRae;  Patricia  Yu,  MPH;  Yon  Yu,  PharmD,  CDC.
Amesh  Adalja,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University;  Jorge  O.  Alarcon,  MD,  Tropical  Medicine
Institute  of  the  Universidad  Nacional  Mayor  de  San  Marcos;  Meredith  Allen,  DrPH,
Marcus Plescia, MD, Association of State and Territorial Health Officials; Martina Badell,
MD,  Alexander  Isakov,  MD,  Denise  Jamieson,  MD,  Emory  University;  Ben  Beard,  PhD,
Victoria  Carter,  PhD,  Alison  Hinckley,  PhD,  Valerie  Johnson,  MPH,  Rima  Khabbaz,  MD,
Hye-Joo  Kim,  PharmD,  Luke  Kingry,  PhD,  Kiersten  Kugeler,  PhD,  Grace  Marx,  MD,  Joel
Montgomery, PhD, Chloe Oram, Nicki Pesik, MD, Corinne Parker, PharmD, Anna Perea,
MS, Jeannine Petersen, PhD, Lyle Petersen, MD, Satish Pillai, MD, Zachary Russell, MA,
Scott  Santibanez,  MD,  Paul  Smith,  MS,  David  Sue,  PhD,  Helen  Talley-McRae,  Henry
Walke,  MD,  Eileen  Yee,  MD,  Patricia  Yu,  MPH,  Yon  Yu,  PharmD,  National  Center  for
Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  Richard  Beigi,  MD,  University  of
Pittsburgh Medical Center Magee-Women’s Hospital; Eric Bertherat, MD, Sophie Jullien,
MD,  World  Health  Organization;  Laura  Biesiadecki,  MSPH,  National  Association  of
County  and  City  Health  Officials;  Coleen  Boyle,  PhD,  Cheryl  Broussard,  PhD,  Kevin
Chatham-Stephens, MD, Janet Cragan, MD, Alina Flores, DrPH, Shana Godfred-Cato, DO,
Margaret Honein, PhD, Georgina Peacock, MD, Emmy Tran, PharmD, National Center on
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Joseph Campbell, PhD, Judith Hewitt,
PhD, National Institutes of Health; Joseph Cantey, MD, University of Texas Health San
Antonio;  Wendy  Chung,  MD,  Dallas  County  Health  and  Human  Services;  Sofia  del
Carmen-Gonzalez Collantes, MD, Regional Health Directorate of Callao; Wayne Duffus,
MD, Center for Global Health, CDC; Sascha Ellington, PhD, Jennifer Nelson, MD, Titilope
Oduyebo,  MD,  National  Center  for  Chronic  Disease  Prevention  and  Health  Promotion,
CDC;  Brian  Erly,  MD,  University  of  Colorado  Denver;  Paul  Ettestad,  DVM,  New  Mexico
Department  of  Health  (retired);  Susan  Gorman,  PharmD,  Office  of  the  Assistant
Secretary  for  Preparedness  and  Response,  Strategic  National  Stockpile;  Christopher
Houchens,  PhD,  Rosemary  Humes,  PhD,  Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  for
Preparedness and Response; Brenna Hughes, MD, Duke University Medical Center; Lilly
Kan, MPH, National Association of County and City Health Officials; Christine Kosmos,
Joanna  Prasher,  PhD,  Dale  Rose,  PhD,  Ernest  (Chip)  Smith,  MD,  Theresa  Smith,  MD,
Todd  Talbert,  MA,  Center  for  Preparedness  and  Response,  CDC;  Gitte  Larsen,  MD,
University  of  Utah;  Marci  Layton,  MD,  New  York  City  Department  of  Health;  Tamorah
Lewis,  MD,  Children’s  Mercy  Hospital,  Kansas  City;  Shannon  Manzi,  PharmD,  Boston
Children’s  Hospital,  Harvard  Medical  School;  Ryan  Maves,  MD,  U.S.  Department  of
Defense,  Naval  Medical  Center  San  Diego;  Gregory  Mertz,  MD,  University  of  New
Mexico; Scott Needle, MD, Elica Health Centers; Marguerite Neill, MD, Brown University;
Sean  O’Leary,  MD,  University  of  Colorado  School  of  Medicine,  Children’s  Hospital
Colorado; Daniel M. Pastula, MD, CDC and University of Colorado; Mihaja Raberahona,
MD,  University  Hospital  Joseph  Raseta  Befelatanana  Antananarivo;  Sonja  Rasmussen,
MD, University of Florida; Bertrand Renaud, MD, Faculte de Medecine, Universite Paris
Descartes; Laura Riley, MD, Weill Cornell Medical Center; Rosemary Roberts, MD, Yuliya
Yasinskaya,  MD,  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Todd  Semla,  PharmD,
Northwestern  Universitys  Feinberg  School  of  Medicine;  Jeanne  Sheffield,  MD,  Johns
Hopkins  Medicine  Department  of  Gynecology  and  Obstetrics;  Joanna  Taliano,  CDC;
Colleen Terriff, PharmD, Deaconess Hospital, MultiCare Inland Northwest; Joel Terriquez,
MD,  Northern  Arizona  Healthcare,  Northern  Arizona  University;  Joao  Toledo,  MD,  Pan
American Health Organization; Luis Fernando Donaires Toscano, MD, National Institute
of  Health  of  Peru;  Raman  Venkataramanan,  PhD,  University  of  Pittsburgh  School  of
Pharmacy and School of Medicine. American Academy of Pediatrics, American College
of  Emergency  Physicians,  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,
American Geriatrics Society, Association of State and Territorial Health Officials, CDC,
Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, Infectious Diseases Society of America,
National  Association  of  County  and  City  Health  Officials,  National  Institutes  of  Health,
National Institutes of Health of Peru, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness
and  Response,  Pan  American  Health  Organization,  Society  for  Maternal  and  Fetal
Medicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Food and Drug Administration, World Health
Organization. Amesh Adalja, MD, Johns Hopkins University; Martina Badell, MD, Denise
Jamieson, MD, Emory University; Eric Bertherat, MD, World Health Organization; Judith
Hewitt,  PhD,  National  Institutes  of  Health;  Tamorah  Lewis,  MD,  Children’s  Mercy
Hospital,  Kansas  City;  Shannon  Manzi,  PharmD,  Boston  Children’s  Hospital,  Harvard
Medical School; Marguerite Neill, MD, Brown University; Kevin Chatham-Stephens, MD,
Dana  Meaney-Delman,  MD,  Shannon  Fleck-Derderian,  MPH;  Patricia  Yu,  MPH,  Corinne
Parker,  PharmD,  Shana  Godfred-Cato,  DO,  Paul  Mead,  MD,  Christina  Nelson,  MD,
Jennifer  Nelson,  MD,  Jeannine  Petersen,  PhD,  Satish  Pillai,  MD,  Scott  Santibanez,  MD,
CDC;  Rosemary  Roberts,  MD,  Yuliya  Yasinskaya,  MD,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;
Todd  Semla,  PharmD,  Northwestern  University’s  Feinberg  School  of  Medicine;  Colleen
Terriff,  PharmD,  Deaconess  Hospital,  MultiCare  Inland  Northwest;  Joel  Terriquez,  MD,
Northern  Arizona  Healthcare,  Northern  Arizona  University;  Raman  Venkataramanan,
PhD,  University  of  Pittsburgh  School  of  Pharmacy  and  School  of  Medicine.  Susanna
Visser, DrPH, CDC; Daniel Schoelles, MBA, Deloitte. Top Corresponding author: Christina
Nelson, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.  Telephone:  970-225-4259;  Email:  wje1@cdc.gov.  Top
1Bacterial  Diseases  Branch,  Division  of  Vector-Borne  Diseases,  National  Center  for
Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC,  Fort  Collins,  Colorado;  2Infant
Outcomes  Monitoring,  Research  and  Prevention  Branch,  Division  of  Birth  Defects  and
Infant Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC,
Atlanta,  Georgia;  3Division  of  Preparedness  and  Emerging  Infections,  National  Center
for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia Top 
 CDC  and  contributors  to  this  work  disclose  that  they  have  no  financial  interests  or
other  relationships  with  the  manufacturers  of  commercial  products,  suppliers  of
commercial services, or commercial supporters that would unfairly influence these CDC
recommendations with the following exceptions: Brenna Hughes discloses that she is a
scientific advisor for the cytomegalovirus program at Merck. Amesh Adalja is a member
of the Speaker’s Bureau and Advisory Board of Merck. 
 All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of  Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of  interest  were  reported.  Top  *  21st  Century  Cures  Act,  Pub.  L.  No.  114–255.  †
Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR §2635. Top
Top Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; PO = per os.
Note: All oral antimicrobials recommended in these guidelines can be administered via
alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for
ciprofloxacin.
*  Dual  therapy  with  two  distinct  classes  of  antimicrobials  should  be  used  for  initial
treatment  of  patients  with  severe  pneumonic  or  septicemic  plague  and  patients
infected after intentional release of Yersinia pestis.
† Antimicrobials are not listed in order of preference within each category.
§ Recommended treatment duration is 10–14 days.
¶ Not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of plague. In
some  instances,  these  antimicrobials  have  been  used  off  label  for  the  treatment  of
naturally  occurring  plague  (17,19,88).  Large-scale  distribution  and  use  of  these
antimicrobials  during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under  FDA-issued  Emergency
Use Authorization.
** At the time of publication, these antimicrobials might not be readily and consistently
available in the United States because of limited production.
††  The  IV  formulation  of  streptomycin  is  not  approved  by  FDA;  however,  the  IM
formulation of streptomycin has been given intravenously as an off-label use (Sources:
Morris JT, Cooper RH. Intravenous streptomycin: a useful route of administration. Clin
Infect  Dis  1994;19:1150–1.  Pérez  Tanoira  R,  Sánchez-Patán  F,  Jiménez  Girón  A.  et  al.
Tolerance and safety of intravenous streptomycin therapy in patients with tuberculosis.
Infection 2014;42:597–8).
§§  The  lower  end  of  the  chloramphenicol  dosing  range  (12.5  mg/kg  every  6  hours)  is
sufficient  for  treatment  of  plague  in  most  cases.  Severe  infections  might  require
increased dosing, but these doses should be decreased as soon as feasible (Sources:
Chloramphenicol  sodium  succinate  [Package  insert].  Lake  Zurich,  IL:  Fresenius  Kabl,
LLC;  2019.  Chloromycetin  sodium  succinate  [Package  insert].  Bristol,  TN:  Monarch
Pharmaceuticals,  LLC;  2004).  Serum  concentration  monitoring  should  be  performed
when available, especially in children.
¶¶ Additional fluoroquinolone alternatives, such as delafloxacin, also can be considered
depending on drug availability.
***  Ofloxacin  suspension  for  oral  liquid  administration  is  not  available  in  the  United
States.
††† Data on use of fluoroquinolones and doxycycline in infants and young children are
limited.
§§§ Moxifloxacin is not FDA approved for use in children aged ≤17 years but has been
used  off  label  (79).  Data  on  use  in  neonates  and  children  aged  ≤2  months  are
extremely  limited;  however,  successful  use  in  neonates  has  been  reported  (Source:
Watt  KM,  Massaro  MM,  Smith  B,  Cohen-Wolkowiez  M,  Benjamin  DK  Jr,  Laughon  MM.
Pharmacokinetics  of  moxifloxacin  in  an  infant  with  Mycoplasma  hominis  meningitis.
Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2012;31:197–9).  For  children  aged  12–17  years  weighing  ≥45  kg
with risk factors for cardiac events, consider 200 mg twice daily to reduce risk for QT
prolongation.
¶¶¶ Although no commercial liquid formulation is available for moxifloxacin, hospitals
and  compounding  retail  pharmacies  can  use  a  published  recipe  to  make  liquid
suspension. Top Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; PO = per os.Note:
All  oral  antimicrobials  recommended  in  these  guidelines  can  be  administered  via
alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for
ciprofloxacin.  *Monotherapy  is  recommended  for  patients  with  naturally  occurring
plague, although dual therapy can be considered for patients with large buboes. Dual
therapy with two distinct classes of antimicrobials should be used for initial treatment of
patients  infected  after  intentional  release  of  Yersinia  pestis.†  Antimicrobials  are  not
listed in order of preference within each category.§ Recommended treatment duration
is 10–14 days.¶ Not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment
of  plague.  In  some  instances,  these  antimicrobials  have  been  used  off  label  for  the
treatment of naturally occurring plague (17,19,88). Large-scale distribution and use of
these  antimicrobials  during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under  FDA-issued
Emergency Use Authorization.** At the time of publication, these antimicrobials might
not  be  readily  and  consistently  available  in  the  United  States  because  of  limited
production.†† The IV formulation of streptomycin is not approved by FDA; however, the
IM  formulation  of  streptomycin  has  been  given  intravenously  as  an  off-label  use
(Sources:  Morris  JT,  Cooper  RH.  Intravenous  streptomycin:  a  useful  route  of
administration.  Clin  Infect  Dis  1994;19:1150–1.  Pérez  Tanoira  R,  Sánchez-Patán  F,
Jiménez  Girón  A.  et  al.  Tolerance  and  safety  of  intravenous  streptomycin  therapy  in
patients  with  tuberculosis.  Infection  2014;42:597–8).  §§  The  lower  end  of  the
chloramphenicol dosing range (12.5 mg/kg every 6 hours) is sufficient for treatment of
plague  in  most  cases.  Severe  infections  might  require  increased  dosing,  but  these
doses  should  be  decreased  as  soon  as  feasible.  (Sources:  Chloramphenicol  sodium
succinate  [Package  insert].  Lake  Zurich,  IL:  Fresenius  Kabl,  LLC;  2019.  Chloromycetin
sodium  succinate  [Package  insert].  Bristol,  TN:  Monarch  Pharmaceuticals,  LLC;  2004).
Serum  concentration  monitoring   should  be  performed  when  available,  especially  in
children.¶¶  Additional  fluoroquinolone  alternatives,  such  as  delafloxacin,  also  can  be
considered  depending  on  drug  availability.***  Ofloxacin  suspension  for  oral  liquid
administration is not available in the United States. ††† Data on use of fluoroquinolones
and  tetracyclines  in  infants  and  young  children  are  limited.  Because  of  the  risk  for
permanent  tooth  discoloration  and  tooth  enamel  hypoplasia,  tetracycline  and
minocycline  should  only  be  used  for  children  aged  <8  years  when  other  treatment
options have been exhausted.§§§ Moxifloxacin is not FDA approved for use in children
aged ≤17years but has been used off label (79). Data on use in neonates and children
aged ≤2 months are extremely limited; however, successful use in neonates has been
reported (Source: Watt KM, Massaro MM, Smith B, Cohen-Wolkowiez M, Benjamin DK Jr,
Laughon MM. Pharmacokinetics of moxifloxacin in an infant with Mycoplasma hominis
meningitis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2012;31:197–9). For children aged 12–17 years weighing
≥45 kg with risk factors for cardiac events, consider 200 mg twice daily to reduce risk
for  QT  prolongation.¶¶¶  Although  no  commercial  liquid  formulation  is  available  for
moxifloxacin, hospitals and compounding retail pharmacies can use a published recipe
to make liquid suspension. Top Abbreviations: IV = intravenous; PO = per os.Note: All
oral  antimicrobials  recommended  in  these  guidelines  can  be  administered  via
alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for
ciprofloxacin.  *Antimicrobials  are  not  listed  in  order  of  preference  within  each
category.† Dual therapy with chloramphenicol plus moxifloxacin or levofloxacin should
be  used  for  initial  treatment  of  patients  with  plague  who  present  with  symptoms  of
meningitis.  If  chloramphenicol  is  not  available,  a  nonfluoroquinolone  first-line  or
alternative antimicrobial for treatment of septicemic plague can be substituted (Table
1).  Recommended  treatment  duration  is  10–14  days.§  For  patients  with  secondary
plague  meningitis,  chloramphenicol  should  be  added  to  the  patient’s  existing
antimicrobial  treatment  regimen  for  plague.  If  chloramphenicol  is  not  available,  or
clinicians would prefer to avoid using this drug in young children because of potential
adverse  effects,  moxifloxacin  or  levofloxacin  can  be  added  to  the  patient’s  existing
treatment  regimen  instead.  After  chloramphenicol,  moxifloxacin,  or  levofloxacin  have
been  added,  the  entire  regimen  of  antimicrobials  the  patient  is  receiving  for  plague
should  be continued  for an  additional  10 days.¶ Not approved  by  the Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA) for treatment of plague. Chloramphenicol has been used off label
for the treatment of naturally occurring plague (17,19,88). Large-scale distribution and
use of these antimicrobials during a bioterrorism response might be under FDA-issued
Emergency Use Authorization.** At the time of publication, these antimicrobials might
not  be  readily  and  consistently  available  in  the  United  States  because  of  limited
production.††  After  clinical  improvement,  chloramphenicol  can  be  reduced  to  a  lower
dose  of  12.5  mg/kg  every  6  hours  in  adults  and  given  orally.  Serum  concentration
monitoring should be performed when available, especially in children (Source: Tunkel
AR, Hartman BJ, Kaplan SL, et al. Practice guidelines for bacterial meningitis. Clin Infect
Dis 2004;39:1267–84). §§ Data on use of fluoroquinolones in infants and young children
are limited. ¶¶ Moxifloxacin is not FDA approved for use in children aged ≤17 years but
has been used off label (79). Data on use in neonates and children aged ≤2 months are
extremely  limited;  however,  successful  use  in  neonates  has  been  reported  (Source:
Watt  KM,  Massaro  MM,  Smith  B,  Cohen-Wolkowiez  M,  Benjamin  DK  Jr,  Laughon  MM.
Pharmacokinetics  of  moxifloxacin  in  an  infant  with  Mycoplasma  hominis  meningitis.
Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2012;31:197–9).  For  children  aged  12–17  years  weighing  ≥45  kg
with risk factors for cardiac events, consider 200 mg twice daily to reduce risk for QT
prolongation.***
 Although
 no
 commercial
 liquid
 formulation
 is
 available
 for
moxifloxacin, hospitals and compounding retail pharmacies can use a published recipe
to  make  a  liquid  suspension.  Top  Abbreviations:  PO  =  per  os.Note:  All  oral
antimicrobials  recommended  in  these  guidelines  can  be  administered  via  alternative
enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for  ciprofloxacin.*
Prophylaxis  with  a  single  antimicrobial  class  is  recommended  for  potentially  exposed
persons following a case of naturally acquired infection or intentional release of Yersinia
pestis,  with  targeting  of  drug  choice  if  engineered  resistance  is  detected  in  the
aftermath of a bioterrorism attack.† Antimicrobials are not listed in order of preference
within each category.§ Pre-exposure prophylaxis can be discontinued 48 hours after the
last  perceived  exposure.  Recommended  duration  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  is  7
days.¶  Not  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  for  treatment  of
plague.  In  some  instances,  these  antimicrobials  have  been  used  off  label  for  the
treatment of naturally occurring plague (17,19,88). Large-scale distribution and use of
these  antimicrobials  during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under  FDA-issued
Emergency  Use  Authorization.**  Additional  fluoroquinolone  alternatives,  such  as
delafloxacin,  also  can  be  considered  depending  on  drug  availability.††  Ofloxacin
suspension for oral liquid administration is not available in the United States.  §§ Data
on use of fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines in infants and young children are limited.
Because  of  the  risk  for  permanent  tooth  discoloration  and  tooth  enamel  hypoplasia,
tetracycline  and  minocycline  should  only  be  used  for  children  aged  <8  years  when
other prophylaxis options have been exhausted.¶¶ Moxifloxacin is not FDA approved for
use  in  children  aged  ≤17  years  but  has  been  used  off  label  (79).  Data  on  use  in
neonates and children aged ≤2  months are extremely limited; however, successful use
in  neonates  has  been  reported  (Source:  Watt  KM,  Massaro  MM,  Smith  B,
Cohen-Wolkowiez M, Benjamin DK Jr, Laughon MM. Pharmacokinetics of moxifloxacin in
an infant with Mycoplasma hominis meningitis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2012;31:197–9). For
children  aged  12–17  years  weighing  ≥45  kg  with  risk  factors  for  cardiac  events,
consider  200  mg  twice  daily  to  reduce  risk  for  QT  prolongation.***  Although  no
commercial liquid formulation is available for moxifloxacin, hospitals and compounding
retail  pharmacies  can  use  a  published  recipe  to  make  liquid  suspension.  Top
Abbreviations:  IM  =  intramuscular;  IV  =  intravenous;  PO  =  per  os.Note:  All  oral
antimicrobials  recommended  in  these  guidelines  can  be  administered  via  alternative
enteral routes (e.g., nasogastric tube and gastric tube) except for ciprofloxacin. * Dual
therapy with distinct classes of antimicrobials is recommended for treatment of plague
in  pregnant  women  caused  by  naturally  acquired  infection  or  intentional  release  of
Yersinia  pestis.†  Antimicrobials  are  not  listed  in  order  of  preference  within  each
category.§
 Recommended
 treatment
 duration
 is
 10–14
 days.
 ¶
 Parenteral
administration is preferred route for all antimicrobials initially, when applicable. ** Not
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of plague. In some
instances, these antimicrobials have been used off label for the treatment of naturally
occurring  plague  (17,19,88).  Large-scale  distribution  and  use  of  these  antimicrobials
during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under  FDA-issued  Emergency  Use
Authorization.††  Additional  fluoroquinolone  alternatives,  such  as  gemifloxacin  and
delafloxacin,  also  can  be  considered  depending  on  drug  availability.§§  At  the  time  of
publication, these antimicrobials might not be readily and consistently available in the
United States because of limited production.¶¶ The lower end of the chloramphenicol
dosing range (12.5 mg/kg every 6 hours) is sufficient for treatment of plague in most
cases.  Severe  infections  might  require  increased  dosing,  but  these  doses  should  be
decreased  as  soon  as  feasible  (Sources:  Chloramphenicol  sodium  succinate  [Package
insert].  Lake  Zurich,  IL:  Fresenius  Kabl,  LLC;  2019.  Chloromycetin  sodium  succinate
[Package
 insert].
 Bristol,
 TN:
 Monarch
 Pharmaceuticals,
 LLC;
 2004).
 Serum
concentration monitoring should be performed when available. Top Abbreviations: PO =
per  os.Note:  All  oral  antimicrobials  recommended  in  these  guidelines  can  be
administered  via  alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)
except for ciprofloxacin. * Prophylaxis with a single antimicrobial class is recommended
for potentially exposed pregnant women following a case of naturally acquired infection
or  intentional  release  of  Yersinia  pestis,  with  targeting  of  drug  choice  if  engineered
resistance is detected in the aftermath of a bioterrorism attack.† Antimicrobials are not
listed  in  order  of  preference  within  each  category.§  Pre-exposure  prophylaxis  can  be
discontinued  48  hours  after  the  last  perceived  exposure.  Recommended  duration  for
postexposure  prophylaxis  is  7  days.¶  Not  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA) for treatment of plague. In some instances, these antimicrobials
have  been  used  off  label  for  the  treatment  of  naturally  occurring  plague  (17,19,88).
Large-scale distribution and use of these antimicrobials during a bioterrorism response
might be under FDA-issued Emergency Use Authorization.** Additional fluoroquinolone
alternatives, such as gemifloxacin and delafloxacin, also can be considered depending
on  drug  availability.††  In  utero  exposure  can  lead  to  permanent  discoloration  of
developing  teeth  in  the  fetus.  This  is  more  likely  to  occur  following  repeated  or
long-term exposure. Top Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; PO = per
os.Note: All oral antimicrobials recommended in these guidelines can be administered
via  alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for
ciprofloxacin. Additional considerations for treatment and postexposure prophylaxis of
neonates, depending on the clinical status of both neonate and mother, are included in
Supplementary  Appendix  2  (https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427).  *  Dual  therapy
with  two  distinct  classes  of  antimicrobials  should  be  used  for  initial  treatment  of
neonates  with  severe  pneumonic  or  septicemic  plague  and  neonates  infected  after
intentional  release  of  Yersinia  pestis.†  Antimicrobials  are  not  listed  in  order  of
preference  within  each  category.§  Recommended  treatment  duration  is  10–14  days.¶
Not  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  for  treatment  of  plague.  In
some  instances,  these  antimicrobials  have  been  used  off  label  for  the  treatment  of
naturally  occurring  plague  (17,19,88).  Large-scale  distribution  and  use  of  these
antimicrobials  during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under  FDA-issued  Emergency
Use Authorization.** Data on use of fluoroquinolones and doxycycline in neonates are
extremely  limited;  however,  successful  use  of  these  antimicrobials  in  neonates  has
been  reported  (Sources:  Kaguelidou  F,  Turner  MA,  Choonara  I,  Jacqz-Aigrain  E.
Ciprofloxacin  Use  in  Neonates.  Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2011;30:e29–e37.  Newby  BD,
Timberlake KE, Lepp LM, Mihic T, Dersch-Mills DA. Levofloxacin use in the neonate: A
case series. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2017;22:304–13. Forti G, Benincori C. Doxycycline
and the teeth. Lancet 1969;1:782). †† At the time of publication, these antimicrobials
might not be readily and consistently available in the United States because of limited
production.§§ The IV formulation of streptomycin is not approved by the FDA; however,
the  IM  formulation  of  streptomycin  has  been  given  intravenously  as  an  off-label  use
(Sources:  Morris  JT,  Cooper  RH.  Intravenous  streptomycin:  a  useful  route  of
administration.  Clin  Infect  Dis  1994;19:1150–1.  Pérez  Tanoira  R,  Sánchez-Patán  F,
Jiménez  Girón  A.  et  al.  Tolerance  and  safety  of  intravenous  streptomycin  therapy  in
patients  with  tuberculosis.  Infection  2014;42:597–8).¶¶  Sources:  Chloramphenicol
sodium  succinate  [Package  insert].  Lake  Zurich,  IL:  Fresenius  Kabl,  LLC;  2019.
Chloromycetin
 sodium
 succinate
 [Package
 insert].
 Bristol,
 TN:
 Monarch
Pharmaceuticals,  LLC;  2004.  Serum  concentration  monitoring  should  be  performed
when available. Top Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous.Note: All oral
antimicrobials  recommended  in  these  guidelines  can  be  administered  via  alternative
enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for  ciprofloxacin.
Additional  considerations  for  treatment  and  postexposure  prophylaxis  of  neonates,
depending  on  the  clinical  status  of  both  neonate  and  mother,  are  included  in
Supplementary  Appendix  2  (https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427).  *  Dual  therapy
with  two  distinct  classes  of  antimicrobials  should  be  used  for  initial  treatment  of
neonates  infected  after  intentional  release  of  Yersinia  pestis.  †  Antimicrobials  are  not
listed in order of preference within each category.§ Recommended treatment duration
is 10–14 days.¶ Not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment
of  plague.  In  some  instances,  these  antimicrobials  have  been  used  off  label  for  the
treatment of naturally occurring plague (17,19,88). Large-scale distribution and use of
these  antimicrobials  during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under  FDA-issued
Emergency  Use  Authorization.**  Data  on  use  of  fluoroquinolones  and  doxycycline  in
neonates  are  extremely  limited;  however,  successful  use  of  these  antimicrobials  in
neonates  has  been  reported  (Sources:  Kaguelidou  F,  Turner  MA,  Choonara  I,
Jacqz-Aigrain  E.  Ciprofloxacin  use  in  neonates.  Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2011;30:e29–e37.
Newby BD, Timberlake KE, Lepp LM, Mihic T, Dersch-Mills DA. Levofloxacin Use in the
Neonate: A case series. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2017;22:304–13. Forti G, Benincori C.
Doxycycline  and  the  teeth.  Lancet  1969;1:782).  ††  At  the  time  of  publication,  these
antimicrobials  might  not  be  readily  and  consistently  available  in  the  United  States
because of limited production.§§ The IV formulation of streptomycin is not approved by
FDA; however, the IM formulation of streptomycin has been given intravenously as an
off-label use (Sources: Morris JT, Cooper RH. Intravenous streptomycin: a useful route of
administration.  Clin  Infect  Dis  1994;19:1150–1.  Pérez  Tanoira  R,  Sánchez-Patán  F,
Jiménez  Girón  A.  et  al.  Tolerance  and  safety  of  intravenous  streptomycin  therapy  in
patients  with  tuberculosis.  Infection  2014;42:597–8).¶¶  Sources:  Chloramphenicol
sodium  succinate  [Package  insert].  Lake  Zurich,  IL:  Fresenius  Kabl,  LLC;  2019.
Chloromycetin
 sodium
 succinate
 [Package
 insert].
 Bristol,
 TN:
 Monarch
Pharmaceuticals,  LLC;  2004.  Serum  concentration  monitoring  should  be  performed
when  available.  Top  Abbreviations:  IM  =  intramuscular;  IV  =  intravenous;  PO  =  per
os.Note: All oral antimicrobials recommended in these guidelines can be administered
via  alternative  enteral  routes  (e.g.,  nasogastric  tube  and  gastric  tube)  except  for
ciprofloxacin. Additional considerations for treatment and postexposure prophylaxis of
neonates, depending on the clinical status of both neonate and mother, are included in
Supplementary  Appendix  2  (https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/107427).*  Antimicrobials
are  not  listed  in  order  of  preference  within  each  category.†  Postexposure  prophylaxis
with  a  single  antimicrobial  agent  is  recommended  for  potentially  exposed  neonates
following a case of naturally acquired infection or  intentional release of Yersinia Pestis,
with targeting of drug of choice if engineered resistance is detected in the aftermath of
a  bioterrorism  attack.  Postexposure  prophylaxis  should  be  given  to  neonates  orally
when possible, unless the neonate is hospitalized and has existing intravenous access.
For neonates with highly concerning exposure to Y. pestis who cannot take medications
orally,  IV  or  IM  formulations  of  the  drugs  listed  in  this  table  can  be  given.§
Recommended  postexposure  prophylaxis  duration  is  7  days.¶  Data  on  use  of
fluoroquinolones  and  doxycycline  in  neonates  are  extremely  limited;  however,
successful  use  of  these  antimicrobials  in  neonates  has  been  reported  (Sources:
Kaguelidou  F,  Turner  MA,  Choonara  I,  Jacqz-Aigrain  E.  Ciprofloxacin  use  in  neonates.
Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2011;30:e29–e37.  Newby  BD,  Timberlake  KE,  Lepp  LM,  Mihic  T,
Dersch-Mills  DA.  Levofloxacin  Use  in  the  Neonate:  A  case  series.  J  Pediatr  Pharmacol
Ther  2017;22:304–13.  Forti  G,  Benincori  C.  Doxycycline  and  the  teeth.  Lancet
1969;1:782).  **  Not  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  for
prophylaxis of plague. In some instances, these antimicrobials have been used off label
for  the  prophylaxis  of  naturally  occurring  plague  (17,19,88).  Large-scale  distribution
and  use  of  these  antimicrobials  during  a  bioterrorism  response  might  be  under
FDA-issued  Emergency  Use  Authorization.††  Ofloxacin  suspension  for  oral  liquid
administration  is  not  available  in  the  United  States.  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this
article: Nelson CA, Meaney-Delman D, Fleck-Derderian S, Cooley KM, Yu PA, Mead PS.
Antimicrobial  Treatment  and  Prophylaxis  of  Plague:  Recommendations  for  Naturally
Acquired  Infections  and  Bioterrorism  Response.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2021;70(No.
RR-3):1–27. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7003a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/rr/rr7003a1.htm
