Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Antibiotic  resistance  is  a  major  global  public  health  threat.
Illnesses that were once easily treatable with antibiotics* are becoming more difficult to
cure and more expensive to treat. Infections from common antibiotic-resistant bacteria,
such  as  Salmonella,  can  cause  more  severe  health  outcomes  than  infections  with
bacteria that are not resistant to antibiotics. NARMS scientists track and study changes
in  antibiotic  resistance  among  several  bacteria,  such  as  those  transmitted  commonly
through  food,  water,  animal  contact,  person-to-person  contact,  and  environmental
contamination.  NARMS  data  increase  our  understanding  of  NARMS  data  are  used  to
help  guide  efforts  to  prevent  and  reduce  the  spread  of  resistance  and  resistant
bacteria.  Organizations  and  groups  using  NARMS  data  include  federal  regulatory
agencies, policymakers, consumer advocacy groups, health departments, industry, and
the public. *This site uses the term “antibiotics” to refer to antimicrobial agents used to
treat  bacterial  infections  in  both  people  and  animals.  Antibiotic  resistance  is  when
bacteria (germs) are able to survive or grow despite the use of an antibiotic that was
previously able to stop them. Learn more > Food animals can carry bacteria, such as
Salmonella  and  Campylobacter,  that  can  make  people  ill.  When  animals  are  given
antibiotics, resistant bacteria in their intestines can continue to survive and grow. What
are some ways these bacteria can get into the food supply? Resistant bacteria that food
animals  carry  can  get  into  a  variety  of  foods.  Meat  and  poultry  can  become
contaminated when the animals are slaughtered and processed. Fruits and vegetables
can become contaminated when resistant bacteria from animal feces (poop) spreads to
them through the environment, such as through irrigation water or fertilizers. What are
some ways people get infected with resistant bacteria from food animals?  People can
get  infected  with  these  bacteria  in  several  ways,  including  What  effects  do  resistant
infections have on people? Some resistant infections cause severe illness. People with
these infections may Antibiotics must be used responsibly in both people and animals
to  help  prevent  the  development,  persistence,  and  spread  of  resistant  bacteria.
Antibiotics are valuable tools for reducing animal disease and suffering from bacterial
infections, but decisions about which antibiotics to use in food animals and how to use
them  must  also  be  made  with  consideration  of  human  health  and  the  environmental
impact. What are the approved uses for antibiotics in food animals? FDA has approved
antibiotics  for  these  uses  in  food  animals:  Preventing  foodborne  and  other
gastrointestinal  illnesses  reduces  both  antibiotic-susceptible  and  antibiotic-resistant
infections.  CDC  activities  that  help  prevent  these  infections  include:  Tracking
Resistance Identifying Sources of Infection Improving Food Safety CDC estimates that
U.S. doctors’ offices and emergency departments prescribe about 47 million antibiotic
courses  each  year  for  infections  that  don’t  need  antibiotics.  That’s  about  30%  of  all
antibiotics  prescribed  in  these  settings.  Visit  CDC’s  Be  Antibiotics  Aware  website  to
learn  how  improving  antibiotic  use  in  hospitals  can  reduce  rates  of  infection  and
antibiotic  resistance,  improve  patient  outcomes,  and  save  hundreds  of  thousands  of
dollars.  Find  out  what  CDC  is  doing  to  detect,  respond  to,  and  prevent  the  spread  of
antibiotic-resistant  germs  and  infections  through  the  Antibiotic  Resistance  Solutions
Initiative.  You  can  reduce  the  chance  of  getting  a  resistant  bacterial  infection  by
following  some  easy  recommendations  for  safe  food  handling  and  preparation.  Learn
more about antibiotic resistance and food safety. NARMS Isolate Submission Login
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/narms/faq.html
