A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. In July 2024, CDC published a fact sheet
using
 new
 dataA
 to
 update
 the
 U.S.
 burden
 of
 the
 following
 seven
antimicrobial-resistant pathogens typically found in healthcare settings: CDC previously
reported  that  the  burden  of  these  pathogens  increased  in  the  U.S.  in  2020  in  the
COVID-19 Impact Report. The new data describe the burden in the two following years,
2021  and  2022,  and  compares  against  2019  data.  The  new  dataA  show  that  six
bacterial  antimicrobial-resistant  hospital-onset  infectionsB  increased  by  a  combined
20% during the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the pre-pandemic period, peaking in
2021, and remaining above pre-pandemic levels in 2022. In 2022, rates for all but one
of  these  pathogens  (MRSA)  remained  above  pre-pandemic  levels.  In  addition,  the
number  of  reported  clinical  cases  of  C.  auris—a  type  of  yeast  that  can  spread  in
healthcare facilities, is often resistant to antifungal medications, and can cause severe
illness—increased  nearly  five-fold  from  2019  to  2022.   The  increases  in  antimicrobial
resistance (AR) burden seen in 2020 and 2021 are likely due in part to the impact of
COVID-19,  which  pushed  healthcare  facilities,  health  departments  and  communities
near  their  breaking  points.  The  pandemic  resulted  in  longer  hospital  stays  for
hospitalized  patients  (including  those  diagnosed  with  COVID-19),  challenged  the
implementation
 of
 infection
 prevention
 and
 control
 practices
 and
 increased
inappropriate  antibiotic  use.   As  the  pandemic  continued,  healthcare  providers  and
public  health  professionals  took  aggressive  action  to  prevent  infections  and  protect
lives, helping to reduce the burden of AR from its 2021 peak. CDC supported many of
these  efforts  through  American  Rescue  Plan  Act  (ARP)  funding  to  health-department
Healthcare-Associated  Infections  and  Antimicrobial  Resistance  (HAI/AR)  Programs  and
CDC’s Antimicrobial Resistance Laboratory Network (AR Lab Network) in all U.S. states,
as well as some large cities and territories. In the first year of work supported by ARP
funding, health departments invested in proven strategies and initiatives including: In
2021 and 2022, CDC’s AR Lab Network tested more than 230,000 patient samples for
detection and characterization of antimicrobial-resistant organisms. This testing helped
inform  efforts  to  stop  spread  and  protect  patients.  CDC's  previous  antimicrobial
resistance  threats  reports,  published  in  2013  and  2019,  were  important  resources  to
guide U.S. policy for and investments in combating antimicrobial resistance.  Starting in
2025, CDC will release estimates for at least 19 antimicrobial resistance threats and an
update on the U.S. burden of antimicrobial resistance, by pathogen, in a new electronic
format.  Going forward, CDC will release new estimates for the burden of these threats
at  least  every  two  years.  Data  are  critical  to  guide  efforts  to  combat  antimicrobial
resistance, and CDC is committed to providing the high-quality data required to steer
this  important  work.  Antimicrobial  resistance  happens  when  germs  like  bacteria  and
fungi  can  defeat  the  drugs  designed  to  kill  them.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance/data-research/threats/update-2022.html
