A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. The following information is a summary of
testing  offered  through  the  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Laboratory  Network  (AR  Lab
Network), including:  Core testing performed by seven regional labs:  Additional testing
performed  by  select  regional  labs:   CPOs  are  types  of  bacteria  that  produce  a
genetically  coded  an  enzyme  called  carbapenemase.  Carbapenemases  allow  these
bacteria  to  resist  the  effects  of  carbapenems  and  other  β-lactam  antibiotics.
Carbapenems are among the few remaining antibiotics that can treat ESBL-producing
bacteria, but resistance is on the rise. Detecting patients who are colonized with CPOs
or have an infection caused by a CPO helps prevent spread within and among facilities.
The  AR  Lab  Network  screens  for  the  following  CPOs:  Aspergillus  fumigatus,  a  fungus
found in the environment, can cause serious illness in people with weakened immune
systems.  This  fungus  can  develop  resistance  to  azoles  during  long-term  treatment  of
infected  patients  or  when  it  is  exposed  to  azole  fungicides  used  in  the  environment.
Infections  have  been  identified  in  the  U.S.,  increasing  the  need  for  awareness  and
action by clinical and public health professionals. The AR Lab Network tests for azole
resistance in A. fumigatus to monitor and track the emergence of azole resistance in the
U.S. Candida is one of the most common causes of healthcare-associated bloodstream
infections  in  the  U.S.,  and  antifungal  resistance  in  Candida  is  increasing.  New  and
emerging species, like C. auris, can spread in healthcare settings and cause outbreaks.
C. difficile causes severe diarrhea and colitis (an inflammation of the colon), which can
be life-threatening. Most cases of infection occur in people taking antibiotics or those
who have recently finished taking antibiotics. When antibiotics are newly approved for
use, it can take years before susceptibility tests for these antibiotics are made available
in  clinical  labs.  CDC's  AR  Lab  Network  provides  testing  for  isolates  of  highly-resistant
Enterobacterales  that  carry  MBLs,  which  can  help  guide  clinical  decision  making  for
highly-resistant isolates. MBLs make bacteria resistant to a broad range of antibiotics,
including carbapenems, which are often used to treat antimicrobial-resistant infections. 
Gonorrhea  has  progressively  developed  antimicrobial  resistance  to  the  drugs
recommended  to  treat  it.  CDC's  AR  Lab  Network  offers  testing  to  assist  in  care  of
patients
 with
 potentially
 drug-resistant
 gonorrhea.
 Streptococcus
 pneumoniae
(pneumococcus) is a leading cause of bacterial pneumonia and meningitis in the U.S. It
also is a common cause of bloodstream infections, and ear and sinus infections. When
labs submit pneumococcus isolates for testing, serotype results can aid clinical practice
to evaluate for vaccine failure, immune deficiency and outbreak identification. Clinical
isolates  are  also  vitally  important  to  public  health  programs  that  monitor  changes  in
circulating  serotypes  and  antimicrobial  resistance.  M.  tuberculosis,  most  known  as
Tuberculosis  (TB),  is  a  disease  caused  by  bacteria  that  are  spread  from  person  to
person  through  the  air.  It  is  a  common  infectious  disease  found  worldwide  and  can
cause death if not treated. TB can be resistant to more than one antibiotic used to treat
it.  The National Tuberculosis Molecular Surveillance Center provides testing to identify
TB  strains,  free  of  charge.  Any  authorized  medical  or  laboratory  professionals  can
submit samples and in consultation/awareness of their state health department or local
authorities  per  institutional  policies.  Visit  the  TB  laboratory  information  page  for
necessary submission forms.  Salmonella bacteria can spread from animals to people
through food. Antimicrobial resistance to Salmonella is increasing. Salmonella testing is
supported  through  PulseNet.   CDC  offers  free  resources  and  tools  for  laboratory
scientists  to  help  combat  antimicrobial  resistance.  Email  CDC  at  ARLN@cdc.gov  for
more information about the AR Lab Network. CDC’s Antimicrobial Resistance Laboratory
Networks  support  domestic  and  global  lab  testing  across  One  Health.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance-laboratory-networks/php/about/testing-services.html
