A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Through  these  investments,  CDC  is
transforming how the nation and world combat antimicrobial resistance. For example,
CDC  is:  Visit  the  AR  Investment  Map  The  map  currently  shows  fiscal  year  2023
extramural funds that support CDC's antimicrobial resistance activities. CDC distributed
the  largest  extramural  portion  of  funding  to  support  all  50  state  health  departments,
several local health departments, and Puerto Rico, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
The map also includes fact sheets highlighting CDC's innovation work with partners to
combat antimicrobial resistance. The information is updated yearly. CDC's investments
in  innovation  to  combat  AR  since  2016  include:  CDC  supports  innovations  and
collaborations  with  investigators  to  identify  and  implement  new  ways  to  prevent
antimicrobial-resistant infections and their spread. CDC supports innovative research to
slow antimicrobial resistance through various funding mechanisms. In fiscal years 2016
through  2023,  CDC  awarded  more  than  $52  million  through  Broad  Agency
Announcements  to  fight  antimicrobial  resistance.  CDC  funds  awardees  through  a
competitive  selection  process  based  on  scientific  needs  and  funds  available  and  the
awardees are typically announced each fall. The projects complement additional CDC
antimicrobial  resistance  investments,  collectively  known  as  CDC's  AR  Solutions
Initiative.  Through  these  investments,  CDC  is  transforming  how  the  nation  combats
antimicrobial  resistance  at  all  levels.   Development  and  Application  of  a  National
Pediatric Sepsis Event Surveillance Definition In this project, investigators will leverage
their  earlier  experiences  in  developing  and  applying  a  national  approach  to  sepsis
surveillance  in  adults,  as  well  as  preliminary  work  developing  pediatric  sepsis
surveillance  definitions  at  the  Children's  Hospital  of  Philadelphia,  to  develop  and
validate  an  optimized  pediatric  surveillance  definition  and  then  apply  it  to  electronic
health  record  data  from  hundreds  of  U.S.  hospitals  to  estimate  total  annual  pediatric
sepsis cases and deaths in infants and children who are more than 30 days old. They
will also develop a toolkit that hospitals can use to implement this definition to track
sepsis cases in children.  This work builds on the research priorities identified in 2019
by a CDC-convened group of pediatric sepsis experts and will be led by investigators at
Harvard  Medical  School  /  Harvard  Pilgrim  Health  Care  Institute  and  the  Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia. The project team will partner with the Society for Critical Care
Medicine Pediatric Sepsis Definition Task Force and include collaborators from Nemours
Children's  Hospital,  HCA  Healthcare,  the  Clinical  Center  at  the  National  Institutes  of
Health,  the  University  of  Colorado,  and  Lurie  Children's  Hospital  of  Chicago.
Development of a curated, international, antibiotic-resistant gonorrhea specimen bank
Researchers  will  establish  a  CDC  International  Antibiotic-Resistant  Gonorrhea  Isolate
Bank,  which  will  include  a  diverse  set  of  Neisseria  gonorrhoeae  strains  based  on
geography,  genomics,  and  antibiotic  susceptibility  profiles.  Gonorrhea  is  a  common
sexually  transmitted  disease  that  can  spread  easily.  N.  gonorrhoeae  has  quickly
developed  resistance  to  each  recommended  treatment  over  time  and  gonorrhea  is
classified as an Urgent Threat in CDC's 2019 Antibiotic Resistance Threats Report. The
CDC
 International
 Antibiotic-Resistant
 Gonorrhea
 Isolate
 Bank
 will
 provide
complementary  data  to  CDC's  domestic  specimens  available  through  the  Antibiotic
Resistance  Laboratory  Network.  These  data  will  help  experts  understand  the
emergence
 and
 spread
 of
 antibiotic-resistant
 gonorrhea
 domestically
 and
internationally  and  will  be  valuable  in  the  development  of  treatment  regimens,
therapeutics,  diagnostics,  and  prevention  activities  needed  to  combat  this  threat.
Improving prevention, detection, and response to antibiotic resistant bacteria in Kenyan
hospitals  ICAP  at  Columbia  University  is  being  funded  to  develop  a  network  of  four
hospitals  in  Kenya  to  improve  their  ability  to  detect  bacterial  infections,  determine
antibiotic  resistance  in  the  infections,  assess  antibiotic  use  and  the  prevalence  of
healthcare-acquired  infections,  and  develop  an  antibiotic  stewardship  collaborative  to
improve  the  use  of  antimicrobials  at  the  hospitals.  These  activities  are  based  on
principles  of  quality  improvement  and  use  a  variety  of  methods  including  laboratory
evaluation, mentorship, and point prevalence surveys. ICAP will also support capacity of
the  National  Public  Health  Laboratory  in  Kenya  to  detect  and  test  for  antimicrobial
resistance.  Current  state  of  infection  prevention  and  control  (IPC)  programs  in  Latin
American  hospitals  Researchers  will  assess  how  national  and  healthcare  facility  IPC
policies  and  guidelines  are  being  adopted  and  implemented  in  hospitals  across
Guatemala,  Panama,  Ecuador,  and  Argentina.  Latin  American  countries  are  facing  a
high  burden  of  healthcare-associated  and  antibiotic-resistant  infections.  Findings  will
inform  the  development  of  a  toolkit  that  other  countries  or  facilities  facing  similar
challenges can use to improve their IPC efforts and reduce the spread of infections. This
research  will  build  upon  the  latest  knowledge  by  assessing  current  IPC  practices,
evaluating  the  healthcare  worker  perspective  on  IPC,  and  identifying  challenges  to
implementing  effective  IPC  in  Latin  American  hospitals.  Assessing  Antibiotic
Stewardship  Practices  in  Non-US  Healthcare  Settings  to  Guide  Implementation  Efforts
Investigators  will  develop  a  context-specific  healthcare  facility  assessment  tool  to
evaluate current antibiotic stewardship practices and needs across multiple institutions
in various countries and regions globally. They will also perform qualitative interviews
with key stakeholders to understand factors associated with successes and challenges
in implementing antibiotic stewardship programs. Each of the three investigator groups,
in  collaboration  with  their  partners  and  stakeholders,  will  focus  on  a  different  global
region: Johns Hopkins University will work with partners in Latin America (Guatemala,
Colombia, Panama, Ecuador and Argentina), University of Oxford and Duke University
consultants will work with partners in South and South East Asia (Vietnam, Indonesia,
Nepal  and  Thailand),  and  University  of  Pennsylvania  will  work  with  partners  in
Southeast Africa (Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe). This project will identify gaps
in  antibiotic  stewardship  programs  and  determine  context-specific  factors  associated
with  successful  implementation  of  these  programs  to  improve  antibiotic  use  globally.
Latin American A. fumigatus Azole Resistance Survey in 12 countries, 20 laboratories
Researchers will conduct a survey of azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus throughout
Latin  America  using  the  existing  Latin  American  Medical  Mycology  Network  (LAMMN).
This survey will include air sampling using a citizen science approach—the involvement
of  the  public  in  scientific  research—with  20  coordinating  LAMMN  laboratories  sending
out and receiving specimen plates from the public. Researchers will isolate A. fumigatus
and  screen  for  resistance.  The  extent  of  resistance  that  is  uncovered  will  help  guide
treatment and appropriate prevention measures. The genetic background of resistant
strains  will  be  determined  and  will  help  establish  how  resistance  is  spread.  This
information  will  build  the  basis  of  early  and  appropriate  interventions  to  improve
patient  outcomes,  reduce  death,  and  lower  health  care  costs,  which  are  of  special
concern in countries with limited resources. Regional and global risk estimates for the
emergence  and  persistence  of  MDR  and  XDR  strains  of  enterobacterial  human
pathogens  Researchers  will  determine  the  mobile  genetic  elements  involved  in  the
emergence of multi-drug resistant (MDR) Shigella sonnei and extensively drug-resistant
(XDR) Salmonella Typhi. They will also look at the risk of spread for relevant antibiotic
resistance genes. Researchers aim to develop bioinformatic pipelines (technology that
helps store, analyze, and share biological data). This work will help understand when
and where drug-resistant bacteria that are harmful to human health might emerge in
the  future.  This  study  builds  upon  work  supported  by  a  previous  BAA.  Assessing
Antibiotic Stewardship Practices in Non-US Healthcare Settings to Guide Implementation
Efforts Collaborative project among Johns Hopkins University, University of Oxford with
Duke  University  consultants,  and  University  of  Pennsylvania.  See  description  under
Johns Hopkins University. Investigating prevalence of multidrug resistance in Botswana
–  assessing  relatedness  using  whole  genome  sequencing  (IMPALA-TWO)  Researchers
will add to their work from a previous BAA award on multidrug-resistant Gram-negative
extended-spectrum
 cephalosporin-resistant
 Enterobacterales
 (ESCrE)
 and
carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  (CRE)  to  determine  the  genetic  diversity  of
ESCrE and CRE in three regions of Botswana. Researchers will perform whole-genome
sequencing on ESCrE and CRE isolates in order to describe the genetic mechanisms of
resistance  and  evaluate  relatedness  between  organisms.  This  study  allows  continued
research  to  understand  and  compare  colonization  of  ESCrE  and  CRE  and  lay  the
groundwork  for  the  development  of  test  strategies  to  decrease  these  drug-resistant
bacteria in the area, and possibly globally. Assessing Antibiotic Stewardship Practices in
Non-US  Healthcare  Settings  to  Guide  Implementation  Efforts  Collaborative  project
among Johns Hopkins University, University of Oxford with Duke University consultants,
and  University  of  Pennsylvania.  See  description  under  Johns  Hopkins  University.
Understanding  co-infection  with  multidrug-resistant  organisms  among  hospitalized
patients  with  COVID-19  in  U.S.  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  (VA)  hospitals
Researchers will develop a better understanding of the relationship between COVID-19
and  antibiotic  resistance  among  hospitalized  patients  to  inform  future  care  plans  for
patients.
 Researchers
 will
 focus
 on
 and
 identify:
 Carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacterales  surveillance  in  two  intensive  care  units  in  India  Globally,  CRE  is
associated  with  a  high  death  rate.  In  low-  and  middle-income  countries,  there  are
barriers in healthcare access, diagnostic testing, and treatment options, which lead to
negative health outcomes for patients with CRE infections. In India, CRE is commonly
found  in  healthcare  facilities,  but  it  is  resource-intensive  for  healthcare  facilities  to
monitor this threat. Researchers aim to find effective, feasible and sustainable way to
implement  screening  for  carbapenem-resistant  Enterbacterales  (CRE)  in  hospital
systems in low- and middle-income countries where resources are limited. This research
is important because creating a robust way to screen for CRE in low- and middle-income
countries  will  provide  data  needed  to  inform  infection  prevention  efforts  and  help
healthcare  facilities  reduce  death  rates  caused  by  CRE  infections.  Interrogating  the
phylogenomics  and  mobilome  of  colonizing  multidrug-resistant  organisms  (MDROs)  in
hospitalized patients and community-dwellers in Pakistan In this study, researchers will
collect  fecal  waste  (poop)  samples  and  nostril  and  armpit  swabs  from  seriously  ill
patients  in  hospitals  in  Pakistan.  They  will  also  collect  samples  from  non-hospitalized
people  who  live  in  the  patient's  home.  Researchers  will  compare  MDROs—including
carbapenem-resistant
 Enterobacterales
 (CRE),
 extended-spectrum
 β-lactamase
(ESBL)-producing Enterobacterales, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA),
and  vancomycin-resistant  Enterococcus  (VRE)—to  determine  if  there  is  a  connection
between the germs in patients and the germs found in household members. MDROs are
often found in healthcare settings (e.g., surfaces and hospital plumbing systems), but it
is  not  known  if  there  is  a  link  between  these  healthcare  MDROs  and  MDROs  in  the
community. By comparing the genetic relatedness of hospital MDROs with community
MDROs,  researchers  will  determine  the  inter-connectedness  of  spread  between
healthcare  facilities  and  the  community.  This  information  is  critical  to  direct  and
improve  infection  prevention  strategies  in  the  region  to  prevent  spread.   Integrated
Food  Safety  Centers  of  Excellence  One  Health  and  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Projects
CDC-designated  Food  Safety  Centers  of  Excellence  will  lead  collaborative  One  Health
projects  across  states  to  explore  antibiotic  stewardship  (improving  antibiotic  use),
animal  health,  and  animal  ownership  and  their  impact  on  antibiotic-resistant  enteric
(gut)  infections  in  humans.  These  efforts  will  guide  the  development  of  educational
interventions and materials for animal owners, caretakers, and veterinarians to prevent
the spread of infections. Projects include: Effective treatments for chronic polymicrobial
infections:  Drug,  dose  &  duration  Researchers  will  use  experimental  model  systems
based  on  lungs  that  are  infected  by  cystic  fibrosis  (CF)  to  test  the  effects  of  certain
antibiotic drugs and their dosage and duration on antibiotic resistance (AR). People with
CF suffer from life-long lung infections. Sometimes these infections can be caused by
antibiotic-resistant germs, which are difficult to treat. Findings from this study will help
inform  clinical  decisions  that  balance  CF  treatment  benefits  with  the  risks  of
contributing  to  AR.  This  project  builds  on  similar  work  Georgia  Tech  accomplished  in
2017. Read about some of the first project's outcomes. Multicenter Impact of COVID-19
on  Secondary  Infections  and  Incidence  of  Hospital-onset  Antimicrobial-Resistant  (AR)
and Fungal Organisms Researchers will describe the epidemiology and risk factors for
secondary  bacterial  or  fungal  co-infections,  and  the  subset  associated  with  resistant
organisms, in COVID-19 patients in intensive care units at three health systems in the
Chicago  area.  These  data  will  enhance  current  understanding  of  risk  factors  for
secondary co-infections in COVID-19 patients as well as determine drivers of AR among
these  infections  to  support  disease  control  and  prevention  strategies.  introduction  of
antimicrobial  resistant  Salmonella  species  and  bacterial  reservoirs  of  transmissible
antibiotic resistance genes into food animal populations through livestock and poultry
feed,  pet  food  and  treats  Researchers  will  examine  livestock  and  poultry  feed
components,  and  pet  treats  of  animal  origin  (e.g.,  pig  ears)  for  potential  presence  of
Salmonella species and other bacteria with antibiotic resistance genes. Researchers will
compare  any  identified  contamination  of  imported  and  domestically  produced  feed
components and pet treats. Based on the study results, researchers will create livestock
feed and pet treat biosecurity recommendations for specific imported and domestically
produced feed components intended to prevent the introduction of Salmonella species
and  other  bacteria  with  antibiotic  resistance  genes.  Determining  the  Incidence  of
Secondary Aspergillus Infections in Influenza positive patients Researchers will establish
a  facility-level  surveillance  system  for  influenza-associated  invasive  pulmonary
aspergillosis  (IAPA),  a  concerning  infection  that  can  be  caused  by  multidrug-resistant
Aspergillus.  This  system  will  track  laboratory  and  clinical  data  from  patient  medical
charts. Analysis will determine the incidence of IAPA and other invasive mold infections
among patients with influenza, and the associated patient characteristics, risk factors,
and  clinical  outcomes.  These  infections  are  often  reported  as  secondary  infections  in
patients with influenza but little is known about them. Prevalence of and risk factors for
community-associated antibiotic-resistant Enterobacterales and genes Researchers will
identify generally healthy people (no inpatient healthcare stay in previous year and no
current  antibiotic  use)  in  a  community  to  measure  how  commonly  they  carry  certain
germs in their gut and the risk factors that may have exposed them to those germs.
Healthy  people  can  carry  antibiotic-resistant  germs  in  their  gut  without  being  ill,  but
these  germs  can  also  cause  serious  infections  in  some  circumstances  or  spread  to
others who are more vulnerable to serious infection. Researchers will ask participants to
answer questions about a wide variety of possible exposures and collect stool samples
to  identify  resistant  bacteria.  They  will  determine  the  full  profile  of  all  antibiotic
resistance genes present in the stool samples and compare them to genes observed in
healthcare,
 agricultural,
 and
 environmental
 settings.
 The
 germs
 include
extended-spectrum
 beta-lactamase
 (ESBL)-producing
 Enterobacterales,
carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  (CRE),  and  antibiotic-resistant  Escherichia  coli
(E.  coli).  Researchers  will  evaluate  risk  factors  including  use  of  antibiotics  and  other
prescription pharmaceuticals, age, housing, water source, lifestyle factors (e.g., travel,
companion  animals),  bacteria  spread  within  households,  and  diet.  Evaluating  the
targeted  use  of  gown  and  gloves  to  prevent  transmission  of  pathogens,  including
antibiotic-resistant organisms, within ventilator units in nursing homes Researchers will
test  the  feasibility  and  impact  of  a  new  gown  and  glove  strategy  for  healthcare
providers in two nursing homes in Maryland to help prevent residents in ventilator units
from
 getting
 Staphylococcus
 aureus,
 including
 both
 methicillin-resistant
 and
methicillin-susceptible  S.  aureus  (MRSA/MSSA),  and  carbapenem-resistant  Gram
negative
 bacteria,
 including
 Enterobacterales,
 Pseudomonas
 aeruginosa,
 and
Acinetobacter  species.  Residents  in  ventilator  units  are  at  a  higher  risk  of  getting
infections, including those caused by antibiotic-resistant germs. Healthcare workers in
nursing  homes  care  for  many  residents  across  different  areas  of  the  facility  and  can
spread germs from resident to resident, including high-risk residents within ventilator
units,  if  not  using  personal  protective  equipment  consistently  and  correctly  and  not
cleaning  their  hands.  This  pilot  study  will  help  determine  if  a  new  gown  and  glove
strategy  can  help  prevent  spread  of  germs.  Secondary  Infections  and  Antibiotic
Resistance in Post-acute Care Patients with Recent COVID-19 Infection Researchers will
determine  the  epidemiology  and  outcomes  associated  with  COVID-19  infection
encountered in the post-acute care setting. The focus will be on secondary infections,
colonization  (germs  are  present  but  no  signs  of  infection),  or  infection  with
multidrug-resistant  germs.  Researchers  will  assess  risk  factors  among  patients  with
recent COVID-19 infection admitted to a long-term acute care hospital. This work will
help  answer  questions  regarding  the  long-term  infectious  outcomes  associated  with
COVID-19.  Clinical  and  molecular  determinants  of  transmission  of  extended-spectrum
beta-lactamase  (ESBLs)  in  the  community  Researchers  will  study  people  with  ESBL
infections in the community to determine how often the germs spread within household
settings  and  possible  reasons  for  spread.  Patients  included  in  this  study  will  have
previously tested positive for an ESBL-producing Escherichia coli or Klebsiella species
during a recent visit to an emergency department or outpatient practice. Researchers
will evaluate the entire household over a two-month period starting as soon as possible
after the patient is identified. They will collect stool samples from household members
and pets and swab samples of common touch sites around the household. Other data
collected  will  include:  Examining  the  relationship  between  SARS-CoV-2  and  antibiotic
resistance  genes  within  municipal  sewage  treatment  facilities  and  the  possible
transmission to their employees Researchers will examine wastewater treatment plant
(WWTP)  systems  to  monitor  for  the  presence  of  SARS-CoV-2  (the  virus  that  causes
COVID-19)  and  antibiotic  resistance  to  better  understand  community  spread  of
COVID-19 and antibiotic resistance. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in increased
antibiotic prescribing to prevent and treat secondary bacterial infections, which could
drive significant changes in antibiotic resistance. WWTP systems have been identified
as  critical  hubs  for  antibiotic  resistance  and  may  expose  treatment  plant  workers  to
pathogens (germs). The results of the study will help CDC evaluate the performance of
existing  AR  monitoring  systems,  inform  guidance  to  protect  utility  workers,  and
establish a foundation for using municipal sewage as an indicator of community-wide
viral  infection  burden.  Evaluation  of  risk  factors  for  the  development  of  secondary
bacterial and fungal co-infections, including antibiotic-resistant organisms, in COVID-19
patients in a regional healthcare system Researchers will describe the epidemiology of
secondary resistant bacterial and fungal infections in hospitalized patients before and
during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  across  socio-demographically  diverse  hospitals  in  the
St. Louis area. The main objective of this work is to identify independent risk factors for
secondary  infections  in  patients  with  COVID-19,  including  socioeconomic  status  and
race. These findings will offer insights on how best to protect and care for higher risk
populations.  Clostridioides  difficile  in  the  community  setting:  Identification  of
epidemiologic  and  microbiome-related  risk  factors  for  colonization  and  household
transmission Researchers will study C. difficile among previous patients who have been
discharged  to  their  home.  Data  from  this  study  will  help  identify  epidemiologic  and
microbiome-specific  risk  factors  for  spread  from  the  index  case  (first  individual  with
infection)  to  their  household  contacts,  including  infection  or  colonization  (germs  are
present but no signs of infection) of those contacts. The patients in this study tested
positive for C. difficile in a specific healthcare facility during 2019 and were discharged
home. Researchers will collect stool samples, as well as epidemiologic and behavioral
risk factor data through interviews. Improving Environmental Control of Candida auris
(C.  auris)  Contaminated  surfaces  and  equipment  in  hospitals  and  long-term  care
facilities  are  a  major  source  of  C.  auris  transmission  (spread)  and  outbreaks.
Researchers evaluated the effectiveness of different products and methods used for C.
auris disinfection, including commonly used liquid disinfectants and applications of UV
light for decontamination. Microbial bioburden of inpatient and outpatient areas beyond
hospital patient rooms Contaminated environmental surfaces are an important potential
source  for  spread  of  healthcare-associated  pathogens  (germs).  Researchers  will
determine  the  frequency  of  environmental  contamination  in  inpatient  and  outpatient
areas beyond hospital patient rooms and investigate the potential for hands to acquire
and  transfer  pathogens  from  contaminated  surfaces  and  examine  shedding  of
pathogens  by  patients  in  outpatient  settings.  Surveillance  for  Non-Ventilator
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia using Structured Electronic Clinical Data Researchers will
provide  valuable  insights  into  the  feasibility  of  widescale  automated  surveillance  for
non-ventilator  hospital-acquired  pneumonia  (NV-HAP)  using  routine  electronic  health
record  data,  deepening  our  understanding  of  treatment  patterns  and  outcomes  for
NV-HAP,  and  allowing  researchers  to  evaluate  emerging  NV-HAP  prevention
interventions. Structure and dynamics of Salmonella plasmids and their involvement in
the  dissemination  of  antibiotic  resistance  Researchers  will  identify  and  evaluate
different  structures  and  dynamics  of  Salmonella  plasmids  and  how  they  spread
antibiotic  resistance.  Group  A  Streptococcus  Molecular  Epidemiology  and  Ecology  An
active surveillance system for Group A Streptococci (GAS) pharyngitis has not existed in
the U.S. since 2007. Researchers will develop an outpatient GAS surveillance network in
five  geographically  distinct  areas  to  better  understand  GAS  burden  and  trends  in  the
U.S.  The  Need  for  Epidemiology  and  Antibacterial  Susceptibility  Assessment  of
Otopathogens (infections in ears) causing Acute Otitis Media (AOM) in Children AOM is
among  the  most  common  infectious  diseases  in  children  and  is  the  most  common
bacterial infection in children for which antibiotics are prescribed. The researchers will
examine effect of PCV13 (vaccine that protects against 13 pneumococcal bacteria) use
on  incidence  of  antibiotic-resistant  pathogens  causing  otitis  media  in  children.
Evaluating  Emergence  of  Resistance  and  Changes  in  Clinical  Pathogens  Following
Introduction
 of
 Chlorhexidine
 Bathing
 Chlorhexidine
 gluconate
 (CHG)
 is
 a
broad-spectrum,  topical  antiseptic  that  is  widely  used  in  healthcare.  Researchers  will
evaluate potential unintended adverse consequences of long-term CHG use, including
emergence of CHG resistance, emergence of co-resistance to antibiotics, and shifts in
frequency  and  distribution  of  microbial  pathogens  producing  disease.  Evaluating
Changes in Skin Cultures and Skin Microbiome Due to Chlorhexidine vs. Soap Bathing in
Patients  Requiring  Acute  or  Long-Term  Care  in  Healthcare  Facilities  Previous  studies
and clinical trials of CHG bathing have demonstrated large reductions in infections and
multidrug-resistant  organisms.  However,  concerns  exist  about  the  unintended
consequences  of  CHG  bathing  on  the  skin  microbiome.  Researchers  will  evaluate
changes  to  the  skin  microbiome  in  patients  in  healthcare  facilities  following  CHG  use
compared to soap bathing. Assessing human exposure to multidrug-resistant organisms
in  environmental  waters  in  a  Chilean  community  Researchers  will  examine  what
happens to humans when they are exposed to antibiotic-resistant pathogens in water
from  a  Chilean  community.  Metabolomic  validation  of  an  intestinal  microbiome
disruption model Researchers at Washington University in St. Louis will be using a small
laboratory  system  that  resembles  the  human  gut  microbiome  to  look  for  markers  of
microbiome  disruption  from  antibiotics.  Using  this  information,  they  will  develop  and
test a panel of markers that may be able to help clinicians understand their patients'
risk  for  infection  and  may  support  development  of  new  therapies  and  microbiome
disruption diagnostics. The Leadership in Epidemiology, Antimicrobial Stewardship and
Public Health (LEAP) Fellowship The LEAP Fellowship is a joint program of the Infectious
Diseases  Society  of  America,  Society  for  Healthcare  Epidemiology  of  America,  and
Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases  Society.  It  is  designed  to  provide  select  Fellows  at
infectious  diseases  training  programs  across  the  nation  an  opportunity  for  immersive
experiences  in  healthcare  leadership,  antimicrobial  stewardship  and  infection
prevention, and the inner workings of public health departments. Assessing risk factors,
clinical  course,  and  microbiologic  outcomes  in  patients  infected  with  Shigella  with
elevated  ciprofloxacin  MIC  values  using  a  population-based  survey  in  California  This
project will provide needed information about the proportion of Shigella infections with
decreased susceptibility to first line antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin and azithromycin.
This  project  aims  to  assess  the  severity  of  illness  and  outcomes  of  those  patients
infected with Shigella with decreased susceptibility to these important antibiotics. The
results of this project can may help inform treatment and prevention recommendations.
Evaluation  of  barrier  precautions  for  prevention  of  patient-to-patient  transfer  of
healthcare-associated pathogens This study will identify routes by which germs spread
and examine the effectiveness of different barrier precautions to prevent the spread of
healthcare-associated  infections  from  patient  to  patient.  Predictors  of  antimicrobial
exposure  for  application  in  the  standardized  antimicrobial  administration  ratio  risk
adjustment  strategy  Researchers  will  identify  patient  and  facility  level  factors
associated with antibiotic use that can be captured in electronic health records and can
be  used  for  benchmarking  antibiotic  use.  Improving  antimicrobial  use  at  hospital
discharge  through  a  collaborative  pharmacist-led  transition-of-care  intervention
Patients are often prescribed antibiotics when they are discharged (when they are sent
home  from  the  hospital).  This  study  aims  to  improve  antibiotic  selection  and  reduce
excess length of antibiotic therapy by facilitating a team antibiotic prescription review
supported  by  pharmacists  at  the  time  of  discharge.  Electronic  direct-from-sample
phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility testing diagnostic for Neisseria gonorrhoeae The
best approach to countering the spread of antibiotic resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae is
to treat patients quickly with effective antibiotics. ImpeDx Diagnostics, Inc. will develop
a  rapid  system  to  provide  phenotypic  antibiotic  susceptibility  testing  results  for
Neisseria gonorrhoeae directly from clinical samples in order to identify the preferred
antibiotic  for  treatment  of  the  individual,  potentially  reducing  the  time  of  infection,
improving public health response, and reducing the incidence of antibiotic resistance.
Campylobacter  burden  testing  in  dogs  Researchers  will  determine  the  burden  of
Campylobacter  in  dogs  by  sampling  commercial  breeding  colonies  and  collecting
information  on  antibiotic  use  to  help  better  understand  risks  associated  with  the
emergence  of  multidrug-resistant  Campylobacter.  Find  out  more  about  this  project,
including information about Campylobacter occurrence, antibiotic resistance, and use of
antibiotics in breeding kennels. Barriers and facilitators for implementation of infection
prevention  practices  for  device  care  in  high-acuity  skilled  nursing  facilities:  A  human
factors and systems engineering approach This study will evaluate how nursing home
staff handle medical devices used during the care of residents, in order to identify best
and  most  effective  practices  for  minimizing  harms  from  these  devices.  This  research
will  identify  implementation  strategies  to  reduce  infections  and  transmission  of
multidrug-resistant organisms among residents in skilled nursing facilities. A toolkit to
enhance  nursing  antibiotic  stewardship  activities  Researchers  will  develop  and
implement  an  antibiotic  stewardship  toolkit  for  nurses  that  focuses  on  improving
assessment  of  penicillin  allergy  and  culturing  practices  (urine  and  respiratory)  based
upon  algorithms.  Investigation  of  short  and  long  term  interventions  to  improve
antibiotic  prescribing  in  dentistry  To  improve  antibiotic  prescribing  in  dentistry,
researchers  will  analyze  insurance  claim  data  to  better  understand  prescribing  by
dentists, test a customized peer comparison message to the most frequent prescribers,
and promote existing guidelines for prophylactic prescribing in dentistry. Development
of  reproducible,  quantitative  methods  based  on  shotgun  metagenome  sequencing  for
assessment of risk of microbial transmission Using samples collected from a hospital,
researchers  will  develop  methods  that  will  help  others  study  the  microbiome  of  the
healthcare environment. This project will help healthcare providers ensure that facilities
are safe. Candida auris, an emerging fungal pathogen of high concern Candida auris (C.
auris) is an emerging, drug-resistant fungus that causes outbreaks of serious infections
in healthcare settings. Patients who are colonized but not infected can transmit C. auris
to  others  and  are  at  risk  of  infection  themselves.  This  study  will  help  us  better
understand  factors  that  are  associated  with  C.  auris  colonization  in  high-risk  patients
and  the  effectiveness  of  chlorhexidine  bathing  as  a  possible  decolonization  method.
Genomic  epidemiology  of  community-onset  invasive  USA300  MRSA  infections
Researchers  will  use  whole  genome  sequencing  (WGS)  to  examine  historical
methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  clinical  isolates  from  the  Cook
County Health and Hospitals System in Chicago, IL. The objective of this study is to use
WGS along with epidemiologic data to better understand the spread of MRSA between
healthcare  and  community  settings,  with  an  ultimate  goal  to  identify  potential
interventions  that  can  prevent  infections.  Metagenomic  analyses  study  through
simulated  direct  and  indirect  healthcare-related  pathogen  transmission  events  This
project  will  evaluate  and  develop  tools  which  can  detect  and  follow  the  spread  of
specific  bacteria  and  microbial  communities  between  people  and  across  surfaces  in
healthcare
 settings.
 Tracking
 hospital
 acquired
 infections
 using
 advanced
metagenomics  tools  Researchers  are  working  to  streamline  an  existing  sequencing
method  and  develop  new  methods  to  track  healthcare-associated  infections  as  they
spread  in  the  healthcare  setting.  Prevalence  of  mcr-harboring  Salmonella  and
Escherichia coli in food products, food-producing animals, and their environments in the
Dominican Republic Researchers will collect samples from food, food animals, and the
environment  in  the  Dominican  Republic  and  test  for  mcr  genes,  which  can  confer
resistance  against  colistin,  a  critically  important  antibiotic.  Researchers  will  examine
the factors that contribute to the spread of these genes in the Dominican Republic to
inform public health recommendations. A novel metric for benchmarking antibiotic use
to  inform  outpatient  stewardship  Researchers  will  develop  an  evidence-based
benchmark  rate  of  antibiotic  prescribing  for  children  with  acute  respiratory  tract
infections. This metric will be applied to estimate how many adverse drug effects are
associated  with  unnecessary  antibiotic  treatment.  This  study  will  also  design  an
intervention  to  improve  antibiotic  prescribing  for  acute  respiratory  tract  infections.
Antimicrobial use on crops and effects on antimicrobial resistant organisms and genes
in  the  environment  Researchers  will  establish  field  plots  of  tomatoes  and  treat  these
plots with organic fertilizers, herbicides, and antimicrobials. Following these treatments,
samples from the plots will be analyzed to determine the kinds of antibiotic-resistant
bacteria  and  genes  that  are  present  in  these  environments.  Mitigating  zoonotic
transmission  of  Salmonella  Heidelberg  in  the  dairy  calf  production  chain  Researchers
will  assess  the  effectiveness  of  cleaning  and  disinfection  methods  to  prevent  the
transmission  of  Salmonella  Heidelberg  through  the  dairy  calf  production  chain.
Researchers  will  develop  and  disseminate  educational  materials  on  cleaning  and
disinfection to livestock markets and veal calf production facilities to reduce the spread
of  Salmonella  Heidelberg.  Find  out  more  about  this  project  and  how  it  informed
mitigation strategies to reduce the spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria among calves,
people,  and  the  environment.  Antimicrobial  stewardship  education  for  calf  producers
Ohio  State  University  will  partner  with  calf  producers  to  assess  the  impact  of  a  farm
antimicrobial  stewardship  plan  on  the  quantity  of  antimicrobials  used  for  disease
treatment.  The  study  will  also  measure  changes  in  the  presence  and  diversity  of
antimicrobial  resistant  genes  in  the  environment  before  and  after  implementation  of
the  stewardship  plan.  Find  out  more  about  this  project,  including  how  the  project
informed  mitigation  strategies  to  reduce  the  spread  of  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria
among  calves,  people,  and  the  environment.  Hospital  and  community  burden  of
colonization due to multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacteria in Chile This project will
determine  the  prevalence  of  and  risk  factors  for  carriage  of  multidrug-resistant
gram-negative  bacteria  in  communities  and  hospitals  in  Chile.  This  research  will
demonstrate  how  resistant  bacteria  spread  and  will  help  identify  potential  strategies
that  can  help  stop  spread  in  South  America.  Comparison  of  commercial  methods  for
molecular  detection  of  Mycoplasma  pneumoniae  This  study  will  evaluate  the
performance  of  commercially  available  diagnostic  tests  to  detect  Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, a common cause of respiratory disease, and to identify antibiotic-resistant
infections. Rapid lateral flow assay for rapid diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis to reduce
the unnecessary use of antibacterial drugs This project will study the impact of a newly
developed  rapid  test  to  diagnose  Valley  fever  (coccidioidomycosis),  a  fungal  lung
infection,  in  patients  visiting  Tucson,  Arizona,  emergency  departments.  A  faster
diagnosis  can  improve  patient  outcomes  and  reduce  unnecessary  antibiotic  use.
Combined  surface  sampling  and  quantitative  microbial  risk  assessment  modeling  to
optimize surface cleaning for targeted healthcare-associated infection reduction Germs
can  spread  in  healthcare  settings  on  environmental  surfaces.  Researchers  will  use  a
combination  of  surface  sampling  and  risk  assessment  modeling  to  characterize  the
effectiveness  of  different  surface  decontamination  strategies  to  reduce  the  spread  of
germs  and  healthcare-associated  infections.  Strategies  to  reduce  post-discharge
invasive  Staphylococcus  aureus  infection  This  study  will  evaluate  what  percent  of
Methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  carriers  being  discharged  from
hospitals  have  a  community-associated  strain.  Patients  sometimes  carry  the  germ
without showing signs of it (colonization) and suffer infections from the strain later. This
study will also assess what percent of patients carrying the community MRSA variant
develop  later  infection  within  a  year  of  discharge.  Finally,  this  project  will  assess
whether a repeated decolonization treatment can reduce post-discharge infections due
to  this  strain.  Design  of  a  highly  multiplexed  targeted  sequencing  panel  for  the
detection and characterization of antimicrobial resistance determinants from complex
metagenomic samples This project will expand an approach that can analyze genetic
data  directly  from  stool  samples  to  identify  known  antibiotic-resistant  genes,  a  faster
way  than  other  testing  methods.  An  efficient  testing  panel  like  this  could  improve
outbreak detection and patient outcomes. Azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus strains
from  agricultural  sites  on  the  east  and  west  coasts  of  the  U.S.  Aspergillus  fumigatus
causes deadly infections in immunocompromised patients, and strains have emerged in
the  U.S.  that  are  resistant  to  all  azoles,  which  are  the  main  antifungals  used  for
treatment.  Similar  azole  chemicals  are  used  as  agricultural  fungicides  to  treat  crops.
Researchers  will  identify  and  isolate  Aspergillus  fumigatus  samples  from  agricultural
sites in multiple U.S. regions to better understand the emergence and sources of azole
resistance. This study builds upon work supported by a previous BAA. New approaches
to improve the efficiency, sensitivity, specificity and standardization of sampling, DNA
isolation, shotgun library preparation, and microbiome DNA enrichment and analysis in
healthcare  settings  Understanding  what  bacteria,  viruses,  and  fungi  (which  together
form a microbiome) exist in a healthcare environment and how they interact with each
other  and  their  immediate  environment  can  help  prevent  and  control  infections.
Researchers  will  develop  protocols  to  detect  microbes  and  characterize  the
microbiomes  in  healthcare  settings  using  next-generation  DNA  sequencing.  These
methods will improve the sensitivity and efficiency of detection, while providing more
information about the microbes than current methods. A novel metric for benchmarking
antibiotic use to inform outpatient stewardship Researchers will validate a human gut
model  of  healthy  and  'disrupted'  human  microbiomes.  These  models  will  be  used  to
determine  how  certain  bacterial  population  can  prevent  infection  by  C.  difficile  and
other  multidrug-resistant  organisms,  and  reestablish  healthy  gut  microbiome  function
after
 receiving
 antibiotics.
 Transmission
 of
 antibiotic-resistant
 bacteria
 from
patient-to-patient  in  the  healthcare  setting  and  the  impact  of  contact  precautions
Researchers  will  study  how  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  spread  from  patient  to
healthcare provider and from healthcare provider to patient. They will also evaluate the
effectiveness of barrier precautions such as gloves and gowns. Longitudinal impact of
prophylactic  antibiotic  use  on  the  gut  microbiota  in  healthy  human  populations  This
study will assess changes over time in the human gut microbiome in healthy patients
undergoing elective surgery. Their ultimate goal is to develop measures that can assess
microbiome  health  status  that  associate  with  important  clinical  outcomes,  such  as
acquisition of an antibiotic-resistant organism. Using complimentary in vitro and in vivo
models of the human microbiome to study antibiotic-mediated disruption Researchers
are testing more cost effective models that will look at the effects antibiotics have on
the  gastrointestinal  microbiome.  Enhancement  and  evaluation  of  metagenomics  tools
to identify and sequence whole genomes of Neisseria gonorrhea from clinical samples
Researchers will develop improved laboratory methods to better detect drug-resistant
gonorrhea directly from patient samples and create publicly available tools to analyze
genetic antibiotic resistance data. Colonization with multidrug-resistant gram negative
bacteria  in  Botswana  This  project  will  measure  the  prevalence  of  and  risk  factors  for
carriage  of  extended-spectrum  beta-lactamase  producing  Enterobacterales  (ESBL-EB)
and  "nightmare  bacteria"  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  (CRE)  in  inpatients,
outpatients,  and  households  in  Botswana.  This  research  will  help  us  understand  how
these bacteria spread in healthcare facilities and communities and inform containment
efforts in a country in Southern Africa. Metagenomic and whole-genome sequencing to
define  resistome  evolution  during  antibiotic  exposure  and  long-term  acute  care
Researchers will characterize how antibiotics change the microbial communities living
in patients' lungs and guts, as well as investigate the evolution of antibiotic resistance
in  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  (a  type  of  bacteria  often  found  in  the  healthcare
environment)  during  antibiotic  treatment.  Socio-ecological  coupling  of  antibiotic
resistance and the potential risk of human exposure to antibiotic-resistant pathogens in
bioaerosols  generated  during  wastewater  treatment  This  study  will  measure  the
variability  of  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  in  bioaerosols  (tiny  liquid  droplets  in  the  air
that  can  contain  bacteria  and  viruses)  generated  during  waste  water  treatment  and
evaluate  the  risk  of  exposure,  colonization  and  infection  to  treatment  plant  workers.
The  study  will  compare  antibiotic  resistant  bacteria  found  in  employees  working  in
wastewater treatment plants to those found in workers from drinking water treatment
plants  where  exposure  to  antibiotic  resistant  bacteria  is  expected  to  be  much  lower.
Clinical and microbiologic outcomes in patients treated for multidrug-resistant Shigella
infections  in  Dhaka,  Bangladesh  This  study  will  look  at  clinical  and  microbiologic
outcomes  in  patients  treated  for  drug-resistant  Shigella  infections  at  a  hospital  in
Dhaka,  Bangladesh.  Data  from  this  study  can  be  used  to  help  determine  antibiotic
breakpoints (which help determine if an antibiotic will be effective on an infection) for
drug-resistant
 Shigella.
 Novel
 interventions
 and
 approaches
 to
 mitigating
carbapenemase-producing  Gammaproteobacteria  in  healthcare  premise  plumbing
Carbapenemase-producing Gammaproteobacteria, a class of bacteria that can be highly
resistant to today's strongest antibiotics, may colonize (or live in) the premise plumbing
systems  of  healthcare  facilities.  This  project  will  investigate  those  factors  that  may
influence  colonization  and  growth  of  these  organisms  in  sink  drains  and  use  a
multifaceted approach to assess interventions designed to prevent the spread of these
organisms  from  plumbing  to  patients.  Critical  barriers  to  antibiotic  resistance  during
water  reclamation  and  reuse  Water  reclamation  and  reuse  uses  advanced  treatment
methods to make treated wastewater safe for a variety of uses, like irrigation, cooling
towers, reservoir augmentation, and aquifer recharge. This study will identify specific
waste  water  reuse  treatment  methods  that  reduce  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  and
genes by comparing wastewater samples throughout the treatment train of two distinct
advanced treatment facilities. Identifying treatment approaches that reduce antibiotic
resistance  is  important  as  water  reuse  becomes  more  widely  adopted.  Optimizing
in-building  disinfection  of  antibiotic-resistant  opportunistic  pathogens  This  study  will
evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  a  variety  of  disinfection  methods  used  in  hospital
plumbing systems to kill antibiotic-resistant bacteria and prevent evolution and spread
of  new  resistant  strains.  The  findings  will  provide  helpful  guidance  to  hospitals  and
similar facilities where disinfection is important to protect high-risk populations. Impact
of early life antibiotic treatment in preterm infants on subsequent multidrug-resistant
colonization and infection Researchers will use a mouse model to study the effects of
antibiotics on the microbiomes of infants C. difficile nucleic acid amplification test cycle
threshold  value  associated  environmental  contamination  (CONTAM  Study)  This  study
will look at the shedding of C. difficile by asymptomatic C. difficile carriers (patients who
may  carry  C.  difficile  but  do  not  show  symptoms)  and  symptomatic  patients  with  C.
difficile  infection  among  cancer  (hematopoietic  cell  transplant  and  leukemia)  patients
admitted to the Siteman Cancer Center. In addition, the immediate surrounding patient
care  environments  associated  with  these  patients  in  the  facility  will  be  sampled  to
understand environmental contamination. This study will help determine if additional C.
difficile infection prevention measures are needed for these patients. Cross-validation
of
 human
 fecal
 minibioreactor
 arrays
 and
 humanized
 microbiota
 mice
 as
complementary pre-clinical models of the gastrointestinal microbiome This project will
evaluate  in  vitro  and  mouse  models  of  human  gut  microbiomes  to  help  create  a
pre-screening  tool  to  evaluate  potential  therapies.  Rapid  assays  to  detect  Neisseria
gonorrhea  antibiotic  resistance  at  the  point  of  care  Investigators  will  develop  and
evaluate new diagnostics tools that can determine the antibiotics to which a patient's
strain  of  gonorrhea  is  susceptible  (slowed  or  killed).  This  fast  and  efficient  test,  once
available,  will  help  guide  individual  patient  management  and  can  be  used  to  identify
antibiotic-resistant  strains  of  gonorrhea.  It  can  also  be  used  to  support  outbreak
investigations  of  resistant  gonorrhea  in  the  community.  Natural  history  of  C.  difficile
colonization  Researchers  will  use  data  to  show  how  C.  difficile  germs  spread  and  to
develop more effective control measures. This project will grow our understanding of C.
difficile colonization and infection. Prenatal antibiotic use and body weight in children
The goal of this study is to examine the potential relationship between antibiotic use
during  pregnancy  and  pediatric  weight  problems.  Computational  methods  for
culture-independent  disambiguation  of  wgMLST  types  in  biological  samples  with
multiple  related  bacterial  strains  Investigators  will  develop  computational  tools  to
differentiate and analyze different types of DNA mixed in one sample. This project will
help  laboratories  better  understand  the  make-up  of  a  mixture  and  its  threat  level.
Antibiotic  resistance  in  concentrated  poultry  feeding  operations:  Impacts  on
environmental waters This project will assess the types of antibiotic-resistant organisms
in poultry houses, in addition to the amount of these organisms in a poultry house and
further  downstream  in  environmental  waters.  Researchers  will  also  measure  the
amount  of  veterinary  antibiotic  residues  in  downstream  environmental  waters.
Optimization  of  therapeutic  strategies  to  manage  polymicrobial  CF  lung  infections:
Clinical  assessment  Researchers  will  continue  this  project  from  last  year  to  identify
novel  probiotic  and  antibiotic  intervention  strategies  for  patients  with  cystic  fibrosis.
The project will validate and improve new treatment strategies by implementing them
in  a  small  group  of  patients.  The  Leaders  in  Epidemiology,  Antimicrobial  stewardship
and  Public  health,  or  LEAP,  Fellowship  are  Infectious  Diseases  Fellowships  to  drive
innovative  education  and  approaches  in  antibiotic  resistance,  antibiotic  stewardship
and public health This project establishes a fellowship for infectious disease physicians
to  bridge  clinical  infectious  disease  and  public  health  work  in  the  areas  of  antibiotic
resistance and antibiotic stewardship. Improved bioinformatics tools for detection and
characterization of antimicrobial resistance in public health Researchers will develop a
comprehensive gene and protein database and web-based resource that public health
experts  can  use  to  quickly  detect  and  identify  antibiotic  resistance  genes  as  they
emerge. Highly accessible system for infection control and antimicrobial stewardship in
resource limited settings This project will modify a commercial cloud and mobile-based
software  platform,  which  integrates  electronic  patient  data  and  local  treatment
guidelines,  to  support  antibiotic  stewardship  and  infection  control  in  low-  and
middle-income countries. Investigators will translate the software to Spanish and use it
in  up  to  three  medical  sites  internationally.  Implementers  will  assess  factors  such  as
cost,  clinical  impact,  and  feasibility.  Microbiome  disruption  and  Enterobacterales
dominance as a risk factor for sepsis in intensive care patients Antibiotics can change
the  intestinal  microbiome,  which  may  increase  the  risk  of  sepsis.  Researchers  will
extend  previous  CDC-funded  work  to  assess  intestinal  microbiome  disruption  and
dominance by the Enterobacterales order of bacteria as risk factors for sepsis.  Rapid
identification  and  analysis  of  transmission  of  the  emerging  pathogen  Candida  auris
Researchers  will  validate  a  new  rapid  diagnostic  platform  to  detect  the  multidrug
resistant  fungal  pathogen  Candida  auris,  and  they  will  analyze  C.  auris  transmission
patterns  in  healthcare  facilities  by  applying  advanced  genetic  fingerprint  methods.
Perinatal antibiotics and weight gain in childhood Researchers will examine if antibiotics
given  to  mothers  immediately  before  birth,  or  to  newborns  right  after  birth,  can
increase  the  weight  gain  of  children  in  the  first  5  years  of  life.  Preventing  the
dissemination  of  CRE  from  healthcare  facilities  into  surface  waters  in  the  US
(continuation request) The study will evaluate potential discharge of antibiotic resistant
bacteria from hospital sewage and test a technology to prevent it. Understanding the
microbiologic dynamics of Carbapenemase-producing organisms in hospital wastewater
premise  plumbing  This  project  will  track  carbapenemase-producing  organisms  in
healthcare  facilities,  in  part  by  using  a  controlled  sink  lab  to  recreate  a  healthcare
facility setting, to help guide facilities experiencing the transmission of these organisms
from  the  healthcare  environment  or  plumbing.  The  prevalence  and  diversity  of
antibiotic resistant bacteria in a mixed-use watershed Investigators will sample surface
water to analyze it for human and agricultural waste and antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
This project will help to determine how antibiotics, pathogens, and resistance elements
move across environments and potentially pose a risk to human health.  Considering
homologous and non-homologous recombination in outbreak analysis Researchers are
developing  computational  tool  to  improve  analysis  of  bacterial  DNA  sequences,
particularly from pathogen samples that are very closely related. Sentinel surveillance
for  Macrolide-resistant  Mycoplasma  pneumoniae  at  select  sites  in  the  U.S.  Using
samples  from eight hospitals,  researchers  will  determine the prevalence of  macrolide
antibiotic  resistance  in  Mycoplasma  pneumoniae,  how  it  spreads,  and  how  it  affects
patients. Reducing antibacterial use in patients with coccidioidomycosis This project will
study  the  delay  in  diagnosis  of  Valley  Fever  (coccidioidomycosis)  in  Tucson,  Arizona
where this disease is endemic (very common). To some clinicians, Valley Fever looks
like  community  acquired  pneumonia.  The  University  of  Arizona  will  collect  the
diagnostic codes for Valley Fever in its hospital computer system. Researchers will also
analyze the health care cost due to delay in diagnosis and determine the unnecessary
antibiotic  usage  for  better  antibiotic  stewardship  practices.  Azole  resistance  in
agricultural  settings  Researchers  will  collect  and  characterize  azole-resistant  fungal
strains from agricultural and horticultural sites. Azoles are used to protect crops from
fungi, but azole-resistant fungi can infect people and cause disease that is difficult to
treat  and  can  lead  to  death.  Implementation  of  a  novel  strategy  to  prevent
Staphylococcus aureus (SA) acquisition in community-based nursing homes to prevent
invasive SA infection: Feasibility and pilot to guide a multicenter stepped wedge cluster
trial Researchers will conduct a pilot study (small-scale study that helps design larger
studies)  on  the  use  of  additional  gowns  and  gloves  in  nursing  homes  to  prevent  the
spread  of  Staphylococcus  aureus  infections.  Comparison  of  methods  for  detecting
recombination  in  bacterial  whole  genome  sequences  Investigators  will  compare
genome analysis methods that determine the source of genetic material. This project
will
 help
 researchers
 to
 understand
 the
 relationships
 and
 transmission
 of
antibiotic-resistant  bacteria.  Double  blinded,  randomized  controlled  Trial  of  Oral
vancomycin  versus  placebo  in  hospitalized  patients  with  diarrhea  and  stool  toXin
NEGative but nucleic acid amplification test positive for toxigenic C. difficile (TOX NEG
trial)  Researchers will assess the risks and benefits of C. difficile treatment compared
to a placebo treatment. Researchers will determine the impact of oral antibiotics on the
microbiome, antibiotic resistance, C. difficile, and colonization of a multi-drug resistant
organism, healthcare environment contamination, duration of diarrhea, and outcomes.
Rectal microbiome disruption indices associated with acquisition of multidrug-resistant
organism  among  subjects  exposed  to  antimicrobials  The  project  will  identify
characteristics of the microbiome that can predict which patients are at highest risk of
acquiring  multidrug-resistant  organisms  to  develop  novel  strategies  that  can  prevent
people  from  acquiring  drug-resistant  bacteria.  Barriers  and  facilitators  for  NHSN
adoption  in  nursing  homes  The  national  study  will  determine  the  barriers  of  nursing
homes  to  tracking  C.  difficile  and  multidrug-resistant  organisms  using  CDC's  National
Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN), and what resources are needed to overcome these
barriers.  Surveillance  of  resistance  gene  carriage  in  patients  with  hematologic
malignancies: A taxonomy-focused approach Researchers will work to understand the
transfer  of  antibiotic  resistance  genes  in  Leukemia  patients  and  what  role  the
microbiome  is  playing.  Evaluating  the  use  of  an  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)
bioluminescence assay to optimize hospital cleaning The study will evaluate the use of
a  new  technology  to  measure  and  thereby  optimize  hospital  room  cleaning.
Optimization  of  therapeutic  strategies  to  manage  polymicrobial  cystic  fibrosis  lung
infections The project aims to reduce the risk of lung infections in patients with cystic
fibrosis by determining what protective alterations can be made to their microbiome. 
Preventing
 the
 dissemination
 of
 carbapenem-resistant
 Enterobacterales
 from
healthcare  facilities  into  surface  waters  in  the  U.S.  The  study  will  evaluate  potential
discharge of antibiotic-resistant bacteria from hospital sewage and test a technology to
prevent  it.  Randomized  controlled  trial  of  Autologous  microbiome  reconstitution  to
prevent  colonization  by  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  A  study  in  which  stool  will  be
collected  from  patients  before  they  go  to  nursing  homes.  The  stool  will  be
re-administered  to  the  patients  after  they  receive  antibiotics  to  restore  their
microbiomes  and  prevent  drug-resistant  infection.  A  randomized  controlled  trial  of
encapsulated fecal microbiota for vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus decolonization A
study  of  fecal  microbiota  transplantation  administered  as  a  capsule  to  decolonize
patients with Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). Doctor-patient communication
Researchers  will  study  doctor-patient  communication  in  acute  care  visits,  including
communications
 that
 may
 include
 educating
 patients
 about
 antibiotics.
 A
comprehensive  study  of  multidrug-resistant  determinants  and  drivers  in  the  fungal
pathogen  Candida  glabrata  A  study  to  better  define  the  genetic  mechanisms  and
drivers  fueling  the  emergence  of  drug-resistant  fungal  infections  and  validate  a  new
diagnostic platform to rapidly identify resistant strains of Candida glabratra in the clinic
and community. Unlocking the microbial ecology of environmental antibiotic resistance
Researchers will target adapting molecular tools to improve understanding of the role
of  microbial  communities  in  antibiotic  resistance  in  the  environment.  A  longitudinal
assessment  of  the  resistome  among  patients  treated  with  intravenous-administered
ceftriaxone  The  project  will  explore  how  selective  pressure  in  the  form  of
intravenous-administered ceftriaxone excreted into the gastrointestinal tract may lead
to the emergence of antibiotic resistance in the gut microbiome, and whether specific
intervention from SYN-004 (ribaxamase), the Company's clinical-stage beta-lactamase
designed
 to
 protect
 the
 gut
 microbiome,
 may
 prevent
 the
 emergence
 of
antibiotic-resistant  organisms  in  the  gut  microbiome.  Challenges  and  facilitators  to
standardized  measurement  of  infections  related  to  C.  difficile  and  multidrug-resistant
organisms  in  nursing  homes  The  project  will  identify  challenges  and  facilitators  to
implementing  standardized  measurement  of  C.  difficile  and  other  multidrug-resistant
organism  events  in  nursing  homes.  Resistance  and  genetics  of  community-acquired
foodborne  urinary  tract  infections  The  project  will  study  the  role  of  retail  food  as  a
potential source of multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli that cause community-acquired
urinary  tract  infections  among  college-age  women.  A  multifaceted  intervention  to
improve prescribing for acute respiratory infection The project will evaluate behavioral
approaches, audit and feedback, and peer-to-peer comparisons to reduce unnecessary
antibiotic  prescribing  among  physicians  for  adult  and  pediatric  patients  who  come  to
emergency
 departments
 and
 urgent-care
 centers
 with
 respiratory
 infections.
Metagenomic shotgun sequencing to detect colonization, invasion, and transmission of
multidrug-resistant  organisms  Investigators  at  Cincinnati  Children's  Hospital  will  use
new  methods  to  analyze  the  microbiome  to  precisely  monitor  colonization,  infection,
and  transmission  of  multi-drug  resistant  bacteria.  Improving  antibiotic  stewardship  in
long-term  care  through  the  UTIDecide  Electronic  Clinical  Decision  Support  A  project
studying  the  use  of  an  electronic  clinician  decision  support  tool  to  improve  antibiotic
use for urinary tract infections in nursing home patients. Nitric oxide releasing ultra-low
fouling
 antibacterial
 intravascular
 catheters
 Researchers
 will
 be
 developing
next-generation  coatings  to  combat  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  in  medical  devices.
Implementation  of  a  C.  difficile  infection  reduction  bundle  in  acute  care  hospitals:
Feasibility  and  pilot  to  guide  a  multicenter  stepped  wedge  cluster  trial  A  project  to
implement  and  assess  a  prevention  bundle  for  C.  difficile  infection  in  acute  care
hospitals.  Longitudinal impact of prophylactic antibiotic use on the gut microbiota in
human  populations  The  study  will  work  to  determine  how  the  microbiome  of  surgery
patients are impacted by antibiotics used before, during, and after orthopedic surgery.
Detection and prognosis of colonization by Extended-spectrum Beta-lactamase (ESBL)
producing  Enterobacterales  The  project  will  develop  of  a  diagnostic  test  to  detect
colonization and domination of the microbiome with ESBL-producing bacteria. Genomic
insights into the origin and spread of antibiotic resistance in nursing homes The project
seeks  to  apply  genome  sequencing  to  understand  how  antibiotic  resistance  spreads
within and between healthcare facilities. Patient hand hygiene initiative A study on how
improving hand hygiene of patients could prevent patients from becoming colonized or
infected  with  drug-resistant  bacteria.  Preventing  spread  of  carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacterales among veterans through an automated tracking system An effort to
develop  and  use  a  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  patient  registry  in  the
Veterans Affairs hospital system. Stool microbiome features to discriminate C. difficile
colonization  and  infection  The  study  will  apply  microbiome  analysis  to  define  stool
bacterial community types in patients who are colonized or infected with C. difficile in
order  to  better  understand  non-C.  difficile  microbes,  with  the  hope  of  improving  our
ability to diagnose, treat, and prevent C. difficile infection. Respiratory tract microbiome
composition and risk for antibiotic-resistant lower respiratory infection during long-term
acute  care  The  study  will  comprehensively  characterize  respiratory  tract  microbiome
composition and change during the course of prolonged mechanical ventilation in order
to  define  bacterial  community  features  associated  with  hazard  for  lower  respiratory
tract  infection,  particularly  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  due  to  antibiotic-resistant
pathogens. Targeted Reduction of Antimicrobials for Prevention of C. difficile Infection
(TRAP-CDI)  The  study  aims  to  compare  the  effectiveness  of  two  antimicrobial  use
strategies  for  prevention  of  C.  difficile  infection  in  the  hospital  setting  and  to  better
understand  the  attitudes,  social  norms  and  beliefs  of  healthcare  providers  about  C.
difficile  infection  and  antimicrobial  stewardship.  Impact  of  human  and  food  animal
wastes on antimicrobial gene abundance and Escherichia coli susceptibility patterns: A
watershed  approach  The  use  of  advanced  genetic  analyses  to  investigate  how  the
spread  of  antibiotic-resistant  genes  in  a  river  system  is  influenced  by  discharges  of
antimicrobials  and  human  and  animal  wastes.  Assessing  the  risk  of  acquisition  of
Carbapenemase-producing
 Enterobacterales
 from
 exposure
 to
 contaminated
wastewater premise plumbing The study aims to understand the risk to patients posed
by sink drains contaminated with drug resistant bacteria. Development of NHSN's AUR
data  and  SAAR  to  support  antibiotic  benchmarking  program  among  Vizient  members
The  project  will  identify  how  to  create  and  deliver  antibiotic  use  data  reports  to
hospitals. It will identify aspects of compelling reports that best help hospitals address
inappropriate prescription practices. Enduring effects of early life antibiotic therapy on
microbiota development and antibiotic resistance gene carriage in the preterm infant
gut Investigators will research the long-term effects of early-life antibiotic therapy on
microbiota  development  and  how  that  affects  the  mobility  of  antibiotic-resistances
genes  in  the  preterm  infant  gut.  Prospective  study  characterizing  fecal  microbiome
disruptions  during  and  after  receipt  of  antimicrobials  The  study  will  characterize  the
extent and duration of microbiome disruptions observed during and after usual courses
of antimicrobials used to treat community-acquired pneumonia. Intestinal Metabolomic
Factors  affecting  Clostridium  difficile  Colonization  and  Infection  The  study  will  lead  a
group of clinicians, chemists, and mathematicians to identify how diet, metabolism, and
intestinal  microbes  interact  to  protect  against  C.  difficile  infection.  Identification  of
microbial
 disruption
 indices
 predictive
 of
 colonization
 by
 multidrug-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  The study will track the microbiome of patients in intensive
care  units  over  time  to  predict  risk  of  infection  of  multidrug-resistant  Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. CDC supports activities carried out by state and local health departments,
partners,  and  investigators  to  combat  antimicrobial  resistance.  CDC  supports  most  of
these  activities  through  the  Antimicrobial  Resistance  (AR)  Solutions  Initiative,  and
leverages  investments  from  successful  programs  across  the  agency  for  maximum
efficiency. These activities are funded through different mechanisms, some of which are
listed below. CDC funding solicitation and award announcements change from year to
year. Visit FedBizOpps to find current opportunities and exact deadlines throughout the
Federal Government. Find the latest CDC antimicrobial resistance activities by state on
the AR Investment Map. Antimicrobial resistance happens when germs like bacteria and
fungi  can  defeat  the  drugs  designed  to  kill  them.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance/programs/AR-investment-map.html
