A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  The  appendix  for  water  guidelines  from
the  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).
Microorganisms  have  a  tendency  to  associate  with  and  stick  to  surfaces.  These
adherent  organisms  can  initiate  and  develop  biofilms,  which  are  comprised  of  cells
embedded  in  a  matrix  of  extracellularly  produced  polymers  and  associated  abiotic
particles.1438  It  is  inevitable  that  biofilms  will  form  in  most  water  systems.  In  the
health-care  facility  environment,  biofilms  may  be  found  in  the  potable  water  supply
piping, hot water tanks, air conditioning cooling towers, or in sinks, sink traps, aerators,
or shower heads. Biofilms, especially in water systems, are not present as a continuous
slime  or  film,  but  are  more  often  scanty  and  heterogeneous  in  nature.1439  Biofilms
may form under stagnant as well as flowing conditions, so storage tanks, in addition to
water  system  piping,  may  be  vulnerable  to  the  development  of  biofilm,  especially  if
water temperatures are low enough to allow the growth of thermophilic bacteria (e.g.,
Legionella  spp.).  Favorable  conditions  for  biofilm  formation  are  present  if  these
structures  and  equipment  are  not  cleaned  for  extended  periods  of  time.1440  Algae,
protozoa, and fungi may be present in biofilms, but the predominant microorganisms of
water system biofilms are gram-negative bacteria. Although most of these organisms
will not normally pose a problem for healthy individuals, certain biofilm bacteria (e.g.,
Pseudomonas  aeruginosa,  Klebsiella  spp.,  Pantoea  agglomerans,  and  Enterobacter
cloacae)  all  may  be  agents  for  opportunistic  infections  for  immunocompromised
individuals.1441,  1442  These  biofilm  organisms  may  easily  contaminate  indwelling
medical devices or intravenous (IV) fluids, and they could be transferred on the hands
of health-care workers.1441–1444 Biofilms may potentially provide an environment for
the  survival  of  pathogenic  organisms,  such  as  Legionella  pneumophila  and  E.  coli
O157:H7. Although the association of biofilms and medical devices provides a plausible
explanation  for  a  variety  of  health-care  associated  infections,  it  is  not  clear  how  the
presence  of  biofilms  in  the  water  system  may  influence  the  rates  of  health-care–
associated  waterborne  infection.  Organisms  within  biofilms  behave  quite  differently
than  their  planktonic  (i.e.,  free  floating)  counterparts.  Research  has  shown  that
biofilm-associated  organisms  are  more  resistant  to  antibiotics  and  disinfectants  than
are planktonic organisms, either because the cells are protected by the polymer matrix,
or because they are physiologically different.1445–1450 Nevertheless, municipal water
utilities attempt to maintain a chlorine residual in the distribution system to discourage
microbiological growth. Though chlorine in its various forms is a proven disinfectant, it
has  been  shown  to  be  less  effective  against  biofilm  bacteria.1448  Higher  levels  of
chlorine for longer contact times are necessary to eliminate biofilms. Routine sampling
of health-care facility water systems for biofilms is not warranted. If an epidemiologic
investigation points to the water supply system as a possible source of infection, then
water  sampling  for  biofilm  organisms  should  be  considered  so  that  prevention  and
control  strategies  can  be  developed.  An  established  biofilm  is  is  difficult  to  remove
totally  in  existing  piping.  Strategies  to  remediate  biofilms  in  a  water  system  would
include flushing the system piping, hot water tank, dead legs, and those areas of the
facility's water system subject to low or intermittent flow. The benefits of this treatment
would include The general strategy for evaluating water system biofilm depends on a
comparision of the bacteriological quality of the incoming municipal water and that of
water sampled from within facility's distribution system. Heterotrophic plate counts and
coliform counts, both of which are routinely run by the municipal water utility, will at
least  provide  in  indication  of  the  potential  for  biofilm  formation.  Heterotrophic  plate
count  levels  in  potable  water  should  be  <500  CFU/mL.  These  levels  may  increase  on
occasion,  but  counts  consistently  >500  CFU/mL  would  indicate  a  general  decrease  in
water quality. A direct correlation between heterotrophic plate count and biofilm levels
has been demonstrated.1450 Therefore, an increase in heterotrophic plate count would
suggest  a  greater  rate  and  extent  of  biofilm  formation  in  a  health-care  facility  water
system. The water supplied to the facility should also contain <1 coliform bacteria/100
mL. Coliform bacteria are organisms whose presence in the distribution system could
indicate  fecal  contamination.  It  has  been  shown  that  coliform  bacteria  can  colonize
biofilms  within  drinking  water  systems.  Intermittant  contamination  of  a  water  system
with these organisms could lead to colonization of the system. Water samples can be
collected from throughout the health-care facility system, including both hot and cold
water  sources;  samples  should  be  cultured  by  standard  methods.945  If  heterotrophic
plate  counts  in  samples  from  the  facility  water  system  are  higher  than  those  from
samples collected at the point of water entry to the building, it can be concluded that
the  facility  water  quality  has  diminished.  If  biofilms  are  detected  in  the  facility  water
system and determined by an epidemiologic and environmental investigation to be a
reservoir for health-care associated pathogens, the municipal water supplier could be
contacted with a request to provide higher chlorine residuals in the distribution system,
or the health-care facility could consider installing a supplemental chlorination system.
Sample  collection  sites  for  biofilm  in  health-care  facilities  include  Swabs  should  be
placed into tubes containing phosphate buffered water, pH 7.2 or phosphate buffered
saline,  shipped  to  the  laboratory  under  refrigeration  and  processed  within  24  hrs.  of
collection. Samples are suspended by vortexing with sterile glass beads and plated onto
a  nonselective  medium  (e.g.,  Plate  Count  Agar  or  R2A  medium)  and  selective  media
(e.g.,  media  for  Legionella  spp.  isolation)  after  serial  dilution.  If  the  plate  counts  are
elevated  above  levels  in  the  water  (i.e.  comparing  the  plate  count  per  square
centimeter of swabbed surface to the plate count per milliliter of water), then biofilm
formation can be suspected. In the case of an outbreak, it would be advisable to isolate
organisms from these plates to determine whether the suspect organisms are present
in  the  biofilm  or  water  samples  and  compare  them  to  the  organisms  isolated  from
patient  specimens.  In  order  to  detect  the  low,  total  viable  heterotrophic  plate  counts
outlined by the current AAMI standards for water and dialysate in dialysis settings, it is
necessary to use standard quantitative culture techniques with appropriate sensitivity
levels.792,  832,  833  The  membrane  filter  technique  is  particularly  suited  for  this
application because it permits large volumes of water to be assayed.792, 834 Since the
membrane  filter  technique  may  not  be  readily  available  in  clinical  laboratories,  the
spread plate assay can be used as an alternative.834 If the spread plate assay is used,
however, the standard prohibits the use of a calibrated loop when applying sample to
the plate.792 The prohibition is based on the low sensitivity of the calibrated loop. A
standard calibrated loop transfers 0.001 mL of sample to the culture medium, so that
the  minimum  sensitivity  of  the  assay  is  1,000  CFU/mL.  This  level  of  sensitivity  is
unacceptable  when  the  maximum  allowable  limit  for  microorganisms  is  200  CFU/mL.
Therefore,  when  the  spread  plate  method  is  used,  a  pipette  must  be  used  to  place
0.1–0.5  mL  of  water  on  the  culture  medium.  The  current  AAMI  standard  specifically
prohibits the use of nutrient-rich media (e.g., blood agar, and chocolate agar) in dialysis
water and dialysate assays because these culture media are too rich for growth of the
naturally  occurring  organisms  found  in  water.792  Debate  continues  within  AAMI,
however, as to the most appropriate culture medium and incubation conditions to be
used.  The  original  clinical  observations  on  which  the  microbiological  requirements  of
this  standard  were  based  used  Standard  Methods  Agar  (SMA),  a  medium  containing
relatively  few  nutrients.666  The  use  of  tryptic  soy  agar  (TSA),  a  general  purpose
medium  for  isolating  and  cultivating  microorganisms  was  recommended  in  later
versions of the standard because it was thought to be more appropriate for culturing
bicarbonate-containing dialysate.788, 789, 835 Moreover, culturing systems based on
TSA  are  readily  available  from  commercial  sources.  Several  studies,  however,  have
shown  that  the  use  of  nutrient-poor  media,  such  as  R2A,  results  in  an  increased
recovery  of  bacteria  from  water.1451,  1452  The  original  standard  also  specified
incubation  for  48  hours  at  95°F–98.6°F  (35°C–37°C)  before  enumeration  of  bacterial
colonies. Extending the culturing time up to 168 hours, or 7 days and using incubation
temperatures  of  73.4°F–  82.4°F  (23°C–28°C)  have  also  been  shown  to  increase  the
recovery  of  bacteria.1451,  1452  Other  investigators,  however,  have  not  found  such
clear  cut  differences  between  culturing  techniques.835,  1453  After  considerable
discussion, the AAMI Committee has not reached a consensus regarding changes in the
assay  technique,  and  the  use  of  TSA  or  its  equivalent  for  48  hours  at  95°F–98.6°F
(35°C–37°C) remains the recommended method. It should be recognized, however, that
these culturing conditions may underestimate the bacterial burden in the water and fail
to  identify  the  presence  of  some  organisms.  Specifically,  the  recommended  method
may  not  detect  the  presence  of  various  NTM  that  have  been  associated  with  several
outbreaks  of  infection  in  dialysis  units.31,  32  In  these  instances,  however,  the  high
numbers  of  mycobacteria  in  the  water  were  related  to  the  total  heterotrophic  plate
counts,  each  of  which  was  significantly  greater  than  that  allowable  by  the  AAMI
standard. Additionally, the recommended method will not detect fungi and yeast, which
have been shown to contaminate water used for hemodialysis applications.1454 Biofilm
on the surface of the pipes may hide viable bacterial colonies, even though no viable
colonies  are  detected  in  the  water  using  sensitive  culturing  techniques.1455  Many
disinfection  processes  remove  biofilm  poorly,  and  a  rapid  increase  in  the  level  of
bacteria  in  the  water  following  disinfection  may  indicate  significant  biofilm  formation.
Therefore, although the results of microbiological surveillance obtained using the test
methods  outlined  above  may  be  useful  in  guiding  disinfection  schedules  and  in
demonstrating  compliance  with  AAMI  standards,  they  should  not  be  taken  as  an
indication  of  the  absolute  microbiological  purity  of  the  water.792  Endotoxin  can  be
tested  by  one  of  two  types  of  assays  Endotoxin  units  are  assayed  by  the  Limulus
Amebocyte Lysate (LAL) method. Because endotoxins differ in their activity on a mass
basis,  their  activity  is  referred  to  a  standard  Escherichia  coli  endotoxin.  The  current
standard (EC-6) is prepared from E. coli O113:H10. The relationship between mass of
endotoxin and its activity varies with both the lot of LAL and the lot of control standard
endotoxin  used.  Since  standards  for  endotoxin  were  harmonized  in  1983  with  the
introduction of EC-5, the relationship between mass and activity of endotoxin has been
approximately  5–10  EU/ng.  Studies  to  harmonize  standards  have  led  to  the
measurement of endotoxin units (EU) where 5 EU is equivalent to 1 ng E. coli O55:B5
endotoxin.1456  In  summary,  water  used  to  prepare  dialysate  and  to  reprocess
hemodialyzers should not contain a total microbial count >200 CFU/mL as determined
by assay on TSA agar for 48 hrs. at 96.8°F (36°C), and ≤2 endotoxin units (EU) per mL.
The dialysate at the end of a dialysis treatment should not contain >2,000 CFU/mL.31,
32, 668, 789, 792 Legionella spp. are ubiquitous and can be isolated from 20%–40% of
freshwater
 environments,
 including
 man-made
 water
 systems.1457,
 1458
 In
health-care facilities, where legionellae in potable water rarely result in disease among
immunocompromised  patients,  courses  of  remedial  action  are  unclear.  Scheduled
microbiologic monitoring for legionellae remains controversial because the presence of
legionellae  is  not  necessarily  evidence  of  a  potential  for  causing  disease.1459  CDC
recommends  aggressive  disinfection  measures  for  cleaning  and  maintaining  devices
known  to  transmit  legionellae,  but  does  not  recommend  regularly  scheduled
microbiologic  assays  for  the  bacteria.396  However,  scheduled  monitoring  of  potable
water within a hospital might be considered in certain settings where persons are highly
susceptible to illness and mortality from Legionella infection (e.g., hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation units and solid organ transplant units).9 Also, after an outbreak of
legionellosis, health officials agree monitoring is necessary to identify the source and to
evaluate the efficacy of biocides or other prevention measures. Examination of water
samples is the most efficient microbiologic method for identifying sources of legionellae
and  is  an  integral  part  of  an  epidemiologic  investigation  into  health-care  associated
Legionnaires  disease.  Because  of  the  diversity  of  plumbing  and  HVAC  systems  in
health-care facilities, the number and types of sites to be tested must be determined
before  collection  of  water  samples.  One  environmental  sampling  protocol  that
addresses sampling site selection in hospitals might serve as a prototype for sampling
in  other  institutions.1209  Any  water  source  that  might  be  aerosolized  should  be
considered  a  potential  source  for  transmission  of  legionellae.  The  bacteria  are  rarely
found  in  municipal  water  supplies  and  tend  to  colonize  plumbing  systems  and
point-of-use  devices.  To  colonize,  legionellae  usually  require  a  temperature  range  of
77°F–108°F (25°C–42.2°C) and are most commonly located in hot water systems.1460
Legionellae  do  not  survive  drying.  Therefore,  air-conditioning  equipment  condensate,
which frequently evaporates, is not a likely source.1461 Water samples and swabs from
point-of-use  devices  or  system  surfaces  should  be  collected  when  sampling  for
legionellae (Box C.1).1437 Swabs of system surfaces allow sampling of biofilms, which
frequently  contain  legionellae.  When  culturing  faucet  aerators  and  shower  heads,
swabs  of  surface  areas  should  be  collected  first;  water  samples  are  collected  after
aerators  or  shower  heads  are  removed  from  their  pipes.  Collection  and  culture
techniques  are  outlined  (Box  C.2).  Swabs  can  be  streaked  directly  onto  buffered
charcoal  yeast  extract  agar  (BCYE)  plates  if  the  pates  are  available  at  the  collection
site.  If  the  swabs  and  water  samples  must  be  transported  back  to  a  laboratory  for
processing,  immersing  individual  swabs  in  sample  water  minimizes  drying  during
transit. Place swabs and water samples in insulated coolers to protect specimens from
temperature extremes. * Material in this box is adapted from reference 1209. *Material
in this table is compiled from references 1209, 1437, 1462–1465.
 Wherever allowable by state code, provide water at ≥124°F (≥51°C) at all points in the
heated  water  system,  including  the  taps.  This  requires  that  water  in  calorifiers  (e.g.,
water  heaters)  be  maintained  at  ≥140°F  (≥60°C).  In  the  United  Kingdom,  where
maintenance  of  water  temperatures  at  ≥122°F  (≥50°C)  in  hospitals  has  been
mandated, installation of blending or mixing valves at or near taps to reduce the water
temperature to ≤109.4°F (≤63°C) has been recommended in certain settings to reduce
the  risk  for  scald  injury  to  patients,  visitors,  and  health  care  workers.726  However,
Legionella  spp.  can  multiply  even  in  short  segments  of  pipe  containing  water  at  this
temperature. Increasing the flow rate from the hot-water-circulation system may help
lessen the likelihood of water stagnation and cooling.711, 1465 Insulation of plumbing
to ensure delivery of cold (<68°F [<20°C]) water to water heaters (and to cold-water
outlets)  may  diminish  the  opportunity  for  bacterial  multiplication.456  Both  dead  legs
and capped spurs within the plumbing system provide areas of stagnation and cooling
to  <122°F  (<50°C)  regardless  of  the  circulating  water  temperature;  these  segments
may need to be removed to prevent colonization.704 Rubber fittings within plumbing
systems have been associated with persistent colonization, and replacement of these
fittings may be required for Legionella spp. eradication.1467 Continuous chlorination to
maintain concentrations of free residual chlorine at 1–2 mg/L (1–2 ppm) at the tap is an
alternative  option  for  treatment.  This  requires  the  placement  of  flow-adjusted,
continuous  injectors  of  chlorine  throughout  the  water  distribution  system.  Adverse
effects  of  continuous  chlorination  can  include  accelerated  corrosion  of  plumbing
(resulting in system leaks) and production of potentially carcinogenic trihalomethanes.
However,  when  levels  of  free  residual  chlorine  are  below  3  mg/L  (3  ppm),
trihalomethane levels are kept below the maximum safety level recommended by the
EPA.727,  1468,  1469  228  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control  and  clinical
safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and
visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/appendix-c-water.html
