A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 These  are  high-risk  specialized  patient  areas  with  a  mechanically  controlled
atmosphere  where  surgical  procedures  are  performed.  A  high  degree  of  asepsis  is
required  because  the  vulnerability  of  the  patients  to  infection  is  high.  Records  of
previous  evening  terminal  clean  required;  if  not  or  if  no  surgeries  on  the  day  prior,
perform  terminal  clean  (as  below)  Remove  all  used  linen  and  surgical  drapes,  waste
(including  used  suction  canisters,  ¾  filled  sharps  containers),  and  kick  buckets,  for
reprocessing  or  disposal  Portable  noncritical  (e.g.,  compressed  gas  tanks,  x-ray
machine)  equipment  should  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  disinfected  before  and  after
each procedure Carefully move the operating table and any mobile equipment to make
sure that the floor areas underneath are thoroughly cleaned and disinfected Clean and
disinfect  low-touch  surfaces,  (e.g.,  the  insides  of  cupboards  and  ceilings/walls)  on  a
scheduled basis (e.g., weekly) Areas where medication is prepared (including pharmacy
or  in  clinical  areas)  are  high-risk  areas  in  which  high  degree  of  asepsis  is  required.
Areas where semi-critical and critical equipment is sterilized and stored in which high
degree  of  asepsis  is  required.  These  are  high-risk  areas  because  patients  may  be
immuno-compromised  by  underlying  diseases,  treatment  modalities  (e.g.,  invasive
devices)  and  other  life-threatening  conditions  (e.g.,  major  trauma,  stroke)  and
vulnerability  to  infection  is  high.  Clean:  Pay  special  attention  to  terminal  cleaning  of
incubators. Change filters in incubators according to manufacturer’s instructions, when
wet  or  if  neonate  was  on  contact  precautions  (during  terminal  clean).  These  are
high-risk  areas  in  which  patients  are  highly  immunosuppressed  (e.g.,  bone  marrow
transplant, leukemia) and vulnerability to infection is high. Clean: These are high-risk
units  where  vulnerability  of  the  patients  to  infection  (immunocompromised)  and
probability of contamination (e.g., with blood and body fluids) are high. Last clean of
the  day:  clean  and  disinfect  entire  floor  and  low-touch  surfaces  These  are  high-risk
areas (such as radiology and endoscopy services) because they often service patients
with  high  vulnerability  to  infection  (e.g.,  immunosuppressed),  in  addition  to  other
patient populations. Handwashing sinks should be thoroughly cleaned (scrubbed) and
disinfected  These  are  high-risk  areas  because  they  are  routinely  contaminated  and
vulnerability  of  patients  to  infection  is  high.  Handwashing  sinks  should  be  thoroughly
cleaned  (scrubbed)  and  disinfected  These  are  high-risk  areas  because  they  are
routinely contaminated and vulnerability of patients to infection is high. Carefully allow
enough  contact  time  before  the  next  subsequent  use  of  the  station/area  In  addition,
clean low-touch surfaces on a scheduled basis (e.g., weekly) These are high risk areas
because they are frequently contaminated and pediatric patients are more vulnerable
to  infection  due  to  pathogens  such  as  enteric  viruses  and  influenza.  These  are
moderate to high-risk areas because of the number of people who could contaminate
the environment and because some patients may be more susceptible to infection (e.g.,
trauma  patients).  These  are  high  risk  areas,  especially  for  environmentally  hardy
pathogens (e.g., resistant to disinfectants) and for multidrug-resistant pathogens that
are highly transmissible or are associated with high morbidity and mortality. In addition,
clean  low-touch  surfaces  on  a  scheduled  basis  (e.g.,  weekly)  Dispose  of  or  reprocess
cleaning  supplies  and  equipment  immediately  after  cleaning.  Last  clean  of  the  day:
clean  and  disinfect  low-touch  surfaces  Reprocess  (i.e.,  clean  and  disinfect)  dedicated
equipment after patient is discharged or transferred (terminal clean) Conduct terminal
cleaning  of  all  noncritical  patient  care  equipment  in  4.7.2  Sluice  rooms  Airborne
precautions:  Cleaning  staff  must  wear  required  PPE;  see  Table  5  in  3.4  Personal
Protective  Equipment  for  Environmental  Cleaning  Keep  the  door  closed  during  the
environmental cleaning process (ventilation requirement). These items are high-touch
surfaces that are touched by both patients and by healthcare workers and may be used
on  multiple  patients.  They  include  portable  or  stationary  noncritical  patient  care
equipment  such  as  IV  poles,  commode  chairs,  blood  pressure  cuffs,  wheelchairs  and
stethoscopes.  Select  a  compatible  disinfectant;  see  4.7.1  Material  compatibility
considerations Clean and disinfect heavily soiled items (e.g., bedpans) in 4.7.2 Sluice
rooms  Disinfect  bedpans  with  a  washer-disinfector  or  boiling  water  instead  of  a
chemical  disinfection  process  Select  a  compatible  disinfectant;  see  4.7.1  Material
compatibility  considerations  Regardless  of  the  risk-level  of  an  area,  spills  or
contamination from blood or body fluid (e.g., vomitus) must be cleaned and disinfected
immediately  using  a  two-step  process.  HAIs  are  associated  with  medical  devices,
complications  following  surgery,  transmission  between  patients  and  healthcare
workers,  antibiotic  overuse,  and  more.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/hcp/cleaning-global/appendix-b2.html
