A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Appendix A from the Guideline for Isolation
Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare  Settings
(2007). The mode(s) and risk of transmission for each specific disease agent included in
Appendix  A  were  reviewed.  Principle  sources  consulted  for  the  development  of
disease-specific recommendations for Appendix A included infectious disease manuals
and textbooks [833, 1043, 1044]. The published literature was searched for evidence of
person-to-person  transmission  in  healthcare  and  non-healthcare  settings  with  a  focus
on reported outbreaks that would assist in developing recommendations for all settings
where healthcare is delivered. Criteria used to assign Transmission-Based Precautions
categories  follow:  Additional  information  relevant  to  use  of  precautions  was  added  in
the comments column to assist the caregiver in decision-making. Citations were added
as needed to support a change in or provide additional evidence for recommendations
for  a  specific  disease  and  for  new  infectious  agents  (e.g.,  SARS-CoV,  avian  influenza)
that have been added to Appendix A. The reader may refer to more detailed discussion
concerning modes of transmission and emerging pathogens in the background text and
for  MDRO  control  in  Appendix  B  (Management  of  Multidrug-Resistant  Organisms  in
Healthcare Settings).  Appendix A: Type and Duration of Precautions Recommended for
Selected  Infections  and  Conditions  Appendix  A:  Table  1.  History  of  Guidelines  for
Isolation Precautions in Hospitals Appendix A: Table 2. Clinical Syndromes or Conditions
Warranting Empiric Transmission-Based Precautions in Addition to Standard Precautions
Appendix A. Table 3. Infection Control Considerations for High-Priority (CDC Category A)
Diseases that May Result from Bioterrorist Attacks or are Considered to be Bioterrorist
Threats Appendix A: Table 4. Recommendations for Application of Standard Precautions
for the Care of All Patients in All Healthcare Settings Appendix A: Table 5. Components
of a Protective Environment Appendix A: Figure. Example of Safe Donning and Removal
of  Personal  Protective  Equipment  (PPE)  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control
and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,
patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/appendix-a.html
