A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. The appendix for Air guidelines from the
Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).  *  This
table is revised from Table S3-1 in reference 4 and has been adapted from the formula
for the rate of purging airborne contaminants presented in reference 1435. + Denotes
frequently cited ACH for patient-care areas. § Values were derived from the formula: t2
– t1 = – [ln (C2 / C1) / (Q / V)] X 60, with t1 = 0 where ¶ Values apply to an empty room
with no aerosol-generating source. With a person present and generating aerosol, this
table would not apply. Other equations are available that include a constant generating
source.  However,  certain  diseases  (e.g.,  infectious  tuberculosis)  are  not  likely  to  be
aerosolized at a constant rate. The times given assume perfect mixing of the air within
the  space  (i.e.,  mixing  factor  =  1).  However,  perfect  mixing  usually  does  not  occur.
Removal  times  will  be  longer  in  rooms  or  areas  with  imperfect  mixing  or  air
stagnation.213 Caution should be exercised in using this table in such situations. For
booths  or  other  local  ventilation  enclosures,  manufacturers’  instructions  should  be
consulted.  Air  sampling  is  an  insensitive  means  of  detecting  Legionella  pneumophila,
and is of limited practical value in environmental sampling for this pathogen. In certain
instances, however, it can be used to Methods used to sample air for legionellae include
impingement  in  liquid,  impaction  on  solid  medium,  and  sedimentation  using  settle
plates.1436 The Chemical Corps.-type all-glass impingers (AGI) with the stem 30 mm
from  the  bottom  of  the  flask  have  been  used  successfully  to  sample  for
legionellae.1436  Because  of  the  velocity  at  which  air  samples  are  collected,  clumps
tend to become fragmented, leading to a more accurate count of bacteria present in
the  air.  The  disadvantages  of  this  method  are  Yeast  extract  broth  (0.25%)  is  the
recommended  liquid  medium  for  AGI  sampling  of  legionellae;1437  standard  methods
for water samples can be used to culture these samples. Andersen samplers are viable
particle  samplers  in  which  particles  pass  through  jet  orifices  of  decreasing  size  in
cascade  fashion  until  they  impact  on  an  agar  surface.1218  The  agar  plates  are  then
removed  and  incubated.  The  stage  distribution  of  the  legionellae  should  indicate  the
extent  to  which  the  bacteria  would  have  penetrated  the  respiratory  system.  The
advantages of this sampling method are Assuming that each colony on the agar plate is
the growth from a single bacteria-carrying particle, the contamination of the air being
sampled  is  determined  from  the  number  of  colonies  counted.  The  airborne
microorganisms may be reported in terms of the number per cubic foot of air sampled.
The following formulas can be applied to convert colony counts to organisms per cubic
foot of air sampled.1218 For solid agar impactor samplers: C / (R H P) = N where N =
number of organisms collected per cubic foot of air sampledC = total plate countR =
airflow  rate  in  cubic  feet  per  minuteP  =  duration  of  sampling  period  in  minutes  For
liquid impingers: (C H V) / (Q H P H R) = N where C = total number of colonies from all
aliquots  platedV  =  final  volume  in  mL  of  collecting  mediaQ  =  total  number  of  mL
platedP, R, and N are defined as above The following tables from the AIA Guidelines for
Design and Construction of Hospitals and Health-Care Facilities, 2001 are reprinted with
permission  of  the  American  Institute  of  Architects  and  the  publisher  (The  Facilities
Guidelines  Institute).120  Note:  This  table  is  Table  7.2  in  the  AIA  guidelines,  2001
edition.  Superscripts  used  in  this  table  refer  to  notes  following  the  table.  Notes:
Appendix  I:  A7.  Recirculating  devices  with  HEPA  filters  may  have  potential  uses  in
existing
 facilities
 as
 interim,
 supplemental
 environmental
 controls
 to
 meet
requirements for the control of airborne infectious agents. Limitations in design must be
recognized. The design of either portable or fixed systems should prevent stagnation
and short circuiting of airflow. The supply and exhaust locations should direct clean air
to areas where health-care workers are likely to work, across the infectious source, and
then  to  the  exhaust,  so  that  the  healthcare  worker  is  not  in  position  between  the
infectious  source  and  the  exhaust  location.  The  design  of  such  systems  should  also
allow for easy access for scheduled preventative maintenance and cleaning. A11. The
verification of airflow direction can include a simple visual method such as smoke trail,
ball-in-tube,  or  flutterstrip.  These  devices  will  require  a  minimum  differential  air
pressure to indicate airflow direction. Note: This table is Table 8.1 in the AIA guidelines,
2001 edition. Superscripts used in this table refer to notes following the table. Notes:
Note: This table is Table 7.3 in the AIA guidelines, 2001 edition. *Additional roughing or
prefilters  should  be  considered  to  reduce  maintenance  required  for  filters  with
efficiency higher than 75%. The filtration efficiency ratings are based on average dust
sopt  efficiency  per  ASHRAE  52.1–1992.  Note:  This  table  is  Table  9.1  in  the  AIA
guidelines,  2001  edition.  *  Additional  roughing  or  prefilters  should  be  considered  to
reduce maintenance required for main filters. The filtration efficiency ratings are based
on dust spot efficiency per ASHRAE 52.1–1992. + These requirements do not apply to
small  primary  (e.g.,  neighborhood)  outpatient  facilities  or  outpatient  facilities  that  do
not perform invasive applications or procedures. Note: This table is Table 8.2 in the AIA
guidelines,  2001  edition.  *The  filtration  efficiency  ratings  are  based  on  average  dust
spot  efficiency  as  per  ASHRAE  52.1–1992.  Note:  This  table  is  Table  11.1  in  the  AIA
guidelines, 2001 edition. * The filtration efficiency ratings are based on average dust
spot efficiency as per ASHRAE 52.1–1992. CDC provides information on infection control
and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,
patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/appendix-b-air.html
