A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Appendix A: Table 2. Clinical Syndromes or
Conditions Warranting Empiric Transmission-Based Precautions in Addition to Standard
Precautions  from  the  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of
Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare  Settings  (2007).  Update:  Recommendations  for
healthcare  workers  can  be  found  at  Ebola  For  Clinicians.  *  Infection  control
professionals should modify or adapt this table according to local conditions. To ensure
that  appropriate  empiric  precautions  are  implemented  always,  hospitals  must  have
systems  in  place  to  evaluate  patients  routinely  according  to  these  criteria  as  part  of
their  preadmission  and  admission  care.  †  Patients  with  the  syndromes  or  conditions
listed below may present with atypical signs or symptoms (e.g.neonates and adults with
pertussis may not have paroxysmal or severe cough). The clinician’s index of suspicion
should be guided by the prevalence of specific conditions in the community, as well as
clinical judgment. ‡ The organisms listed under the column “Potential Pathogens” are
not  intended  to  represent  the  complete,  or  even  most  likely,  diagnoses,  but  rather
possible  etiologic  agents  that  require  additional  precautions  beyond  Standard
Precautions
 until
 they
 can
 be
 ruled
 out.
 §
 These
 pathogens
 include
enterohemorrhagic  Escherichia  coli  O157:H7,  Shigella  spp,  hepatitis  A  virus,
noroviruses,  rotavirus,  C.  difficile.  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control  and
clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections among healthcare workers, patients,
and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/appendix-a-table-2.html
