Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Disclaimer:  Although  each  Federal  and  State  regulatory
agency  has  its  own  procedures  for  handling  safety  and  health  audits,  the  following
sections  suggest  practical  ways  to  prepare  for  and  assist  in  safety  and  health
inspections. However, NIOSH does not imply that these written suggestions are the only
ways to prepare for and assist in safety and health inspections. Although Federal OSHA
does not have jurisdiction over State and local government employees, including those
in public schools, the 26 States that operate OSHA-approved State plans are required to
extend  their  State  standards  to  these  workers  (refer  to  Appendix  A,  Federal
Government Agencies, OSHA State-Plan States). State standards and enforcement are
either identical to, or at least as effective as, Federal OSHA. In addition, EPA enforces
several OSHA standards, including “hazardous waste operations” (29 CFR 1910.120), in
workplaces in the public sector in States without OSHA-approved State plans. The 26
States  with  OSHA-approved  State  plans,  in  addition  to  enforcement,  have  extensive
voluntary  compliance  programs,  including  on-site  consultation  services  available  to
public sector employers. In States without State plans, although Federal OSHA has no
authority to inspect nor enforce standards in public schools, the local OSHA office may
be  able  to  provide  hazard  recognition  assistance  and  technical  support.  Extensive
compliance assistance information is also available on OSHA’s Web site and in Federal
and  State  publications.  To  assure  that  inspections  run  smoothly,  follow  the
recommendations
 outlined
 here:
 Both
 career-technical
 educational
 program
administrators and enforcing agencies have expressed that they want inspections to be
cooperative  rather  than  adversarial  events.  To  do  this,  inspectors  need  to  be
understanding of the obstacles the school faces in controlling hazards and considerate
of  the  time  and  efforts  needed  to  remediate  such  hazards.  Have  an  ongoing
environmental safety and health program in place.
Most  inspectors  are  impressed  when  they  see  that  a  school  is  concerned  with  a  safe
environment on a daily basis, not just before or after an inspection. Such programs help
schools take a proactive approach to safety. For this reason, it is important that there
be an ongoing program and that you make the inspector aware of it. The elements of a
good program are described in Chapter 2: How to Establish an Effective Occupational
Safety and Health and Environmental Safety Program. Invite the enforcement agencies
to do proactive training and education.
Part of an environmental safety and health program involves training and educating key
personnel and high-risk employees and students. Take advantage of the enforcement
agencies: they all offer free outreach, compliance assistance, and education services;
including  training  and  information  sessions.  They  can  also  supply  you  with  free
bulletins,  videos,  presentations,  fact  sheets,  and  other  helpful  documents.  They  are
often  willing  to  send  staff  to  regional  or  annual  conferences,  meetings,  or  training
programs. Have them speak to your school about their inspection procedures or policies
and other resources available to you. Use the enforcement agencies’ free consultation
and technical assistance services before inspections take place.
Take  a  proactive  approach  by  dealing  with  problems  before  you  receive  a  citation.
Agencies prefer to help you be proactive with regard to safety, rather than to conduct
formal  inspections.  If  there  is  a  suspected  violation  or  hazard,  call  the  appropriate
agency’s  consultation  program  and  ask  for  help.  Many  consultation  programs  are
designed to help identify problems and offer solutions for correcting them, as well as
offering information about other free resources. Consultation personnel are well-trained
safety and health professionals. If an agency is not able to help, ask them to refer you
to someone who can. For example, OSHA offers free consultation services in each State.
Have designated safety representatives and personnel available at the inspection.
When an inspector arrives, he or she must have access to people with a good overview
of the safety program. It will help to have representatives who are informed and can
describe steps that have already been taken to solve problems. Find out the scope of
the inspection.
Find out whether the inspection will be broad or specific, who will be interviewed, what
locations will be inspected, what records will be reviewed, and what practices will be
observed. Ask the inspector what documents would be helpful. Do not be reluctant to
ask questions. Notify the appropriate people in your school district about an upcoming
inspection.
Enforcement agencies have different protocols for determining contacts. For example,
some inspectors may contact only the county superintendent; others may contact the
business  administrator  or  the  district  superintendent.  The  school  must  establish  their
own  internal  protocol  for  determining  the  person  to  notify  for  inspections.  Make  sure
that  those  who  want  to  be  involved  in  the  inspections  are  notified.  Having  the  union
representative present is often very helpful for the inspector, and it is required by some
regulations because: Schedule the inspection for a convenient time.
Finding an ideal time for an inspection may be difficult, because the inspector often has
to observe a class or process in progress. However, most enforcement agencies will be
accommodating if the school offers reasonable opportunities for the critical personnel
to be present. Aim for a date that is not as busy for the key personnel. Remember that
the  inspector  may  need  adequate  notice  to  reschedule  inspections,  especially  those
that involve numerous parties. Gather necessary documents in advance.
Have  appropriate  blue  prints,  purchase  orders,  organization  charts,  injury  and  illness
reports  and  records,  material  safety  data  sheets,  hazard  communication  inventories,
etc.  available  for  inspection.  Have  extra  copies  made  in  advance.  Gather  other
important information in advance.
In  addition  to  the  above  documents,  gather  other  useful  information  before  the
inspection (for example, the status of obtaining parts or services to correct a problem).
To keep a general inspection focused and to save time, ask a union representative if
applicable,  or  other  suitable  representative  to  survey  employees  for  complaints  or
health symptoms in advance. Arrange for necessary access to equipment or locations.
Make  sure  there  is  access  to  areas  or  equipment  that  is  normally  locked  or  requires
security  clearance.  Have  a  ladder  and  flashlight  ready.  Always  have  spare  hardhats,
safety  goggles,  etc.  for  people  who  accompany  the  inspector.  Accept  unannounced
inspections.
Some  agencies  are  mandated  to  conduct  unannounced  inspections  (e.g.,  the
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration).  Immediately  notify  the  appropriate
people to participate in the inspection. Have someone meet with the inspector as soon
as possible. Be ready to respond to the inspector’s questions or comments.
They are made with the intent of identifying and correcting hazards. Explain the chain
of command and key responsibilities Send the appropriate people.
Send someone knowledgeable about the particular hazards being investigated as well
as  the  person  responsible  for  the  entire  safety  program  at  that  site.  Explain  what
actions have already been taken. Present the facts.
Not giving inspectors all the facts will make the case worse. If the school is aware of an
existing  hazardous  condition  that  was  not  or  could  not  get  corrected,  this  potentially
makes  the  condition  a  “willful”  violation.  Save  time  by  delegating  the  search  for
documents and personnel.
Delegate  the  responsibility  of  finding  and  copying  records  to  someone  who  does  not
have  to  attend  the  inspection.  Secure  only  those  documents  requested  by  the
inspector. Similarly, have someone else schedule time for the inspector to meet with
key  individuals  (i.e.,  maintenance  personnel,  safety  officer,  teacher).  Offer  to  mail
documents  or  set  up  telephone  interviews  if  needed.  Accompany  the  inspector  on
his/her walkthrough.
Have  someone,  preferably  the  site  safety  person,  stay  with  the  inspector  during  the
entire inspection. Also, if the school has one or many unions, it may be appropriate to
have  a  union  steward  or  other  employee  representative  present  during  the
walkthrough. Have that person take notes and pictures as appropriate. Be available.
During the inspection, make sure that you will be available. If the inspectors asks, give
out  the  business  cards  or  names,  phone  numbers,  and  titles  of  key  personnel  who
attended  the  inspection  and  those  who  could  not  attend.  Ask  for  explanations  of
citations.
The  inspector  should  be  able  to  give  an  adequate  explanation  of  why  the  regulation
exists. Ask for the inspector’s help in abating a violation.
If the inspector cites the school, ask to help for a feasible solution since they may have
seen similar problems corrected. In some cases, the law requires inspectors to provide
a  feasible  solution.  Ask  them  for  additional  resources  and  contacts  in  other
career-technical education programs or safety and health organizations that have dealt
with similar problems and solutions to those problems. Explain any obstacles that may
be faced in trying to correct a problem.
Explain the budget process and time constraints. The inspector may have the flexibility
to  arrange  for  convenient  abatement  deadlines.  In  some  cases,  abatement  time
requirements may need to be discussed with the inspector’s supervisor. If necessary,
ask the inspector about the procedures for contesting abatement deadlines. If there are
problems with the inspection, let the inspector or his/her supervisor know.
If  the  inspection  did  not  go  well,  discuss  it  as  soon  as  possible  with  the  inspector
(sometimes  there  is  a  lag  time  between  an  inspection  and  a  report  or  citations).  In
some cases, rights to contesting a citation are lost for not responding quickly.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2004-101/appenc.html
