Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
 
 This  site  provides  a  listing  of  NIOSH-approved  particulate  filtering  facepiece
respirators. This type of air-purifying respirators protects by filtering particles out of the
air the user is breathing. There are seven classes of filters for NIOSH-approved filtering
facepiece respirators available at this time. Ninety-five percent is the minimal level of
filtration  that  will  be  approved  by  NIOSH.  The  N,  R,  and  P  designations  refer  to  the
filter’s oil resistance as described below. N95 – Filters at least 95% of airborne particles.
Not resistant to oil.
(N95 Manufacturers Index: 3M   A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V 
W  X  Y  Z) Surgical N95 – A NIOSH-approved N95 respirator that has also been cleared
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a surgical mask. N99 – Filters at least
99% of airborne particles. Not resistant to oil. N100 – Filters at least 99.97% of airborne
particles. Not resistant to oil. R95 – Filters at least 95% of airborne particles. Somewhat
resistant to oil. P95 – Filters at least 95% of airborne particles. Strongly resistant to oil.
P99 – Filters at least 99% of airborne particles. Strongly resistant to oil. P100 – Filters at
least  99.97%  of  airborne  particles.  Strongly  resistant  to  oil.  The  NIOSH-approved
products  are  listed  by  brand.  Links  to  the  manufacturers’  websites  are  provided  as  a
courtesy  to  users  and  NIOSH  is  not  responsible  for  the  content  of  those  pages.  Also
included is the manufacturer’s phone number, product model number, approval number
(84A-XXXX), an indication if the product has an exhalation valve, and the user donning
instructions.  The  manufacturer’s  donning  procedure  and/or  user  instructions  are  also
provided here as a courtesy to the user. Manufacturers’ recommended procedures for
performing  a  user  seal  check  can  be  included  in  the  donning  procedures  and/or  user
instructions  as  alternatives  to  the  OSHA-specified  procedures  under  the  respiratory
protection standard (See 29 CFR 1910.134 Appendix B-1). NIOSH does not evaluate the
efficacy  and  reliability  of  any  user  seal  check  procedures,  but  OSHA  will  accept  the
manufacturer’s  recommended  procedures  if  the  employer  demonstrates  those
procedures are equally effective as those identified in the standard. Each manufacturer
is  responsible  for  updating  the  links  on  their  website  and/or  providing  NIOSH  with  an
updated or revised copy when changes are made. The tables were created to provide
easy  access  to  a  comprehensive  listing  of  NIOSH-approved  particulate  filtering
facepiece  respirators  and  also  to  provide  easy  access  to  the  donning  process/user
instructions. The tables are not updated as frequently as the certified equipment list,
which is the official NIOSH certification record. If you have a product that is not listed on
the provided tables use the searchable certified equipment list. Follow these steps to
search  for  NIOSH-approved  disposable  particulate  respirators:  If  your  product  is  not
listed, you should scroll through the list of “Private Label” products. Individual filtering
facepiece respirators are required to have the following markings: NIOSH recommends
the  lot  number  and/or  date  of  manufacture  also  be  included,  however,  this  is  not
required. Sample of a generic filtering facepiece respirator with appropriate markings.
Sample for printing Filtering facepiece respirators that are private labeled are required
to have the following statement on the packaging as a special S caution and limitation
statement identified on the full label and located in the respirator user instructions: This
private label related statement does not need to appear on the exterior surface of the
respirator as part of the required name marking.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/topics/respirators/disp_part/default.html
