Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  All  post-mortem  procedures  require  adherence  to  standard
precautions  with  the  use  of  appropriate  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  and
facilities with appropriate safety features. Personnel who perform post-mortem care of
remains  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  mpox  should  wear  PPE  as
recommended for healthcare settings. The body should be prepared following routine
healthcare facility procedures for cleaning and containing body fluids and then wrapped
in a plastic shroud. Wrapping should be done to prevent contamination of the outside of
the  shroud.  If  an  autopsy  is  performed,  the  shrouded  body  should  be  placed  on  a
mortuary  stretcher  and  covered  with  a  clean  linen  sheet  for  transportation  to  the
morgue. If the remains go directly to a mortuary, they should be placed in a body bag
prior to removal. Dispose of gown and gloves after completing post-mortem care or if
they  become  damaged.  People  transporting  prepared  and  covered  human  remains
should wear gloves but are not required to wear other PPE. People who transfer remains
from a mortuary stretcher onto the autopsy table should wear a gown, gloves, and eye
protection. Personnel who perform or assist with the autopsy of patients with confirmed
or  suspected  mpox  should  wear  the  following  PPE:  Before  an  autopsy  begins,  the
following  engineering  strategies  and  facility  designs  should  be  considered:  The
following safety procedures should be used for autopsies and post-mortem assessment
of  mpox  cases:  Samples  should  be  taken  from  all  major  organs  when  possible.
Particular attention and extensive sampling should include tissues demonstrating gross
pathology  or  involvement  as  suggested  by  clinical  presentation.  Autopsy  specimens
should include: Place representative tissues in 10% buffered formalin for a minimum of
48  hours  and  no  longer  than  2  weeks.   Autopsy  brain  tissues  may  require  additional
fixation  of  up  to  4  weeks.  After  fully  fixed,  specimens  should  undergo  processing,
paraffin-embedding, and routine histopathologic evaluation. Formalin-fixed wet tissues
and  formalin-fixed,  paraffin-embedded  tissue  blocks  should  be  stored  at  room
temperature. A second set of representative fragments of tissues listed above should
be  collected  using  sterile  techniques  and  placed  in  sterile  1.5-2  mL  screw-capped
plastic vials with O-ring, or any tube with a gasket seal (leak-proof) that can be shipped
under  the  required  conditions.  DO  NOT  ADD  ANY  VIRAL  TRANSPORT  MEDIA.  Ideally,
specimens  should  be  stored  and  shipped  frozen  at  -20⁰C  or  lower  Disinfection
Procedures after Autopsy: Infection Control: Healthcare Settings
Guidelines  for  monitoring  healthcare  workers  who  have  unprotected  exposures  to
patients  with  mpox  or  laboratory  specimens  from  these  patients.  OSHA’s  Respiratory
Protection  Safety  and  Health  Topics  page  provides  additional  information  about
respiratory  protection  programs,  including  training,  fit  testing,  and  compliance   [14.9
MB, 124 Pages] resources. Formalin-fixed autopsy tissue specimens can be submitted
to  CDC’s  Infectious  Diseases  Pathology  Branch  (IDPB)  for  additional  pathologic
characterization,  and  immunohistochemical  (IHC)  testing  for  orthopoxviruses.  Testing
for other infectious etiologies by methods including IHC and polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)  may  also  be  performed  as  warranted  based  on  histopathologic  findings  and
clinical  and  epidemiologic  history.  Acceptable  sample  criteria:  Please  contact  CDC’s
Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch (IDPB) (pathology@cdc.gov) for pre-approval and
specific submission instructions. Do not send specimens until pre-approval is provided
by pathology@cdc.gov. For more information, see: Pathologic or Molecular Evaluation of
Fixed Tissues for Possible Infectious Etiologies (CDC-10365). For fresh, frozen autopsy
tissue  samples,  please  contact  the  Poxvirus  laboratory  (poxviruslab@cdc.gov)  for
pre-approval  and  specific  submission  instructions.  Please  indicate  if  the  patient  was
taking tecovirimat (TPOXX). For more information on labeling and packaging specimens
for  transport  read  Submitting  Specimens  to  CDC  Shipping  and  Packing.  Healthcare
providers, pathologists, medical examiners, and coroners:
Please first contact your state, tribal, local, or territorial health department for approval
of specimen submission to CDC.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/clinicians/autopsy.html
