A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Background  of  the  Management  of
Multidrug-Resistant
 Organisms
 in
 Healthcare
 Settings
 (2006)
 guideline.
 For
epidemiologic  purposes,  MDROs  are  defined  as  microorganisms,  predominantly
bacteria, that are resistant to one or more classes of antimicrobial agents (1). Although
the names of certain MDROs describe resistance to only one agent (e.g., MRSA, VRE),
these pathogens are frequently resistant to most available antimicrobial agents. These
highly  resistant  organisms  deserve  special  attention  in  healthcare  facilities  (2).  In
addition to MRSA and VRE, certain GNB, including those producing extended spectrum
beta-lactamases  (ESBLs)  and  others  that  are  resistant  to  multiple  classes  of
antimicrobial  agents,  are  of  particular  concernA.  In  addition  to  Escherichia  coli  and
Klebsiella pneumoniae, these include strains of Acinetobacter baumannii resistant to all
antimicrobial  agents,  or  all  except  imipenem,  (6-12),  and  organisms  such  as
Stenotrophomonas  maltophilia  (12-14),  Burkholderia  cepacia  (15,  16),  and  Ralstonia
pickettii  (17)  that  are  intrinsically  resistant  to  the  broadest-spectrum  antimicrobial
agents.  In  some  residential  settings  (e.g.,  LTCFs),  it  is  important  to  control
multidrug-resistant  S.  pneumoniae  (MDRSP)  that  are  resistant  to  penicillin  and  other
broad-spectrum agents such as macrolides and fluroquinolones (18, 19). Strains of S.
aureus  that  have  intermediate  susceptibility  or  are  resistant  to  vancomycin  (i.e.,
vancomycin-intermediate  S.  aureus  [VISA],  vancomycin-resistant  S.  aureus  [VRSA])
(20-30)  have  affected  specific  populations,  such  as  hemodialysis  patients.  In  most
instances,  MDRO  infections  have  clinical  manifestations  that  are  similar  to  infections
caused  by  susceptible  pathogens.  However,  options  for  treating  patients  with  these
infections  are  often  extremely  limited.  For  example,  until  recently,  only  vancomycin
provided  effective  therapy  for  potentially  life-threatening  MRSA  infections  and  during
the  1990's  there  were  virtually  no  antimicrobial  agents  to  treat  infections  caused  by
VRE.  Although  antimicrobials  are  now  available  for  treatment  of  MRSA  and  VRE
infections,  resistance  to  each  new  agent  has  already  emerged  in  clinical  isolates
(31-37).  Similarly,  therapeutic  options  are  limited  for  ESBL-producing  isolates  of
gram-negative bacilli, strains of A. baumanniiresistant to all antimicrobial agents except
imipenem  (8-11,  38)  and  intrinsically  resistant  Stenotrophomonas  sp.  (12-14,  39).
These limitations may influence antibiotic usage patterns in ways that suppress normal
flora  and  create  a  favorable  environment  for  development  of  colonization  when
exposed to potential MDR pathogens (i.e., selective advantage) (40). Increased lengths
of  stay,  costs,  and  mortality  also  have  been  associated  with  MDROs  (41-46).  Two
studies documented increased mortality, hospital lengths of stay, and hospital charges
associated  with  multidrug-resistant  gram-negative  bacilli  (MDR-GNBs),  including  an
NICU  outbreak  of  ESBL-producing  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  (47)  and  the  emergence  of
third-  generation  cephalosporin  resistance  in  Enterobacter  spp.  in  hospitalized  adults
(48). Vancomycin resistance has been reported to be an independent predictor of death
from  enterococcal  bacteremia  (44,  49-53).  Furthermore,  VRE  was  associated  with
increased mortality, length of hospital stay, admission to the ICU, surgical procedures,
and costs when VRE patients were compared with a matched hospital population (54).
However, MRSA may behave differently from other MDROs. When patients with MRSA
have  been  compared  to  patients  with  methicillin-susceptible  S.  aureus  (MSSA),
MRSA-colonized  patients  more  frequently  develop  symptomatic  infections  (55,  56).
Furthermore, higher case fatality rates have been observed for certain MRSA infections,
including  bacteremia  (57-62),  poststernotomy  mediastinitis  (63),  and  surgical  site
infections  (64).  These  outcomes  may  be  a  result  of  delays  in  the  administration  of
vancomycin,  the  relative  decrease  in  the  bactericidal  activity  of  vancomycin  (65),  or
persistent  bacteremia  associated  with  intrinsic  characteristics  of  certain  MRSA  strains
(66).  Mortality  may  be  increased  further  by  S.  aureus  with  reduced  vancomycin
susceptibility (VISA) (26, 67). Also some studies have reported an association between
MRSA infections and increased length of stay, and healthcare costs (46, 61, 62), while
others have not (64). Finally, some hospitals have observed an increase in the overall
occurrence  of  staphylococcal  infections  following  the  introduction  of  MRSA  into  a
hospital or special-care unit (68, 69). CDC provides information on infection control and
clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections among healthcare workers, patients,
and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/mdro-management/background.html
