A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 All U.S. health care personnel should be screened for tuberculosis (TB) upon hire (i.e.,
preplacement). This process includes a risk assessment, symptom evaluation, and TB
blood test or TB skin test.  The TB screening process for health care personnel includes:
CDC  recommendations  do  not  override  or  replace  state  regulations.  State  and  local
regulations  may  differ  to  meet  local  needs.    Contact  your  state  or  local  TB  control
program  for  the  testing  regulations  in  your  state.  Health  care  personnel  should  be
considered at increased risk for TB if any of the following risk factors are present: Use
an individual TB risk assessment to help interpret test results and determine whether
health care personnel are at increased risk. Health care personnel at lower risk for TB
who have a positive test result for TB infection should have a second TB test (either a
TB  blood  test  or  TB  skin  test).   Symptoms  of  active  TB  disease  include:  If  baseline
testing is performed using a TB blood test (also known as Interferon Gamma Release
Assay or IGRA):  Using a TB blood test for baseline testing of health care personnel does
not require two-step testing. TB blood tests are the preferred TB test for people who
have received the Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine. If the Mantoux tuberculin skin
test  (TST)  is  used  for  baseline  testing  of  health  care  personnel,  use  two-step  testing.
Two-step  testing  is  recommended  for  the  initial  TB  skin  test  for  adults  who  may  be
tested  periodically,  such  as  health  care  personnel.  This  procedure  is  especially
important for settings that are classified as low risk where testing is indicated only upon
exposure. Some people with latent TB infection have a negative reaction to the TB skin
test when tested years after being infected. However, if they are tested again within a
year  of  the  first  test,  they  may  have  a  positive  reaction.  The  first  TB  skin  test  can
"trigger the memory" of the immune system, boosting its ability to react to the second
TB  skin  test.   It  may  appear  that  these  people  were  infected  between  the  first  and
second tests. However, the second positive test reaction is actually a boosted reaction
due to TB infection that occurred a long time ago. The TB skin test should be placed
and  read  by  a  designated,  trained  health  care  provider.  Consult  with  your  state  and
local public health authorities to determine who is authorized to place and read TB skin
tests in your state. Health care personnel with a documented history of a prior positive
TB test result should receive an individual TB risk assessment and TB symptom screen
upon  hire  (i.e.,  pre-placement).  Repeating  the  TB  test  (e.g.,  TB  blood  test  or  TB  skin
test)  is  not  required.  Health  care  personnel  with  a  prior  positive  TB  test  should  also
receive a chest x-ray or provide documentation of a normal chest x-ray. Repeat chest
x-rays are not required unless health care personnel develop signs or symptoms of TB
disease  or  as  part  of  the  repeat  evaluation  prior  to  starting  treatment  for  latent  TB
infection.   Local  or  state  regulations  may  determine  the  requirements  regarding
acceptable documentation. Contact your state TB program for the regulations in your
state.  Health care personnel with untreated latent TB infection should receive a yearly
TB symptom screen to detect early evidence of TB disease and to reevaluate the risks
and benefits of treatment for latent TB infection. Treatment is strongly encouraged for
health care personnel diagnosed with latent TB infection.  Short course, rifamycin-based
regimens are the preferred treatment options for latent TB infection because they have
higher  completion  rates.  Health  care  settings  in  the  United  States  should  have  a  TB
infection  control  plan.,  including  TB  screening  and  testing  of  health  care  personnel.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/tb-healthcare-settings/hcp/screening-testing/baseline-testing.html
