A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Dental  health  care  personnel  should
practice proper methods for use and disposal of single-use devices in dental settings.
Single-use devices, also called disposable devices, are intended for use on one patient
during a single procedure. These devices are usually not heat-tolerant and cannot be
reliably  cleaned.  Use  these  devices  for  one  patient  only  and  then  dispose  of  them
appropriately after one use. A device may not include instructions for reprocessing or a
label  that  identifies  it  as  single-use  or  disposable.  If  a  device  does  not  have
reprocessing  instructions,  regardless  of  labeling,  consider  it  single-use.  Single-use
patient-care  devices  sometimes  have  reusable  heat-tolerant  alternatives.  Examples
include prophylaxis angles, high-volume evacuator tips, impression trays, dental burs,
and air and water syringe tips. When determining the cost-effectiveness of disposable
and reusable devices, dental health care personnel should consider not only the cost of
the disposable item, but also the cost, time, and materials involved with cleaning and
reprocessing  the  reusable  item.  CDC  recommends  that  dental  health  care  personnel
use single-use devices for one patient only and then dispose of them appropriately.  
More  information  on  single-use  devices  is  available  on  pages  34  and  46  of  the
Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings—2003.  Some
devices―such  as  burs,  endodontic  files,  and  broaches―may  be  practical  to  consider
single-use  because  the  way  they  are  constructed  makes  them  hard  to  clean.  In
addition,  cleaning  and  heat  sterilization  can  lead  to  deterioration  on  the  cutting
surfaces and raise the potential for breakage during patient treatment.  If such devices
do  not  have  reprocessing  instructions,  they  should  be  considered  single-use.  Most
single-use  devices  used  in  dental  settings  can  be  discarded  with  the  regular  trash.  
Some  single-use  devices  meet  the  definition  of  regulated  medical  waste  and  require
special  handling  and  disposal  according  to  federal,  state,  and  local  rules  and
regulations. One example is solid waste soaked or saturated with blood or saliva—such
as gauze saturated with blood from surgery that would release blood when squeezed or
compressed  or  gauze  caked  with  dried  blood  that  may  be  released  during  handling.
Other examples include contaminated sharp items, such as needles and scalpel blades. 
CDC  protects  patients  and  providers  by  developing  recommendations  that  guide
infection prevention and control practices wherever dental care is delivered. Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/single-use-devices.html
