A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Health  care  personnel  are  at  risk  for
occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens  that  can  cause  diseases.  These
include, but are not limited to, hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), and HIV.
Even when blood is not visible, it can still be present in limited quantities in saliva. Both
blood  and  saliva  are  considered  potentially  infectious  materials  by  the  Occupational
Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA).  Occupational  exposures  can  occur  when
infected blood from a patient comes in contact with the eyes, nose, mouth, or broken
skin of a provider. They can also occur through needlesticks or cuts from other sharp
instruments  contaminated  with  infected  blood  (including  blood-contaminated  saliva).
Risk  of  exposures  can  be  reduced  by  following  a  hierarchy  of  controls  including
elimination,  substitution,  administrative  controls,  engineering  controls,  and  personal
protective equipment (PPE). For example, in dental settings, splashes to the eyes, nose,
mouth, and skin can be reduced by properly using high volume evacuation systems and
PPE such as gloves, eye and face protection, and gowns. Needlesticks and other cuts
can be prevented by using engineering controls (for example, disposing of used needles
in  appropriate  sharps  disposal  containers  and  using  medical  devices  with  safety
features designed to prevent injuries) and safer techniques (for example, not recapping
needles by hand). CDC's National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
developed the Hierarchy of Controls, which defines various levels of controls that can
lower worker exposures and reduce risk of illness or injury. Additionally, NIOSH created
a  bloodborne  pathogens  page  that  provides  information  on  handling  needlestick  or
sharps injuries and exposure to patient blood or body fluids in a health care setting. To
prevent  occupational  exposure  to  blood,  CDC  recommends  to:  More  information  on
preventing occupational exposure to blood can be found on pages 3, 12–14, 40, and 62
of  the  Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings—2003.  If  you
experience a needlestick, cut yourself with a sharp instrument, or are exposed to the
blood  or  another  body  fluid  of  a  patient,  immediately  follow  these  steps:  Health  care
professionals  caring  for  exposed  health  care  workers  can  call  the  National  Clinicians'
Post-Exposure  Prophylaxis  Hotline  (PEPline)  for  advice  on  managing  occupational
exposures to HIV and hepatitis B and C viruses. PEPline is available 24 hours a day, 7
days  a  week,  at  1-888-448-4911.  CDC  protects  patients  and  providers  by  developing
recommendations that guide infection prevention and control practices wherever dental
care is delivered. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/occupational-exposure.html
