A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  In  the  dental  operatory,  environmental
surfaces can become contaminated through touch, splash, or droplets generated during
patient  care.  Certain  surfaces,  especially  ones  touched  frequently—such  as  light
handles,  unit  switches,  and  drawer  knobs—can  serve  as  reservoirs  of  microbial
contamination. This may cause cross-contamination that can expose dental health care
personnel  or  patients  to  disease.  Full  recommendations  on  cleaning  and  disinfecting
environmental surfaces can be found on pages 25–28 in CDC's Guidelines for Infection
Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings—2003  and  in  the  Summary  of  Infection
Prevention  Practices  in  Dental  Settings:  Basic  Expectations  for  Safe  Care.  Cleaning
removes  debris  and  organic  contamination  from  surfaces.  Cleaning  is  the  necessary
first step of any disinfection process. If a surface is not cleaned first, the disinfection
process  can  be  compromised.  Disinfection  eliminates  many  or  all  disease-causing
microorganisms  on  an  object.  However,  it  does  not  remove  bacterial  spores.  
Sterilization eliminates all disease-causing microorganisms, as well as bacterial spores.
This  is  typically  done  by  heat  (steam  autoclave,  dry  heat,  and  unsaturated  chemical
vapor)  or  liquid  chemical  sterilants.  Sterilization  is  used  for  patient  care  items.  The
choice of specific cleaning or disinfecting agents is largely a matter of judgment, guided
by  product  label  claims  and  instructions  and  government  regulations.   Choosing  the
correct product depends on the consideration of multiple factors, including the degree
of microbial killing required; the nature and composition of the surface, item, or device
to be treated; and the cost, safety, and ease of use.  A single product might not satisfy
all  disinfection  requirements  in  a  given  dental  facility.  Low-level  disinfectants  are
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)-registered  without  a  tuberculocidal  claim.  The
label  may  instead  provide  a  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  or  HIV  label  claim.  Low-level
disinfection kills most vegetative bacteria, some viruses, and some fungi, but cannot be
relied  on  to  kill  mycobacteria  or  bacterial  spores.  Intermediate-level  disinfectants  are
registered  with  the  US  EPA  and  have  a  tuberculocidal  claim.  Intermediate-level
disinfection  kills  bacteria,  most  viruses  and  most  fungi,  but  does  not  reliably  kill
bacterial spores. High-level disinfectants, such as glutaraldehyde, are used as chemical
sterilants. Because of their toxic nature, high level disinfectants should never be used
on environmental surfaces. Because of the risks associated with exposure to chemical
disinfectants  and  contaminated  surfaces,  dental  health  care  personnel  (DHCP)  should
wear appropriate PPE to prevent exposure to infectious agents or chemicals. PPE can
include  gloves,  gowns,  masks,  and  eye  protection.  Chemical-  and  puncture-resistant
utility  gloves  offer  more  protection  than  patient  examination  gloves  when  using
hazardous chemicals.    DHCP should follow manufacturer instructions and review the
manufacturer Safety Data Sheet (formerly called Material Safety Data Sheet) regarding
correct procedures for handling or working with hazardous chemicals. Clinical contact
surfaces, such as light handles, bracket trays, switches on dental units, and computer
equipment,  are  likely  be  contaminated  by  direct  spray  or  spatter  generated  during
dental  procedures.  They  can  also  be  contaminated  by  contact  with  contaminated
gloved hands.  Ideally, clinical contact surfaces, especially those that are hard to clean,
should  be  barrier  protected  with  a  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)-approved
surface barrier. This barrier should be changed between each patient.  After removing
the  barrier,  examine  the  surface  to  make  sure  it  did  not  become  soiled.  If  it  is
contaminated, the surface needs to be cleaned and disinfected before the next patient.
If  surface  barriers  cannot  be  used,  clean  and  then  disinfect  the  surface  with  an
EPA-registered, low-level hospital disinfectant that is effective against HIV and HBV. If
the surface is visibly contaminated with blood or other potentially infectious material,
clean and then disinfect the surface with an EPA-registered, intermediate-level hospital
disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim. Housekeeping surfaces, such as floors, walls,
and sinks, do not come into contact with patients or devices used in dental procedures.
These surfaces have a limited risk of disease transmission and can be decontaminated
with  less  rigorous  methods  than  those  used  on  dental  patient-care  items  and  clinical
contact surfaces. Housekeeping surface can be cleaned with soap and water or cleaned
and disinfected if visibly contaminated with blood. Reusable mops and cloths should be
cleaned  after  use  and  allowed  to  dry  before  reuse.  Alternatively,  use  single-use
disposable  options.  Prepare  fresh  cleaning  and  disinfecting  solutions  daily  and
according  to  the  manufacturer's  recommendations.  The  majority  of  soiled  items  in
dental offices are general medical waste. Examples include used gloves, masks, gowns,
and lightly soiled gauze or cotton rolls. Non-regulated medical waste can be disposed of
with ordinary waste. Some waste—such as gauze soaked in blood, extracted teeth, and
used  needles—carries  a  substantial  risk  of  causing  infection  during  handling  and
disposal  and  is  regulated  medical  waste.  This  type  of  waste  requires  special  storage,
handling,  neutralization,  and  disposal  strategies.   Regulated  medical  waste  that  does
not have any sharp items can be contained in a single leak-resistant biohazard bag. 
Sharp  items,  like  scalpel  blades,  needles,  or  syringes,  should  be  placed  in
puncture-resistant  containers  with  a  biohazard  label  (e.g.,  a  sharps  container).   Any
facility generating regulated medical waste should have a plan for its management that
complies with federal, state, and local regulations.  Dental health care facilities should
dispose of medical waste regularly so that it does not accumulate. EPA regulates low-
and  intermediate-level  disinfectants  that  are  used  on  environmental  surfaces  (clinical
contact surfaces and housekeeping). FDA regulates liquid chemical sterilants/high-level
disinfectants  (e.g.,  glutaraldehyde,  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  peracetic  acid)  used  on
heat-sensitive  semicritical  patient  care  devices.  CDC  does  not  test,  evaluate,  or
otherwise recommend specific chemical germicides. The CDC dental guidelines provide
overall  guidance  for  dental  health  care  personnel  to  choose  from  among  general
classes of products based on infection prevention and control principles. This guidance
recommends appropriate application of liquid chemical disinfectants registered with the
EPA  for  use  in  dental  health  care  settings.  The  EPA  maintains  a  list  of  selected
EPA-registered disinfectants. The ability to kill Mycobacterium tuberculosis is used as a
benchmark  to  measure  how  well  a  disinfectant  can  kill  germs.  Mycobacteria  have
among the highest levels of resistance of all microorganisms. Therefore, any germicide
with a tuberculocidal claim is considered capable of inactivating a broad spectrum of
pathogens,  including  less  resistant  organisms  such  as  bloodborne  pathogens  (e.g.,
hepatitis  B  and  C  viruses,  HIV).  The  use  of  such  products  on  environmental  surfaces
plays no role in preventing the spread of tuberculosis (which is airborne). CDC protects
patients and providers by developing recommendations that guide infection prevention
and  control  practices  wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/cleaning-disinfecting-environmental-surf
ace.html
