Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
SPECIAL TOPIC — Volume 15 — May 17, 2018 Suggested citation for this article:
Jilcott  Pitts  S,  Schwartz  B,  Graham  J,  Warnock  AL,  Mojica  A,  Marziale  E,  et  al.  Best
Practices  for  Financial  Sustainability  of  Healthy  Food  Service  Guidelines  in  Hospital
Cafeterias.
 Prev
 Chronic
 Dis
 2018;15:170477.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd15.170477. PEER REVIEWED In February and March 2017
we examined barriers and facilitators to financial sustainability of healthy food service
guidelines and synthesized best practices for financial sustainability in retail operations.
We conducted qualitative, in-depth interviews with 8 hospital food service directors to
learn  more  about  barriers  and  facilitators  to  financial  sustainability  of  healthy  food
service guidelines in retail food service operations. Analysts organized themes around
headers  in  the  interview  guide  and  also  made  note  of  emerging  themes  not  in  the
original guide. They used the code occurrence and co-occurrence features in Dedoose
version 7.0.23 (SocioCultural Research Consultants) independently to analyze patterns
across  the  interviews  and  to  pull  illustrative  quotes  for  analysis.  Two  overarching
themes  emerged,  related  to  1)  the  demand  for  and  sales  of  healthy  foods  and
beverages, and 2) the production and supply of healthy foods and beverages. Our study
provides  insights  into  how  hospital  food  service  directors  can  maximize  revenue  and
remain financially viable while selling healthier options in on-site dining facilities. Top
Given  the  rising  prevalence  of  obesity  and  associated  health  care  costs  (1–3),  food
service  operations  in  the  health  care  industry  are  under  growing  pressure  to  offer
nutritious  foods  and  beverages  to  customers  at  onsite  dining  facilities.  With  industry
trends  like  the  Partnership  for  a  Healthier  America’s  (PHA’s)  Healthy  Hospital  Food
Initiative (4) and Health Care Without Harm’s Healthy Food in Health Care Pledge (5),
food  service  operations  in  the  health  care  industry  are  committing  to  replacing
calorie-dense and nutrient-poor foods and beverages with healthier options. However,
there  are  several  barriers  to  implementing  such  healthy  food  service  guidelines,
including  customer  complaints  and  dissatisfaction,  need  for  increased  labor  skills,
increased  time  needed  to  prepare  healthier  food,  and  inadequate  selections  offered
from vendors (6). Changes in current food practices will continue to occur as directors
are tasked with balancing increased organizational pressure to generate a profit with
pressure from the health care industry and the public to provide healthier food options.
Little is known about how these healthy food service guidelines in retail operations have
changed long-term revenue for hospitals and food service contractors. As healthy food
service guidelines proliferate, more research is needed to understand best practices to
improve financial sustainability once the guidelines are implemented. Thus, the purpose
of  this  study  was  to  examine  barriers  and  facilitators  to  maintaining  financial
sustainability of healthy food service guidelines and to synthesize information on best
practices for financial sustainability collected from 8 hospital food service directors. This
information can help food service directors successfully transition to implementation of
healthy food service guidelines in their retail operations in a financially sustainable way.
Top  Participant  recruitment.  We  used  purposive  sampling  to  recruit  respondents.
Participants  were  recruited  by  using  the  listserv  of  the  Association  for  Healthcare
Foodservice, the PHA web page, and personal contacts. Eligibility was limited to food
service directors of sites that had implemented healthy food service guidelines in their
onsite retail dining facility for at least 6 months. Each site was asked to classify its food
service  as  self-operated,  contracted,  blended,  or  neither.  Self-operated  sites  use
internal funds, staff, and equipment to manage food service, whereas contracted food
service is managed by an external vendor hired to handle all aspects of food service for
the hospital dining facility. Of the 8 participating sites, one used a blended model and
classified itself as both self-operated and contracted, 6 reported a self-operated model,
and one classified itself as neither.  Data collection. In-depth interviews were conducted
in February and March 2017. Before the 8 key informant interviews, participants were
asked to complete a brief Qualtrics survey about characteristics of their hospital food
service  operation  (eg,  number  of  beds,  number  of  employees,  group  purchasing
organization [GPO] used, broadline distributor used). In a GPO, numerous hospitals or
other  entities  join  together  to  pool  purchasing  power  and  obtain  reduced  pricing  and
rebates  from  manufacturers.  A  broadline  distributor  is  a  company  that  provides  food
and  nonfood  products  to  hospitals  and  functions  as  an  intermediary  between
manufacturers  and  the  hospital  food  service  operator.  One-hour  semi-structured
interviews  were  conducted  with  pairs  of  interviewees  with  similar  operational
characteristics,  to  encourage  information  sharing.  The  same  interviewer  (S.J.P.)
facilitated each interview. The research project was submitted to the Office of Human
Research  Ethics  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill,  which  determined
that  the  submission  did  not  constitute  human  subject  research  and  did  not  require
institutional review board approval. Interview guide. A preliminary review of literature
addressing  financial  sustainability  for  hospital  cafeterias  implementing  healthy  food
service guidelines was conducted to inform development of the interview guide. S.J.P.
developed  an  initial  interview  guide  based  on  literature  review  results  with
contributions from all authors. Interview themes were 1) employee training/education,
2) menu-planning and recipe redevelopment, 3) procurement, 4) inventory and tracking
systems,  and  5)  behavioral  design  strategies.  Revisions  to  the  guide  were  based  on
discussions  among  research  team  members  and  a  pilot  test  with  one  food  service
director  identified  through  purposive  sampling.  The  interview  guide  was  refined  and
finalized with 7 sections and 25 open-ended questions. Data analysis. Interviews were
transcribed  verbatim  using  NoNotes  transcription  service  (Nonotes.com).  Researchers
independently  cleaned  the  transcripts  for  typographical  errors  before  uploading  into
Dedoose  (Dedoose.com),  a  collaborative  web-based  qualitative  software  system  for
health  and  policy  research.  S.J.P.  and  B.S.  used  2  transcripts  to  develop  independent
codebooks and then developed a consolidated codebook with prioritized topical codes.
All interview transcripts were cloned and independently coded by S.J.P. and B.S. using
the  consolidated  codebook.  S.J.P.  and  B.S.  discussed  the  independently  coded
transcripts  and  resolved  discrepancies  in  coding.  Final  coding  decisions  were
documented  in  a  single  transcript.  S.J.P.  and  B.S.  used  the  headers  in  the  interview
guide  to  organize  themes  and  made  note  of  emerging  themes  not  included  in  the
original  interview  guide.  They  independently  used  the  code  occurrence  and
co-occurrence  features  in  Dedoose  to  analyze  patterns  across  the  interviews  and
extract  illustrative  quotes.  The  2  independent  documents  listing  themes  were
consolidated by the analysts. A list of potential best practices for financial sustainability
for hospital food retail operations was collated as authors discussed each theme. A third
analyst (J.G.) reviewed all themes, and further consolidated themes into best practices
to maintain financial sustainability when implementing healthy food service guidelines.
Participant checking was also used, wherein each food service director reviewed results
and  provided  feedback.  We  describe  characteristics  of  respondents’  hospital  food
service retail operations, followed by overarching themes and best practices related to
1) the demand for and sales of healthy foods and beverages, and 2) the production and
supply  of  healthy  foods  and  beverages.  The  8  participants  worked  in  hospitals  that
ranged in size from 92 to 2000 beds, and 65 to 25,000 employees. The time required to
implement healthy food service guidelines ranged from 6 months to 3 years or longer.
Table 1 shows hospital cafeteria characteristics for each respondent. Two overarching
themes emerged as necessary to ensure that hospital dining facilities remain financially
sustainable  when  implementing  healthy  food  service  guidelines,  related  to  1)  the
demand for and sales of healthy foods and beverages, and 2) the production and supply
of healthy foods and beverages (Table 2). Top From the demand and sales perspective,
all 8 food service directors voiced concerns that the higher prices of healthy foods and
highly  restrictive  healthy  food  service  guidelines  could  reduce  sales  and  overall
profitability.  All  8  food  service  directors  noted  that  healthier  foods  are  typically  more
expensive  to  purchase  and  prepare,  and  thus  must  be  prepared  and  marketed
creatively  to  ensure  continued  profitability.  Five  directors  noted  that  customers  were
willing to accept smaller portions of tastier dishes or pay more for healthier products,
like  antibiotic-free  or  organic  chicken.  Although  directors  often  could  not  state  that
profitability had increased because of healthier food selections, 5 noted that customer
volume had increased or stayed the same. Six directors believed that, in some cases, it
was workable to price healthy dishes at a loss to promote greater customer volume and
to promote healthy food purchases. A common concern voiced by 5 directors was that a
substantial  portion  of  the  existing  customer  base  could  easily  be  alienated,  with  a
commensurate reduction in sales, if the healthy food program was too aggressive and
restrictive. “I was not a fan of that [healthy food service guidelines] program, I thought
it  was  so  restrictive  .  .  .  the  reality  is  that  if  you  tell  somebody  that  they  can’t  have
something, guess what — they want it even more.” (Participant [P]01) One food service
director employed a strategy called “stealth health” to ensure that customers were not
turned off by the idea of overtly healthier options. Six said that it was challenging to
drop  comfort  foods  (eg,  fried  foods  and  sugar-sweetened  beverages)  and  familiar,
traditional  foods  from  the  menu  because  customers  resisted  these  changes.
Furthermore,  the  hospital  setting  can  be  stressful  and  customers  often  want  comfort
foods and beverages. I’m amazed at how passionate customers have been about the
fries. We took out the fries, and we still hear about it to this day and it’s been over 2
years ago. That’s why I didn’t take out the sugar-sweetened beverages because I didn’t
want to hear about that. People are in the hospital and they are stressed and they need
something  that  they  consider  comfort  food,  so  I  don’t  want  to  deny  that  to  people  if
that’s  what  makes  them  feel  better.  (P01)  Top  The  following  best  practices  were
identified to address concerns about demand for and sales of healthy foods: Evaluate
new dishes with staff and customers to see which are well-received. For example, do
successive taste-tasting before the roll-out of new dishes. Use point of sale (POS) and
nutrition analysis software to identify and prioritize popular recipes that meet healthy
food  service  guidelines.  Anticipate  dropping  popular  comfort  foods  by  preparing
customers in advance, and replace them with tasty, healthier alternatives. Avoid setting
healthy  foods  apart  as  something  different;  rather,  attempt  to  improve  the
healthfulness of most dishes, and support customers’ ability to make healthy choices
through  food  labeling.  To  increase  customer  volume,  roll  out  and  launch  new  menus
that feature tastier, healthy menu options. The goal should be to enhance the overall
appeal  of  the  menu  and  draw  in  new  customers.  Offset  higher  food  costs  for  new,
healthier  menu  items  by  adjusting  the  price  point  of  other  popular  food  offerings  to
ensure overall profitability. Realign employee and customer discounts to favor healthier
menu  options.  Top  From  a  supply  perspective,  8  food  service  directors  said  they
struggle with the cost of healthy food production and the effective engagement of their
food service staff to embrace the organizational culture shift to healthier eating. All 8
noted that a limited supply of healthy packaged foods and ingredients is available from
GPOs and broadline distributors. This makes it more expensive to prepare healthy foods
because they cost more to develop, require more staff time to produce, and the recipe
ingredients  are  more  costly.  “We  found  that  some  of  our  healthier  recipes  that  are
popular are a little bit more labor intensive. We really had to take a look at some of our
labor  and  how  we  did  our  work.”  (P05)  The  8  food  service  directors  reported  that,  in
addition to staff time associated directly with food production, a successful healthy food
program  requires  staff  training  around  recipe  redevelopment  and  production,  the
display  and  promotion  of  healthy  dishes,  and  the  goals  and  practices  of  offering  a
healthy food program. One group had a particularly innovative training method wherein
the executive chef provided videos for other employees, and disseminated the training
online. It’s been a real big change for us and one of our initiatives from our executive
chef since he started to do online trainings. We have a demo kitchen that can record
live training sessions. He teaches people how to cook whole grains, how to rehydrate
dried beans, all of these new ingredients that we’re using that we haven’t used in the
past . . . he’s doing training videos that are accessible to all of our frontline food service
employees.  (P06)  All  8  food  service  directors  said  that  healthy  food  programs  may
require upfront capital investment to address both the cost of healthy food production
and the availability of healthy food choices. Food service directors must determine what
investments  should  be  made  to  obtain  kitchen  equipment  needed  for  healthy  food
production, and how to reduce labor costs associated with healthier food preparation
and service. Six food service directors expressed concern with the financial stress that
adopting a healthy food program may place on management and staff, which, in turn,
can  affect  staff  morale,  productivity,  and  retention.  Top  To  address  the  overarching
production  and  supply  concerns,  respondents  considered  the  following  to  be  best
practices: Regularly emphasize and share the goals of the healthy food program with
your staff, emphasizing the benefits of a healthier diet. Instill pride in the production of
better tasting healthier foods, enhancing staff productivity and retention. Conduct taste
tests with frontline staff so they buy in to healthier options and will then market them to
consumers. Develop recipes that balance the cost of ingredients, but overall provide a
healthy, delicious alternative. Absorb losses associated with more expensive, healthier
foods by offsetting higher costs with increases in the price of other popular dishes on
the  cafeteria’s  larger  menu.  Serve  smaller  portions  of  those  foods  that  are  more
expensive to make. Introduce innovative training methods that maximize the reach and
impact  of  individual  trainers.  Adopt  innovative  technologies  and  obtain  kitchen
equipment  to  enhance  labor  efficiency  and  productivity.  Work  with  your  GPO  to
negotiate  prices  and  secure  reasonably  priced  ingredients  for  healthy  foods.  When
managing  multiple  sites  or  facilities,  use  POS  systems  to  determine  top-sellers  and
simplify inventory management. Identify and work with small, local vendors to achieve
healthy  food  goals.  Set  up  healthy  stations  to  ensure  portion  control  and  distinguish
healthy  food  choices.  Adopt  behavioral  design  strategies  to  encourage  healthy  food
selection  and  sales.  Six  directors  noted  that  implementing  healthy  food  service
guidelines is a journey that happens in incremental phases over time: It’s a journey. It’s
not going to happen overnight. We live in [western state], which is one of the healthiest
states in the U.S., but people here want their [unhealthy food] as much as anybody else
does and it’s hard to change people’s minds. So every little victory is a victory. (P01)
Top Hospital food retail operations are increasingly pressured to provide healthier, but
often more costly, food and beverage options to customers, while remaining financially
sound. A perception that customers want less-healthy comfort foods on the menu has
implications  for  food  service  directors  attempting  to  offer  healthy  menus  while
maintaining profits. More research is needed on how best to incentivize and motivate
customers  to  demand  healthier  options.  Although  we  did  not  ask  directly  about
subsidies,  it  is  possible  that  hospitals  that  subsidize  healthy  menu  items  could  have
more  success  overall.  Our  study  provides  insights  into  how  hospital  food  service
directors can increase healthy options and maximize revenue and profit in their retail
operations. Future research should examine quantitative sales data to determine how
healthy  foods  and  beverages  perform  financially  when  compared  with  less  healthy
menu  items.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  improve  health  and  reduce  disease  risk  among
customers.  Top  The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  all  interview  participants.  This
project  was  supported  by  the  National  Network  of  Public  Health  Institutes  through  a
cooperative  agreement  with  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (no:
#5U38OT000203-03).  The  findings  and  conclusions  in  this  report  are  those  of  the
authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease
Control  and  Prevention.  Top  Corresponding  Author:  Stephanie  Jilcott  Pitts,  PhD,
Associate  Professor,  East  Carolina  University,  600  Moye  Blvd,  MS  660,  Room  126,
Lakeside  Annex  8,  Department  of  Public  Health,  Greenville,  NC  27834.  Telephone:
252-744-5572.  Email:  jilcotts@ecu.edu.  Author  Affiliations:  1East  Carolina  University,
Greenville, North Carolina. 2Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North
Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina.  3Division  of  Nutrition,  Physical
Activity  and  Obesity,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,  Georgia.
4University  of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina.  5National
Network  of  Public  Health  Institutes,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.  Top  Top  a  Numerous
hospitals or other entities joined together to pool purchasing power to obtain reduced
pricing and rebates from manufacturers. b A company that provides food and nonfood
products to hospitals and functions as an intermediary between manufacturers and the
hospital  food  service  operator.    Abbreviation:  GPO,  group  purchasing  organization.a
Eight food service directors participated in our interviews. P0x numbers identify each
respondent  (Table  1).b  CBORD  is  a  diet/menu  analysis  system.  Top  The  opinions
expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2018/17_0477.htm
