A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Oral surgical procedures raise the risk of
local or systemic infection. Microorganisms from inside or outside the mouth can enter
areas of the body that are normally sterile, such as bone, subcutaneous tissue, or the
vessels that carry blood and lymph through the body. Oral surgical procedures involve
the incision, excision, or reflection of tissue that exposes the normally sterile areas of
the oral cavity. Examples include: CDC recommends that dental health care personnel
performing  oral  surgeries:  CDC  recommendations  on  oral  surgical  procedures  can  be
found  on  pages  19,  29,  32–33,  41,  and  46  in  the  Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in
Dental  Health-Care  Settings—2003.  Conventional  dental  units  cannot  reliably  deliver
sterile water even when equipped with independent water reservoirs. For this reason,
sterile solutions like sterile saline or sterile water should be used as a coolant or irrigant
when  performing  surgical  procedures.   Placing  sterile  solutions  in  the  independent
water  reservoir  will  not  result  in  sterile  solutions  being  delivered  during  patient  care.
Sterile  irrigating  solutions  should  always  be  manually  delivered  by  a  sterile  water
delivery  device,  such  as  a  sterile  irrigating  syringe  or  a  bulb  syringe.  Alternatively,
devices that bypass the dental unit by using sterile single-use disposable or sterilizable
tubing to deliver sterile water are available.More information can be found on our Best
Practices  for  Dental  Unit  Water  Quality  web  page  and  in  the  Summary  of  Infection
Prevention Practices in Dental Settings: Basic Expectations for Safe Care. CDC protects
patients and providers by developing recommendations that guide infection prevention
and  control  practices  wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/oral-surgical-procedures.html
