A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  CDC  provides  recommendations  for  the
sterilization  process  in  the  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Healthcare
Facilities  (2008)  as  well  as  on  page  21–25  and  42–44  of  the  Guidelines  for  Infection
Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings  —  2003  and  in  the  Summary  of  Infection
Prevention in Dental Settings: Basic Expectations for Safe Care. CDC recommends that
dental  health  care  personnel  be  familiar  with  the  recommended  practices  for
reprocessing patient-care items. Always follow manufacturer's validated Instructions for
Use  when  reprocessing  items.  Patient-care  items  are  categorized  depending  on  the
potential risk for transmission of infection. Critical‎ items penetrate soft tissue or bone.
These items have the highest risk of transmitting infections and should always be heat
sterilized. Semicritical items touch mucous membranes, like the inside of the cheeks or
the  gums.  These  items  have  a  lower  risk  of  transmission  than  critical  items.  Most
semicritical items can (and therefore should) be heat sterilized. If they cannot tolerate
heat sterilization, they should be processed using a high-level disinfectant. ‎ Noncritical
items only contact unbroken skin. These items have the lowest risk of transmission. In
most cases, noncritical items can ‎be cleaned and, if visibly soiled, low-level disinfected. 
Cleaning  is  the  basic  first  step  in  all  decontamination  processes.  Cleaning  removes
debris  and  organic  contamination  from  instruments.  Blood,  saliva,  and  other
contamination  can  cause  the  disinfection  or  sterilization  process  to  fail  if  it  is  not
removed.  Debris can be removed from an instrument in several ways. Dental health
care personnel may scrub the instrument manually with a surfactant or detergent and
water.  Dental  health  care  personnel  may  also  use  automated  equipment  (e.g.,
ultrasonic  cleaner,  washer-disinfector)  and  chemical  agents.  Using  automated
equipment  can  be  more  efficient  and  safer  than  manually  cleaning  contaminated
instruments.  If manual cleaning is performed:  After cleaning, instruments should be
rinsed  with  water  to  remove  chemical  or  detergent  residue.  Take  care  to  minimize
splashing. After cleaning, instruments should be allowed to dry thoroughly before they
are packaged, wrapped or otherwise contained. Wet instruments can compromise the
packaging  material's  integrity  and  ability  to  maintain  sterility.  Once  dry,  instruments
should  be  inspected  and  then  wrapped,  packaged,  or  placed  into  container  systems
before  heat  sterilization.  Packaging  materials  allow  for  penetration  of  the  sterilization
agent and maintain sterility of the processed item after sterilization. Dental health care
personnel  should  follow  the  manufacturer's  instructions  for  packaging  patient-care
items. This includes following instructions for the item being sterilized, the packaging,
and  any  sterilization  equipment  being  used.   Before  placing  packaged  instruments  in
the  sterilizer,  at  a  minimum,  include  the  following  information  on  the  label:  This
information  helps  dental  health  care  personnel  retrieve  items  in  the  event  of  an
instrument  processing  or  sterilization  failure.  The  majority  of  patient-care  items  in
dentistry  are  heat-tolerant  and  therefore  should  be  heat  sterilized.  Follow  the
manufacturer's  recommendations  for  sterilization  times,  temperatures,  and  other
operating  parameters  for  all  equipment  and  supplies  used  during  reprocessing.  This
includes correct use of containers, wraps, and chemical or biological indicators.  If the
manufacturer's  instructions  for  use  are  not  clear,  contact  the  manufacturer  for
assistance.   Ideally,  sterile  instruments  and  supplies  should  be  stored  in  covered  or
closed cabinets. They should not be stored under sinks or in other places where they
might become wet. Storage practices for wrapped sterilized instruments can be either
date-  or  event-related.  For  date-related  shelf-life  practices,  sterilized  packages  are
expiration-dated  and  used  on  a  "first  in,  first  out"  basis.  Event-related  shelf-life
practices recognize that the product should remain sterile indefinitely, unless an event
causes it to become contaminated (such as torn or wet packaging).  Dental health care
personnel should inspect packaging of sterilized instruments before opening and use to
ensure  the  material  has  not  been  compromised  (wet,  torn,  or  punctured)  during
storage. If a package has been compromised, the contents should be reprocessed—that
is,  cleaned,  packaged,  and  heat-sterilized  again—before  patient  use.  The  use  of
heat-sensitive  semicritical  items  that  must  be  processed  with  liquid  chemical
germicides is discouraged. Heat-tolerant or disposable alternatives are available for the
majority  of  such  items.  If  heat-sensitive  instruments  must  be  used,  they  can  be
sterilized  or  high-level  disinfected  by  soaking  them  in  a  liquid  chemical  germicide
cleared by FDA as sterilants.  However, these powerful chemicals are highly toxic and
manufacturer
 instructions—for
 example,
 regarding
 dilution,
 immersion
 time,
temperature,  and  disposal—and  safety  precautions  for  using  chemical  sterilants  or
high-level  disinfectants  must  be  followed  precisely.   This  video,  from  CDC's
Foundations:  Building  the  Safest  Dental  Visit  training,  describes  the  workflow  pattern
for  a  sterilization  area  that  ensures  devices  and  instruments  clearly  flow  from
high-contamination  areas  to  clean  and  sterile  areas.  CDC  protects  patients  and
providers by developing recommendations that guide infection prevention and control
practices  wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/dental-sterilization.html
