A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Sterilization monitoring is a critical step in
ensuring that instruments and devices are safe to use on another patient. Dental health
care  personnel  should  use  a  combination  of  mechanical,  chemical,  and  biological
monitoring to check whether a sterilizer reached the conditions necessary to achieve
sterilization.  CDC  provides  recommendations  for  sterilization  monitoring  in  the
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities (2008) as well as on
page 24–25 of the Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings (2003)
and in the Summary of Infection Prevention in Dental Settings: Basic Expectations for
Safe  Care.   Mechanical  monitoring  involves  checking  the  sterilizer  gauges,  computer
displays,  or  printouts,  and  documenting  in  your  sterilization  records  that  pressure,
temperature,  and  exposure  time  have  reached  the  levels  recommended  by  the
sterilizer manufacturer. Since these parameters can be observed during the sterilization
cycle, this might be the first indication of a problem. Mechanical monitoring should be
conducted for every sterilizer load. Do not use instrument packages if the mechanical
monitoring indicates that the sterilizer did not reach the required temperature, time, or
pressure to render the items sterile. Chemical monitoring uses sensitive chemicals that
change  color  when  exposed  to  high  temperatures  or  combinations  of  time  and
temperature.  A chemical indicator should be used inside every package to verify that
the sterilizing agent has penetrated the package and reached the instruments inside. If
the  internal  chemical  indicator  is  not  visible  from  the  outside  of  the  package,  an
external  indicator  should  also  be  used.   Inspect  the  chemical  indicator  immediately
when  removing  packages  from  the  sterilizer;  if  the  appropriate  color  change  did  not
occur,  do  not  use  the  instruments.  Biological  monitoring,  also  called  a  spore  test,
assesses  the  sterilization  process  directly  by  killing  known  highly  resistant
microorganisms. Because the spores used in biologic indicators are more resistant than
the common microbial contaminants found on patient-care equipment, a negative spore
test indicates that other potential microorganisms in the load have been killed. A spore
test should be used at least weekly to monitor sterilizers, and should use a matching
control  (i.e.,  biological  indicator  and  control  from  same  lot  number).  Follow  the
manufacturer’s directions for how to place the biological indicator in the sterilizer.  A
spore  test  should  also  be  used  for  every  load  with  an  implantable  device.  Ideally,
implantable items should not be used until they test negative. Sterilization monitoring
records  are  an  important  component  of  a  dental  infection  prevention  program.
Maintaining accurate records ensures cycle parameters have been met and establishes
accountability.  In  addition,  if  there  is  a  problem  with  a  sterilizer  (e.g.,  unchanged
chemical  indicator,  positive  spore  test),  documentation  helps  to  determine  if  an
instrument  recall  is  necessary.  Maintain  your  sterilization  monitoring  records
(mechanical,  chemical,  and  biological)  long  enough  to  comply  with  state  and  local
regulations.  Mechanical, chemical, or biological monitoring failures can be caused by a
number  of  issues,  including  but  not  limited  to:  If  the  mechanical  (e.g.,  time,
temperature, pressure) and chemical (internal or external) indicators suggest that the
sterilizer  is  functioning  properly,  a  single  positive  spore  test  result  probably  does  not
indicate  sterilizer  malfunction.  If  the  repeat  spore  test  result  is  positive,  remove  the
sterilizer  from  service  and  do  not  use  until  it  has  been  inspected  or  repaired  and
re-challenged  with  spore  tests  in  three  consecutive  fully  loaded  chamber  sterilization
cycles. When possible, items from suspect loads dating back to the last negative spore
test should be recalled, rewrapped, and re-sterilized. See Table 12 of the Guideline for
Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities (2008) for the suggested protocol
to manage a positive biological indicator in a steam sterilizer. If patient care items are
not properly reprocessed, this could represent an infection control breach.  Visit CDC's
Steps for Evaluating an Infection Control Breach for more information on what to do in
this situation. CDC does not provide a separate recommendation for sterilizers that are
used on a part-time basis. CDC recommends that dental health care personnel monitor
sterilizers at least weekly by using a biological indicator with a matching control (i.e.,
biological  indicator  and  control  from  same  lot  number).  CDC  protects  patients  and
providers by developing recommendations that guide infection prevention and control
practices  wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/sterilization-monitoring.html
