A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Untreated  dental  units  cannot  reliably
produce water that meets drinking water standards (which is fewer than 500 CFU/mL of
water  of  heterotrophic  water  bacteria).  On  October  31,  2022,  CDC  released  a  Health
Advisory Notice to communicate the importance of following existing recommendations
for  maintaining  and  monitoring  dental  waterlines.   Biofilm  is  a  thin,  slimy  film  of
bacteria  that  sticks  to  moist  surfaces.  Dental  unit  waterlines  have  unique
characteristics
 that
 make
 them
 prone
 to
 biofilm
 formation,
 including
 long,
small-diameter  tubing,  low  flow  rates,  and  frequent  periods  of  stagnation.   High
numbers  of  common  water  bacteria  can  be  found  in  untreated  dental  unit  water
systems,
 including
 Legionella,
 Pseudomonas
 aeruginosa,
 and
 nontuberculous
Mycobacteria.  These  bacteria  can  cause  serious,  sometimes  life-threating  infections.
Contaminated  water  from  dental  units  has  been  linked  to  outbreaks  of  Mycobacteria
infections  in  children.  Case  reports  also  document  infections  with  Mycobacteria  and
Legionella following endodontic procedures, third molar extractions, and general dental
work.  In  these  reported  cases,  water  samples  taken  from  the  dental  clinics
demonstrated  levels  of  bacteria  much  higher  than  the  recommended  levels  and
reported breakdowns in infection prevention procedures to maintain and monitor dental
water quality. These reports highlight the need for training to improve understanding of
the  underlying  principles  of  dental  unit  water  quality  maintenance  and  monitoring,
recommended  practices,  and  their  implementation  in  dental  settings.  Dental  unit
waterlines  should  be  treated  regularly  with  disinfectants  to  meet  the  Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) regulatory standards for drinking water (≤500 colony forming
units [CFU]/mL of heterotrophic water bacteria).  Dental unit water quality must also be
monitored, or tested, routinely as recommended by the equipment manufacturer. This
ensures  that  treatments  are  working  effectively  and  that  the  water  used  in  dental
procedures meets safety standards. Monitoring dental unit water quality can also help
identify problems in performance or adherence with maintenance protocols and provide
documentation  of  compliance.  Dental  providers  should  consult  with  the  dental
equipment manufacturer for appropriate methods and equipment to both maintain and
monitor  the  quality  of  dental  water.  Full  recommendations  regarding  dental  unit
waterlines  can  be  found  on  pages  28–30  of  CDC’s  Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in
Dental  Health-Care  Settings—2003  and  in  the  Summary  of  Infection  Prevention
Practices  in  Dental  Settings:  Basic  Expectations  for  Safe  Care.  The  Organization  for
Safety,  Asepsis  and  Prevention's  Dental  Unit  Water  Quality  White  Paper  and
Recommendations provides further information on this topic. CDC provides information
on what to do on page 30 of the Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care
Settings—2003.    For more information, see CDC's Emergency Water Supply Planning
Guide for Hospitals and Healthcare Facilities.  For surgical procedures, sterile saline or
sterile water should be used as a coolant or irrigant. Conventional dental units cannot
reliably  deliver  sterile  water  even  when  equipped  with  independent  water  reservoirs
containing low-microbial or sterile water because the water-bearing pathway cannot be
reliably sterilized. Appropriate delivery devices should be used to deliver sterile water
during surgery. Examples include bulb syringes; sterile, single-use disposable products;
or sterile water delivery systems that bypass the dental unit by using sterile single-use
disposable  or  sterilizable  tubing.  There  are  many  commercial  products  and  devices
available to disinfect and maintain dental unit waterlines, including: Available products
to  treat  waterlines  include  tablet  systems,  continuous  release  straws  and  cartridges,
initial  and  periodic  shock  treatments,  and  centralized  systems.  All  products  and
systems must be used and maintained according to the manufacturer instructions for
use  (IFUs).  If  you  have  questions  about  the  IFUs,  contact  the  manufacturer  of  the
treatment product or device that you are using. The unit should be treated according to
manufacturer IFU, and re-tested immediately after treatment. If a unit remains resistant
to  treatment  over  time,  it  may  be  necessary  to  replace  waterlines  or  other
water-bearing  components.  CDC  protects  patients  and  providers  by  developing
recommendations that guide infection prevention and control practices wherever dental
care is delivered. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/dental-ipc-faqs/best-practices-dental-unit-water-quality.
html
