Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Recommendations  for  Ages  18  Years  or  Younger,  United
States,  2024   Back  to  Child  and  Adolescent  Immunization  Schedule  home  page
Vaccines  and  Other  Immunizing  Agents  in  the  Child  Immunization  Schedule  To  make
vaccination  recommendations,  healthcare  providers  should:  Compliant  version  of  the
schedule Legend These recommendations must be read with the notes that follow. For
those  who  fall  behind  or  start  late,  provide  catch-up  vaccination  at  the  earliest
opportunity as indicated by the green bars. To determine minimum intervals between
doses,  see  the  catch-up  schedule  (Table  2).  To  make  vaccination  recommendations,
healthcare providers should: 
Recommended  by  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and
approved by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), American Academy
of Pediatrics (AAP), American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), American College
of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists  (ACOG),  American  College  of  Nurse-Midwives
(ACNM), American Academy of Physician Associates (AAPA), and National Association of
Pediatric Nurse Practitioners (NAPNAP).
The comprehensive summary of the ACIP recommended changes made to the child and
adolescent immunization schedule can be found in the January 11, 2024 MMWR.
Report
Suspected cases of reportable vaccine-preventable diseases or outbreaks to your state
or local health department
Clinically  significant  adverse  events  to  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Event  Reporting  System
(VAERS) at www.vaers.hhs.gov or (800-822-7967)
Questions or comments
Contact www.cdc.gov/cdc-info or 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636), in English or Spanish,
8 a.m.–8 p.m. ET, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.
Helpful information
Complete Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommendations
ACIP Shared Clinical Decision-Making Recommendations
General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for  Immunization  (including  contraindications  and
precautions)
Vaccine information statements
Manual  for  the  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases  (including  case
identification and outbreak response)
 Recommended  by  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and
approved by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), American Academy
of Pediatrics (AAP), American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), American College
of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists  (ACOG),  American  College  of  Nurse-Midwives
(ACNM), American Academy of Physician Associates (AAPA), and National Association of
Pediatric  Nurse  Practitioners  (NAPNAP).  The  comprehensive  summary  of  the  ACIP
recommended changes made to the child and adolescent immunization schedule can
be found in the January 11, 2024 MMWR. Report Questions or comments
Contact www.cdc.gov/cdc-info or 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636), in English or Spanish,
8 a.m.–8 p.m. ET, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Helpful information
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/child-adolescent.html
