A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  It  is  vital  for  healthcare  workers  to  be
informed  about  ways  to  protect  patients  and  themselves  from  bloodborne  infectious
diseases. Bloodborne pathogens of primary concern are the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV). As you work, you may
experience:  If  any  of  these  occur,  take  the  following  steps:  Workers  and  employers
should  take  advantage  of  needle-free  and  sharps-free  equipment,  work  practices,
engineering  controls  (including  safety-engineered  sharps),  and  personal  protective
equipment.  Always  consider  the  following  hierarchy  of  controls:  Eliminate  sharps  or
substitute with equipment that does not cause puncture wounds or lacerations. In some
cases, healthcare workers can reduce the risk of transmitting bloodborne pathogens by
eliminating sharps devices and substituting with non-sharp devices. Examples include
needle-free medication delivery systems and the use of blunt surgical suture needles.
Policies  and  procedures  can  help  protect  healthcare  workers  from  bloodborne
pathogens.  These  include:  Engineering  controls  are  important  for  protecting  against
bloodborne  pathogen  hazards.  Types  of  engineering  controls  include:  Administrative
and  engineering  controls  are  preferred  methods  of  protecting  healthcare  workers.
However, using PPE such as gloves are a part of routine patient care. When protecting
against  bloodborne  pathogens  by  touching  patients  and  surfaces  or  splashes  and
sprays of blood and body fluids, PPE may include: 
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 established NIOSH as a research
agency focused on the study of worker safety and health, and empowering employers
and  workers  to  create  safe  and  healthy  workplaces.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/healthcare/risk-factors/bloodborne-infectious-diseases.html
