A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Air  guidelines  from  the  Guidelines  for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).  A  variety  of  airborne
infections  in  susceptible  hosts  can  result  from  exposures  to  clinically  significant
microorganisms  released  into  the  air  when  environmental  reservoirs  (i.e.,  soil,  water,
dust,  and  decaying  organic  matter)  are  disturbed.  Once  these  materials  are  brought
indoors  into  a  health-care  facility  by  any  of  a  number  of  vehicles  (e.g.,  people,  air
currents, water, construction materials, and equipment), the attendant microorganisms
can proliferate in various indoor ecological niches and, if subsequently disbursed into
the  air,  serve  as  a  source  for  airborne  health-care  associated  infections.  Respiratory
infections can be acquired from exposure to pathogens contained either in droplets or
droplet nuclei. Exposure to microorganisms in droplets (e.g., through aerosolized oral
and  nasal  secretions  from  infected  patients33  )  constitutes  a  form  of  direct  contact
transmission.  When  droplets  are  produced  during  a  sneeze  or  cough,  a  cloud  of
infectious  particles  >5  μm  in  size  is  expelled,  resulting  in  the  potential  exposure  of
susceptible persons within 3 feet of the source person.6 Examples of pathogens spread
in this manner are influenza virus, rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, and respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV). Because these agents primarily are transmitted directly and because the
droplets tend to fall out of the air quickly, measures to control air flow in a health-care
facility (e.g., use of negative pressure rooms) generally are not indicated for preventing
the  spread  of  diseases  caused  by  these  agents.  Strategies  to  control  the  spread  of
these  diseases  are  outlined  in  another  guideline.3  The  spread  of  airborne  infectious
diseases via droplet nuclei is a form of indirect transmission.34 Droplet nuclei are the
residuals  of  droplets  that,  when  suspended  in  air,  subsequently  dry  and  produce
particles  ranging  in  size  from  1–5  μm.  These  particles  can  The  microorganisms  in
droplet nuclei persist in favorable conditions (e.g., a dry, cool atmosphere with little or
no
 direct
 exposure
 to
 sunlight
 or
 other
 sources
 of
 radiation).
 Pathogenic
microorganisms  that  can  be  spread  via  droplet  nuclei  include  Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, VZV, measles virus (i.e., rubeola), and smallpox virus (i.e., variola major).6
Several environmental pathogens have life-cycle forms that are similar in size to droplet
nuclei and may exhibit similar behavior in the air. The spores of Aspergillus fumigatus
have a diameter of 2–3.5 μm, with a settling velocity estimated at 0.03 cm/second (or
about 1 meter/hour) in still air. With this enhanced buoyancy, the spores, which resist
desiccation,  can  remain  airborne  indefinitely  in  air  currents  and  travel  far  from  their
source.35  Aspergillosis  is  caused  by  molds  belonging  to  the  genus  Aspergillus.
Aspergillus spp. are prototype health-care acquired pathogens associated with dusty or
moist  environmental  conditions.  Clinical  and  epidemiologic  aspects  of  aspergillosis
(Table  1)  are  discussed  extensively  in  another  guideline.3  Modes  of  transmission
Airborne  transmission  of  fungal  spores;  direct  inhalation;  direct  inoculation  from
environmental  sources  (rare)  37  Table  8.  Strategies  to  reduce  dust  and  moisture
intrusion  Causative  agents  Aspergillus  fumigatus  (90%–95%  of  Aspergillus  infections
among  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant  (HSCT)  patients;  A.  flavus,  A.  niger,  A.
terreus, A. nidulans 36–43 Activities associated with infection Construction, renovation,
remodeling, repairs, building demolition; rare episodes associated with fomites 44–51
Clinical
 syndromes
 and
 diseases
 Acute
 invasive:
 pneumonia;
 ulcerative
tracheobronchitis;  osteomyelitis;  abscesses  (aspergillomas)  of  the  lungs,  brain,  liver,
spleen,  and  kidneys;  thrombosis  of  deep  blood  vessels;  necrotizing  skin  ulcers;
endophthalmitis;  and  sinusitis  Chronic  invasive:  chronic  pneumonitis  Hypersensity:
allergic  bronchopulmonary  aspergillosis  Cutaneous:  primary  skin  and  burn-wound
infections  44,  45,  52–58  Patient  populations  at  greatest  risk  Hematopoietic  stem  cell
transplant  patients  (HSCT):  immunocompromised  patients  (ie,  those  with  underlying
disease),  patients  undergoing  chemotherapy,  organ  transplant  recipients,  preterm
neonates, hemodialysis patients, patients with identifiable immune system deficiencies
who receive care in general intensive care units (ICUs), and cystic fibrosis patients (may
be colonized, occasionally become infected) 3 6, 59–78 Factors affecting severity and
outcomes The immune status of the patient and the duration of severe neutropenia 79,
80 Occurrence Rare and sporadic, but increasing as proportion of immunocompromised
patients  increases;  5%  of  HSCT  patients  infected,  <5%  of  solid  organ  transplant
recipients infected 36, 37, 81–88 Mortality rate Rate can be as high as 100% if severe
neutropenia persists; 13%–80% mortality among leukemia patients 5, 8, 83, 89, 90 +
The American Institute of Architects (AIA) standards stipulate that for new or renovated
construction  Infections  due  Cryptococcus  neoformans,  Histoplasma  capsulatum,  or
Coccidioides immitis can occur in health-care settings if nearby ground is disturbed and
a  malfunction  of  the  facility's  air-intake  components  allows  these  pathogens  to  enter
the  ventilation  system.  C.  neoformans  is  a  yeast  usually  4–  8  μm  in  size.  However,
viable particles of <2 μm diameter (and thus permissive to alveolar deposition) have
been found in soil contaminated with bird droppings, particularly from pigeons.98, 103,
104, 121 H. capsulatum, with the infectious microconidia ranging in size from 2–5 μm,
is  endemic  in  the  soil  of  the  central  river  valleys  of  the  United  States.  Substantial
numbers of these infectious particles have been associated with chicken coops and the
roosts of blackbirds.98, 103, 104, 122 Several outbreaks of histoplasmosis have been
associated  with  disruption  of  the  environment;  construction  activities  in  an  endemic
area may be a potential risk factor for health-care acquired airborne infection.123, 124
C. immitis, with arthrospores of 3–5 μm diameter, has similar potential, especially in the
endemic southwestern United States and during seasons of drought followed by heavy
rainfall. After the 1994 earthquake centered near Northridge, California, the incidence
of  coccidioidomycosis  in  the  surrounding  area  exceeded  the  historical  norm.125
Emerging evidence suggests that Pneumocystis carinii, now classified as a fungus, may
be spread via airborne, person-to-person transmission.126 Controlled studies in animals
first  demonstrated  that  P.  carinii  could  be  spread  through  the  air.127  More  recent
studies in health-care settings have detected nucleic acids of P. carinii in air samples
from  areas  frequented  or  occupied  by  P.  carinii-infected  patients  but  not  in  control
areas  that  are  not  occupied  by  these  patients.128,  129  Clusters  of  cases  have  been
identified among immunocompromised patients who had contact with a source patient
and with each other. Recent studies have examined the presence of P. carinii DNA in
oropharyngeal washings and the nares of infected patients, their direct contacts, and
persons with no direct contact.130, 131 Molecular analysis of the DNA by polymerase
chain  reaction  (PCR)  provides  evidence  for  airborne  transmission  of  P.  carinii  from
infected  patients  to  direct  contacts,  but  immunocompetent  contacts  tend  to  become
transiently  colonized  rather  than  infected.131  The  role  of  colonized  persons  in  the
spread  of  P.  carinii  pneumonia  (PCP)  remains  to  be  determined.  At  present,  specific
modifications to ventilation systems to control spread of PCP in a health-care facility are
not  indicated.  Current  recommendations  outline  isolation  procedures  to  minimize  or
eliminate  contact  of  immunocompromised  patients  not  on  PCP  prophylaxis  with
PCP-infected  patients.6,  132  The  bacterium  most  commonly  associated  with  airborne
transmission  is  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis.  A  comprehensive  review  of  the
microbiology and epidemiology of M. tuberculosis and guidelines for tuberculosis (TB)
infection  control  have  been  published.4,  133,  134  A  summary  of  the  clinical  and
epidemiologic information from these materials is provided in this guideline (Table 3).
Modes  of  transmission  Airborne  transmission  via  droplet  nuclei  1–5  μm  in  diameter
Causative  agents  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis,  M.  bovis,  M.  africanum  Patient  factors
associated with infectivity and transmission Activities associated with infections Clinical
syndromes  and  disease  Patient  populations  at  greatest  risk  Factors  affecting  severity
and  outcomes  Occurrence  Mortality  rate  Chemoprophylaxis  /  treatment  *  Material  in
this table is compiled from references 4, 133–141. M. tuberculosis is carried by droplet
nuclei generated when persons (primarily adults and adolescents) who have pulmonary
or laryngeal TB sneeze, cough, speak, or sing;139 normal air currents can keep these
particles  airborne  for  prolonged  periods  and  spread  them  throughout  a  room  or
building.142 However, transmission of TB has occurred from mycobacteria aerosolized
during  provision  of  care  (e.g.,  wound/lesion  care  or  during  handling  of  infectious
peritoneal  dialysis  fluid)  for  extrapulmonary  TB  patients.135,  140  Gram-positive  cocci
(i.e.,  Staphylococcus  aureus,  group  A  beta-hemolytic  streptococci),  also  important
health-care  associated  pathogens,  are  resistant  to  inactivation  by  drying  and  can
persist in the environment and on environmental surfaces for extended periods. These
organisms  can  be  shed  from  heavily  colonized  persons  and  discharged  into  the  air.
Airborne  dispersal  of  S.  aureus  is  directly  associated  with  the  concentration  of  the
bacterium  in  the  anterior  nares.143  Approximately  10%  of  healthy  carriers  will
disseminate  S.  aureus  into  the  air,  and  some  persons  become  more  effective
disseminators of S. aureus than others.144–148 The dispersal of S. aureus into air can
be exacerbated by concurrent viral upper respiratory infection, thereby turning a carrier
into a "cloud shedder."149 Outbreaks of surgical site infections (SSIs) caused by group
A beta-hemolytic streptococci have been traced to airborne transmission from colonized
operating-room  personnel  to  patients.150–153  In  these  situations,  the  strain  causing
the  outbreak  was  recovered  from  the  air  in  the  operating  room150,  151,  154  or  on
settle plates in a room in which the carrier exercised.151–153 S. aureus and group A
streptococci have not been linked to airborne transmission outside of operating rooms,
burn  units,  and  neonatal  nurseries.155,  156  Transmission  of  these  agents  occurs
primarily  via  contact  and  droplets.  Other  gram-positive  bacteria  linked  to  airborne
transmission  include  Bacillus  spp.  which  are  capable  of  sporulation  as  environmental
conditions
 become
 less
 favorable
 to
 support
 their
 growth.
 Outbreaks
 and
pseudo-outbreaks  have  been  attributed  to  Bacillus  cereus  in  maternity,  pediatric,
intensive  care,  and  bronchoscopy  units;  many  of  these  episodes  were  secondary  to
environmental  contamination.157–160  Gram-negative  bacteria  rarely  are  associated
with  episodes  of  airborne  transmission  because  they  generally  require  moist
environments  for  persistence  and  growth.  The  main  exception  is  Acinetobacter  spp.,
which  can  withstand  the  inactivating  effects  of  drying.  In  one  epidemiologic
investigation
 of
 bloodstream
 infections
 among
 pediatric
 patients,
 identical
Acinetobacter spp. were cultured from the patients, air, and room air conditioners in a
nursery.161  Aerosols  generated  from  showers  and  faucets  may  potentially  contain
legionellae  and  other  gram-negative  waterborne  bacteria  (e.g.,  Pseudomonas
aeruginosa).  Exposure  to  these  organisms  is  through  direct  inhalation.  However,
because water is the source of the organisms and exposure occurs in the vicinity of the
aerosol,  the  discussion  of  the  diseases  associated  with  such  aerosols  and  the
prevention measures used to curtail their spread is discussed in another section of the
Guideline  (see  Part  I:  Water).  Airborne  transmission  may  play  a  role  in  the  natural
spread of hantaviruses and certain hemorrhagic fever viruses (e.g., Ebola, Marburg, and
Lassa),  but  evidence  for  airborne  spread  of  these  agents  in  health-care  facilities  is
inconclusive.190  Although  hantaviruses  can  be  transmitted  when  aerosolized  from
rodent  excreta,191,  192  person-to-person  spread  of  hantavirus  infection  from  source
patients  has  not  occurred  in  health-care  facilities.193–195  Nevertheless,  health-care
workers  are  advised  to  contain  potentially  infectious  aerosols  and  wear  National
Institute  of  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH)  approved  respiratory  protection
when  working  with  this  agent  in  laboratories  or  autopsy  suites.196  Lassa  virus
transmission via aerosols has been demonstrated in the laboratory and incriminated in
health-care associated infections in Africa,197–199 but airborne spread of this agent in
hospitals in developed nations likely is inefficient.200, 201 Yellow fever is considered to
be  a  viral  hemorrhagic  fever  agent  with  high  aerosol  infectivity  potential,  but
health-care  associated  transmission  of  this  virus  has  not  been  described.202  Viral
hemorrhagic fever diseases primarily occur after direct exposure to infected blood and
body  fluids,  and  the  use  of  standard  and  droplet  precautions  prevents  transmission
early  in  the  course  of  these  illnesses.203,  204  However,  whether  these  viruses  can
persist  in  droplet  nuclei  that  might  remain  after  droplet  production  from  coughs  or
vomiting  in  the  latter  stages  of  illness  is  unknown.205  Although  the  use  of  a
negative-pressure room is not required during the early stages of illness, its use might
be  prudent  at  the  time  of  hospitalization  to  avoid  the  need  for  subsequent  patient
transfer. Current CDC guidelines recommend negative-pressure rooms with anterooms
for  patients  with  hemorrhagic  fever  and  use  of  HEPA  respirators  by  persons  entering
these  rooms  when  the  patient  has  prominent  cough,  vomiting,  diarrhea,  or
hemorrhage.6,  203  Face  shields  or  goggles  will  help  to  prevent  mucous-membrane
exposure  to  potentially-aerosolized  infectious  material  in  these  situations.  If  an
anteroom  is  not  available,  portable,  industrial-grade  high  efficiency  particulate  air
(HEPA) filter units can be used to provide the equivalent of additional air changes per
hour  (ACH).  Some  human  viruses  are  transmitted  from  person  to  person  via  droplet
aerosols,  but  very  few  viruses  are  consistently  airborne  in  transmission  (i.e.,  are
routinely  suspended  in  an  infective  state  in  air  and  capable  of  spreading  great
distances), and health-care associated outbreaks of airborne viral disease are limited to
a few agents. Consequently, infection-control measures used to prevent spread of these
viral diseases in health-care facilities primarily involve patient isolation, vaccination of
susceptible  persons,  and  antiviral  therapy  as  appropriate  rather  than  measures  to
control  air  flow  or  quality.6  Infections  caused  by  VZV  frequently  are  described  in
health-care facilities. Health-care associated airborne outbreaks of VZV infections from
patients  with  primary  infection  and  disseminated  zoster  have  been  documented;
patients with localized zoster have, on rare occasions, also served as source patients
for  outbreaks  in  health-care  facilities.162–166  VZV  infection  can  be  prevented  by
vaccination, although patients who develop a rash within 6 weeks of receiving varicella
vaccine or who develop breakthrough varicella following exposure should be considered
contagious.167 Viruses whose major mode of transmission is via droplet contact rarely
have caused clusters of infections in group settings through airborne routes. The factors
facilitating airborne distribution of these viruses in an infective state are unknown, but
a  presumed  requirement  is  a  source  patient  in  the  early  stage  of  infection  who  is
shedding large numbers of viral particles into the air. Airborne transmission of measles
has  been  documented  in  health-care  facilities.168–171  In  addition,  institutional
outbreaks  of  influenza  virus  infections  have  occurred  predominantly  in  nursing
homes,172–176  and  less  frequently  in  medical  and  neonatal  intensive  care  units,
chronic-care areas, HSCT units, and pediatric wards.177–180 Some evidence supports
airborne transmission of influenza viruses by droplet nuclei,181, 182 and case clusters
in  pediatric  wards  suggest  that  droplet  nuclei  may  play  a  role  in  transmitting  certain
respiratory  pathogens  (e.g.,  adenoviruses  and  respiratory  syncytial  virus  [RSV]).177,
183,  184  Some  evidence  also  supports  airborne  transmission  of  enteric  viruses.  An
outbreak of a Norwalk-like virus infection involving more than 600 staff personnel over
a  3-week  period  was  investigated  in  a  Toronto,  Ontario  hospital  in  1985;  common
sources (e.g., food and water) were ruled out during the investigation, leaving airborne
spread as the most likely mode of transmission.185 Smallpox virus, a potential agent of
bioterrorism, is spread predominantly via direct contact with infectious droplets, but it
also  can  be  associated  with  airborne  transmission.186,  187  A  German  hospital  study
from 1970 documented the ability of this virus to spread over considerable distances
and  cause  infection  at  low  doses  in  a  well-vaccinated  population;  factors  potentially
facilitating transmission in this situation included a patient with cough and an extensive
rash, indoor air with low relative humidity, and faulty ventilation patterns resulting from
hospital  design  (e.g.,  open  windows).188  Smallpox  patients  with  extensive  rash  are
more likely to have lesions present on mucous membranes and therefore have greater
potential to disseminate virus into the air.188 In addition to the smallpox transmission
in  Germany,  two  cases  of  laboratory-acquired  smallpox  virus  infection  in  the  United
Kingdom in 1978 also were thought to be caused by airborne transmission.189 * This
list excludes microorganisms transmitted from aerosols derived from water. + Refer to
the text for references for these disease agents. § Airborne transmission of smallpox is
infrequent. Potential for airborne transmission increases with patients who are effective
disseminators  present  in  facilities  with  low  relative  humidity  in  the  air  and  faulty
ventilation.  ¶  Documentation  of  pseudoepidemic  during  construction.  **  Airborne
transmission  documented  in  the  laboratory  but  not  in  patient-care  areas.  †  The
recommendations  in  this  guideline  for  Ebola  Virus  Disease  has  been  superseded  on
August 1, 2014. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems in health-care
facilities are designed to An HVAC system includes an outside air inlet or intake; filters;
humidity modification mechanisms (i.e., humidity control in summer, humidification in
winter); heating and cooling equipment; fans; ductwork; air exhaust or out-takes; and
registers,  diffusers,  or  grilles  for  proper  distribution  of  the  air  (Figure  1).213,  214
Decreased  performance  of  healthcare  facility  HVAC  systems,  filter  inefficiencies,
improper installation, and poor maintenance can contribute to the spread of health-care
associated airborne infections. The American Institute of Architects (AIA) has published
guidelines  for  the  design  and  construction  of  new  health-care  facilities  and  for
renovation  of  existing  facilities.  These  AIA  guidelines  address  indoor  air-quality
standards  (e.g.,  ventilation  rates,  temperature  levels,  humidity  levels,  pressure
relationships, and minimum air changes per hour [ACH]) specific to each zone or area in
health-care facilities (e.g., operating rooms, laboratories, diagnostic areas, patient-care
areas,  and  support  departments).120  These  guidelines  represent  a  consensus
document  among  authorities  having  jurisdiction  (AHJ),  governmental  regulatory
agencies (i.e., Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS]; Department of Labor,
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  [OSHA]),  health-care  professionals,
professional  organizations  (e.g.,  American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigeration,  and
Air-Conditioning  Engineers  [ASHRAE],  American  Society  for  Healthcare  Engineering
[ASHE]),  and  accrediting  organizations  (i.e.,  Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of
Healthcare  Organizations  [JCAHO]).  More  than  40  state  agencies  that  license
health-care facilities have either incorporated or adopted by reference these guidelines
into  their  state  standards.  JCAHO,  through  its  surveys,  ensures  that  facilities  are  in
compliance  with  the  ventilation  guidelines  of  this  standard  for  new  construction  and
renovation.  Engineering  controls  to  contain  or  prevent  the  spread  of  airborne
contaminants  center  on  General  ventilation  encompasses  A  centralized  HVAC  system
operates as follows. Outdoor air enters the system, where low-efficiency or "roughing"
filters  remove  large  particulate  matter  and  many  microorganisms.  The  air  enters  the
distribution  system  for  conditioning  to  appropriate  temperature  and  humidity  levels,
passes  through  an  additional  bank  of  filters  for  further  cleaning,  and  is  delivered  to
each  zone  of  the  building.  After  the  conditioned  air  is  distributed  to  the  designated
space,  it  is  withdrawn  through  a  return  duct  system  and  delivered  back  to  the  HVAC
unit.  A  portion  of  this  "return  air"  is  exhausted  to  the  outside  while  the  remainder  is
mixed with outdoor air for dilution and filtered for removal of contaminants.215 Air from
toilet  rooms  or  other  soiled  areas  is  usually  exhausted  directly  to  the  atmosphere
through a separate duct exhaust system. Air from rooms housing tuberculosis patients
is  exhausted  to  the  outside  if  possible,  or  passed  through  a  HEPA  filter  before
recirculation.  Ultraviolet  germicidal  irradiation  (UVGI)  can  be  used  as  an  adjunct
air-cleaning  measure,  but  it  cannot  replace  HEPA  filtration.  15  Filtration,  the  physical
removal  of  particulates  from  air,  is  the  first  step  in  achieving  acceptable  indoor  air
quality. Filtration is the primary means of cleaning the air. Five methods of filtration can
be used (Table 5). During filtration, outdoor air passes through two filter beds or banks
(with efficiencies of 20%–40% and ≥90%, respectively) for effective removal of particles
1–5 μm in diameter.35, 120 The low-to-medium efficiency filters in the first bank have
low resistance to airflow, but this feature allows some small particulates to pass onto
heating  and  air  conditioning  coils  and  into  the  indoor  environment.35  Incoming  air  is
mixed  with  recirculated  air  and  reconditioned  for  temperature  and  humidity  before
being  filtered  by  the  second  bank  of  filters.  The  performance  of  filters  with  ≤90%
efficiency is measured using either the dust-spot test or the weight-arrestance test.35,
216 *Material in this table was compiled from information in reference 217. The second
filter bank usually consists of high-efficiency filters. This filtration system is adequate
for  most  patient-care  areas  in  ambulatory-care  facilities  and  hospitals,  including  the
operating room environment and areas providing central services.120 Nursing facilities
use  90%  dust-spot  efficient  filters  as  the  second  bank  of  filters,120  whereas  a  HEPA
filter bank may be indicated for special-care areas of hospitals. HEPA filters are at least
99.97%  efficient  for  removing  particles  ≥0.3  μm  in  diameter.  (As  a  reference,
Aspergillus  spores  are  2.5–3.0  μm  in  diameter.)  Examples  of  care  areas  where  HEPA
filters are used include PE rooms and those operating rooms designated for orthopedic
implant  procedures.35  Maintenance  costs  associated  with  HEPA  filters  are  high
compared with other types of filters, but use of in-line disposable prefilters can increase
the life of a HEPA filter by approximately 25%. Alternatively, if a disposable prefilter is
followed  by  a  filter  that  is  90%  efficient,  the  life  of  the  HEPA  filter  can  be  extended
ninefold. This concept, called progressive filtration, allows HEPA filters in special care
areas  to  be  used  for  10  years.213  Although  progressive  filtering  will  extend  the
mechanical  ability  of  the  HEPA  filter,  these  filters  may  absorb  chemicals  in  the
environment and later desorb those chemicals, thereby necessitating a more frequent
replacement  program.  HEPA  filter  efficiency  is  monitored  with  the  dioctylphthalate
(DOP)  particle  test  using  particles  that  are  0.3  μm  in  diameter.218  HEPA  filters  are
usually framed with metal, although some older versions have wood frames. A metal
frame has no advantage over a properly fitted wood frame with respect to performance,
but wood can compromise the air quality if it becomes and remains wet, allowing the
growth  of  fungi  and  bacteria.  Hospitals  are  therefore  advised  to  phase  out
water-damaged or spent wood-framed filter units and replace them with metal-framed
HEPA  filters.  HEPA  filters  are  usually  fixed  into  the  HVAC  system;  however,  portable,
industrial grade HEPA units are available that can filter air at the rate of 300–800 ft3
/min.  Portable  HEPA  filters  are  used  to  Portable  HEPA  units  are  useful  engineering
controls that help clean the air when the central HVAC system is undergoing repairs219
but  these  units  do  not  satisfy  fresh-air  requirements.214  The  effectiveness  of  the
portable unit for particle removal is dependent on If portable, industrial-grade units are
used, they should be capable of recirculating all or nearly all of the room air through the
HEPA filter, and the unit should be designed to achieve the equivalent of ≥12 ACH.4 (An
average  room  has  approximately  1,600  ft3  of  airspace.)  The  hospital  engineering
department  should  be  contacted  to  provide  ACH  information  in  the  event  that  a
portable HEPA filter unit is necessary to augment the existing fixed HVAC system for air
cleaning. Efficiency of the filtration system is dependent on the density of the filters,
which can create a drop in pressure unless compensated by stronger and more efficient
fans, thus maintaining air flow. For optimal performance, filters require monitoring and
replacement  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  recommendations  and  standard
preventive maintenance practices.220 Upon removal, spent filters can be bagged and
discarded  with  the  routine  solid  waste,  regardless  of  their  patient-care  area
location.221  Excess  accumulation  of  dust  and  particulates  increases  filter  efficiency,
requiring more pressure to push the air through. The pressure differential across filters
is measured by use of manometers or other gauges. A pressure reading that exceeds
specifications  indicates  the  need  to  change  the  filter.  Filters  also  require  regular
inspection  for  other  potential  causes  of  decreased  performance.  Gaps  in  and  around
filter banks and heavy soil and debris upstream of poorly maintained filters have been
implicated  in  health-care  associated  outbreaks  of  aspergillosis,  especially  when
accompanied  by  construction  activities  at  the  facility.17,  18,  106,  222  As  a
supplemental  air-cleaning  measure,  UVGI  is  effective  in  reducing  the  transmission  of
airborne bacterial and viral infections in hospitals, military housing, and classrooms, but
it has only a minimal inactivating effect on fungal spores.223–228 UVGI is also used in
air handling units to prevent or limit the growth of vegetative bacteria and fungi. Most
commercially  available  UV  lamps  used  for  germicidal  purposes  are  low-pressure
mercury vapor lamps that emit radiant energy predominantly at a wave-length of 253.7
nm.229,  230  Two  systems  of  UVGI  have  been  used  in  health-care  settings  –  duct
irradiation  and  upper-room  air  irradiation.  In  duct  irradiation  systems,  UV  lamps  are
placed  inside  ducts  that  remove  air  from  rooms  to  disinfect  the  air  before  it  is
recirculated.  When  properly  designed,  installed,  and  maintained,  high  levels  of  UVGI
can be attained in the ducts with little or no exposure of persons in the rooms.231, 232
In  upper-room  air  irradiation,  UV  lamps  are  either  suspended  from  the  ceiling  or
mounted  on  the  wall.4  Upper  air  UVGI  units  have  two  basic  designs:  The  germicidal
effect is dependent on air mixing via convection between the room's irradiated upper
zone and the lower patient-care zones.233, 234 Bacterial inactivation studies using BCG
mycobacteria and Serratia marcescens have estimated the effect of UVGI as equivalent
to 10 ACH–39 ACH.235, 236 Another study, however, suggests that UVGI may result in
fewer equivalent ACH in the patient-care zone, especially if the mixing of air between
zones is insufficient.234 The use of fans or HVAC systems to generate air movement
may increase the effectiveness of UVGI if airborne microorganisms are exposed to the
light energy for a sufficient length of time.233, 235, 237–239 The optimal relationship
between  ventilation  and  UVGI  is  not  known.  Because  the  clinical  effectiveness  of  UV
systems  may  vary,  UVGI  is  not  recommended  for  air  management  prior  to  air
recirculation from airborne isolation rooms. It is also not recommended as a substitute
for HEPA filtration, local exhaust of air to the outside, or negative pressure.4 The use of
UV  lamps  and  HEPA  filtration  in  a  single  unit  offers  only  minimal  infection-control
benefits over those provided by the use of a HEPA filter alone.240 Duct systems with
UVGI  are  not  recommended  as  a  substitute  for  HEPA  filters  if  the  air  from  isolation
rooms must be recirculated to other areas of the facility.4 Regular maintenance of UVGI
systems is crucial and usually consists of keeping the bulbs free of dust and replacing
old  bulbs  as  necessary.  Safety  issues  associated  with  the  use  of  UVGI  systems  are
described  in  other  guidelines.4  Temperature  and  humidity  are  two  essential
components  of  conditioned  air.  After  outside  air  passes  through  a  low-  or
medium-efficiency filter, the air undergoes conditioning for temperature and humidity
control  before  it  passes  through  high-efficiency  or  HEPA  filtration.  HVAC  systems  in
health-care  facilities  are  often  single-duct  or  dual-duct  systems.35,  241  A  single-duct
system  distributes  cooled  air  (55°F  [12.8°C])  throughout  the  building  and  uses
thermostatically controlled reheat boxes located in the terminal ductwork to warm the
air for individual or multiple rooms. The dual-duct system consists of parallel ducts, one
with a cold air stream and the other with a hot air stream. A mixing box in each room or
group  of  rooms  mixes  the  two  air  streams  to  achieve  the  desired  temperature.
Temperature standards are given as either a single temperature or a range, depending
on the specific health-care zone. Cool temperature standards (68°F–73°F [20°C–23°C])
usually  are  associated  with  operating  rooms,  clean  workrooms,  and  endoscopy
suites.120  A  warmer  temperature  (75°F  [24°C])  is  needed  in  areas  requiring  greater
degrees  of  patient  comfort.  Most  other  zones  use  a  temperature  range  of  70°F–75°F
(21°C–24°C).120 Temperatures outside of these ranges may be needed occasionally in
limited  areas  depending  on  individual  circumstances  during  patient  care  (e.g.,  cooler
temperatures  in  operating  rooms  during  specialized  operations).  Four  measures  of
humidity  are  used  to  quantify  different  physical  properties  of  the  mixture  of  water
vapor and air. The most common of these is relative humidity, which is the ratio of the
amount  of  water  vapor  in  the  air  to  the  amount  of  water  vapor  air  can  hold  at  that
temperature.242 The other measures of humidity are specific humidity, dew point, and
vapor pressure.242 Relative humidity measures the percentage of saturation. At 100%
relative humidity, the air is saturated. For most areas within health-care facilities, the
designated  comfort  range  is  30%–60%  relative  humidity.120,  214  Relative  humidity
levels  >60%,  in  addition  to  being  perceived  as  uncomfortable,  promote  fungal
growth.243 Humidity levels can be manipulated by either of two mechanisms.244 In a
water-wash unit, water is sprayed and drops are taken up by the filtered air; additional
heating  or  cooling  of  this  air  sets  the  humidity  levels.  The  second  mechanism  is  by
means  of  water  vapor  created  from  steam  and  added  to  filtered  air  in  humidifying
boxes.  Reservoir-type  humidifiers  are  not  allowed  in  health-care  facilities  as  per  AIA
guidelines and many state codes.120 Cool-mist humidifiers should be avoided, because
they
 can
 disseminate
 aerosols
 containing
 allergens
 and
 microorganisms.245
Additionally, the small, personal-use versions of this equipment can be difficult to clean.
The control of air pollutants (e.g., microorganisms, dust, chemicals, and smoke) at the
source  is  the  most  effective  way  to  maintain  clean  air.  The  second  most  effective
means  of  controlling  indoor  air  pollution  is  through  ventilation.  Ventilation  rates  are
voluntary  unless  a  state  or  local  government  specifies  a  standard  in  health-care
licensing  or  health  department  requirements.  These  standards  typically  apply  to  only
the design of a facility, rather than its operation.220, 246 Health-care facilities without
specific  ventilation  standards  should  follow  the  AIA  guideline  specific  to  the  year  in
which the building was 120, 214, 241 built or the ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 62, Ventilation
for  Acceptable  Indoor  Air  Quality.  Ventilation  guidelines  are  defined  in  terms  of  air
volume per minute per occupant and are based on the assumption that occupants and
their  activities  are  responsible  for  most  of  the  contaminants  in  the  conditioned
space.215 Most ventilation rates for health-care facilities are expressed as room ACH.
Peak efficiency for particle removal in the air space occurs between 12 ACH–15 ACH.35,
247, 248 Ventilation rates vary among the different patient-care areas of a health-care
facility  (Appendix  B).120  Health-care  facilities  generally  use  recirculated  air.35,  120,
241, 249, 250 Fans create sufficient positive pressure to force air through the building
duct work and adequate negative pressure to evacuate air from the conditioned space
into  the  return  duct  work  and/or  exhaust,  thereby  completing  the  circuit  in  a  sealed
system (Figure 1). However, because gaseous contaminants tend to accumulate as the
air  recirculates,  a  percentage  of  the  recirculated  air  is  exhausted  to  the  outside  and
replaced  by  fresh  outdoor  air.  In  hospitals,  the  delivery  of  filtered  air  to  an  occupied
space is an engineered system design issue, the full discussion of which is beyond the
scope of this document. Hospitals with areas not served by central HVAC systems often
use  through-the-wall  or  fan  coil  air  conditioning  units  as  the  sole  source  of  room
ventilation.  AIA  guidelines  for  newly  installed  systems  stipulate  that  through-the-wall
fan-coil units be equipped with permanent (i.e., cleanable) or replaceable filters with a
minimum  efficiency  of  68%  weight  arrestance.120  These  units  may  be  used  only  as
recirculating units; all outdoor air requirements must be met by a separate central air
handling  system with  proper filtration,  with  a  minimum of  two  outside air changes  in
general patient rooms (D. Erickson, ASHE, 2000).120 If a patient room is equipped with
an individual through-the-wall fan coil unit, the room should not be used as either AII or
as  PE.120  These  requirements,  although  directed  to  new  HVAC  installations  also  are
appropriate  for  existing  settings.  Non-central  air-handling  systems  are  prone  to
problems associated with excess condensation accumulating in drip pans and improper
filter maintenance; health-care facilities should clean or replace the filters in these units
on  a  regular  basis  while  the  patient  is  out  of  the  room.  Laminar  airflow  ventilation
systems  are  designed  to  move  air  in  a  single  pass,  usually  through  a  bank  of  HEPA
filters either along a wall or in the ceiling, in a one-way direction through a clean zone
with parallel streamlines. Laminar airflow can be directed vertically or horizontally; the
unidirectional system optimizes airflow and minimizes air turbulence.63, 241 Delivery
of  air  at  a  rate  of  0.5  meters  per  second  (90  ±  20  ft/min)  helps  to  minimize
opportunities  for  microorganism  proliferation.63,  251,  252  Laminar  airflow  systems
have  been  used  in  PE  to  help  reduce  the  risk  for  health-care  associated  airborne
infections (e.g., aspergillosis) in high-risk patients.63, 93, 253, 254 However, data that
demonstrate a survival benefit for patients in PE with laminar airflow are lacking. Given
the high cost of installation and apparent lack of benefit, the value of laminar airflow in
this setting is questionable.9, 37 Few data support the use of laminar airflow systems
elsewhere  in  a  hospital.255  Positive  and  negative  pressures  refer  to  a  pressure
differential between two adjacent air spaces (e.g., rooms and hallways). Air flows away
from areas or rooms with positive pressure (pressurized), while air flows into areas with
negative  pressure  (depressurized).  AII  rooms  are  set  at  negative  pressure  to  prevent
airborne microorganisms in the room from entering hallways and corridors. PE rooms
housing  severely  neutropenic  patients  are  set  at  positive  pressure  to  keep  airborne
pathogens  in  adjacent  spaces  or  corridors  from  coming  into  and  contaminating  the
airspace occupied by such high-risk patients. Self-closing doors are mandatory for both
of  these  areas  to  help  maintain  the  correct  pressure  differential.4,  6,  120  Older
health-care  facilities  may  have  variable  pressure  rooms  (i.e.,  rooms  in  which  the
ventilation can be manually switched between positive and negative pressure). These
rooms are no longer permitted in the construction of new facilities or in renovated areas
of the facility,120 and their use in existing facilities has been discouraged because of
difficulties  in  assuring  the  proper  pressure  differential,  especially  for  the  negative
pressure setting, and because of the potential for error associated with switching the
pressure differentials for the room. Continued use of existing variable pressure rooms
depends on a partnership between engineering and infection control. Both positive- and
negative-pressure  rooms  should  be  maintained  according  to  specific  engineering
specifications  (Table  6).  *Material  in  this  table  was  compiled  from  references  35  and
120.  Table  adapted  from  and  used  with  permission  of  the  publisher  of  reference  35
(Lippincott  Williams  and  Wilkins).  Health-care  professionals  (e.g.,  infection  control,
hospital epidemiologists) must perform a risk assessment to determine the appropriate
number of AII rooms (negative pressure) and/or PE rooms (positive pressure) to serve
the patient population. The AIA guidelines require a certain number of AII rooms as a
minimum, and it is important to refer to the edition under which the building was built
for appropriate guidance.120 In large health-care facilities with central HVAC systems,
sealed  windows  help  to  ensure  the  efficient  operation  of  the  system,  especially  with
respect  to  creating  and  maintaining  pressure  differentials.  Sealing  the  windows  in  PE
areas helps minimize the risk of airborne contamination from the outside. One outbreak
of aspergillosis among immunosuppressed patients in a hospital was attributed in part
to  an  open  window  in  the  unit  during  a  time  when  both  construction  and  a  fire
happened nearby; sealing the window prevented further entry of fungal spores into the
unit  from  the  outside  air.111  Additionally,  all  emergency  exits  (e.g.,  fire  escapes  and
emergency doors) in PE wards should be kept closed (except during emergencies) and
equipped with alarms. A failure or malfunction of any component of the HVAC system
may  subject  patients  and  staff  to  discomfort  and  exposure  to  airborne  contaminants.
Only  limited  information  is  available  from  formal  studies  on  the  infection-control
implications  of  a  complete  air-handling  system  failure  or  shutdown  for  maintenance.
Most  experience  has  been  derived  from  infectious  disease  outbreaks  and  adverse
outcomes  among  high-risk  patients  when  HVAC  systems  are  poorly  maintained.  (See
Table 7 for potential ventilation hazards, consequences, and correction measures.) AIA
guidelines prohibit U.S. hospitals and surgical centers from shutting down their HVAC
systems  for  purposes  other  than  required  maintenance,  filter  changes,  and
construction.120  Airflow  can  be  reduced;  however,  sufficient  supply,  return,  and
exhaust must be provided to maintain required pressure relationships when the space
is  not  occupied.  Maintaining  these  relationships  can  be  accomplished  with  special
drives  on  the  air-handling  units  (i.e.,  a  variable  air  ventilation  [VAV]  system).
Microorganisms proliferate in environments wherever air, dust, and water are present,
and  air-handling  systems  can  be  ideal  environments  for  microbial  growth.35  Properly
engineered  HVAC  systems  require  routine  maintenance  and  monitoring  to  provide
acceptable  indoor  air  quality  efficiently  and  to  minimize  conditions  that  favor  the
proliferation  of  health-care  associated  pathogens.35,  249  Performance  monitoring  of
the system includes determining pressure differentials across filters, regular inspection
of system filters, DOP testing of HEPA filters, testing of low- or medium efficiency filters,
and  manometer  tests  for  positive-  and  negative-pressure  areas  in  accordance  with
nationally recognized standards, guidelines, and manufacturers' recommendations. The
use of hand-held, calibrated equipment that can provide a numerical reading on a daily
basis  is  preferred  for  engineering  purposes  (A.Streifel,  University  of  Minnesota,
2000).256  Several  methods  that  provide  a  visual,  qualitative  measure  of  pressure
differentials  (i.e.,  airflow  direction)  include  smoke-tube  tests  or  placing  flutter  strips,
ping-pong  balls,  or  tissue  in  the  air  stream.  Preventive  filter  and  duct  maintenance
(e.g., cleaning ductwork vents, replacing filters as needed, and properly disposing spent
filters  into  plastic  bags  immediately  upon  removal)  is  important  to  prevent  potential
exposures of patients and staff during HVAC system shut-down. The frequency of filter
inspection  and  the  parameters  of  this  inspection  are  established  by  each  facility  to
meet their unique needs. Ductwork in older health-care facilities may have insulation on
the interior surfaces that can trap contaminants. This insulation material tends to break
down over time to be discharged from the HVAC system. Additionally, a malfunction of
the air-intake system can overburden the filtering system and permit aerosolization of
fungal pathogens. Keeping the intakes free from bird droppings, especially those from
pigeons,  helps  to  minimize  the  concentration  of  fungal  spores  entering  from  the
outside.98 Accumulation of dust and moisture within HVAC systems increases the risk
for  spread  of  health-care–  associated  environmental  fungi  and  bacteria.  Clusters  of
infections caused by Aspergillus spp., P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, and Acinetobacter spp.
have  been  linked  to  poorly  maintained  and/or  malfunctioning  air  conditioning
systems.68,  161,  257,  258  Efforts  to  limit  excess  humidity  and  moisture  in  the
infrastructure  and  on  air-stream  surfaces  in  the  HVAC  system  can  minimize  the
proliferation and dispersion of fungal spores and waterborne bacteria throughout indoor
air.259–262 Within the HVAC system, water is present in water-wash units, humidifying
boxes,  or  cooling  units.  The  dual-duct  system  may  also  create  conditions  of  high
humidity  and  excess  moisture  that  favor  fungal  growth  in  drain  pans  as  well  as  in
fibrous insulation material that becomes damp as a result of the humid air passing over
the hot stream and condensing. If moisture is present in the HVAC system, periods of
stagnation  should  be  avoided.  Bursts  of  organisms  can  be  released  upon  system
start-up, increasing the risk of airborne infection.206 Proper engineering of the HVAC
system  is  critical  to  preventing  dispersal  of  airborne  organisms.  In  one  hospital,
endophthalmitis caused by Acremonium kiliense infection following cataract extraction
in  an  ambulatory  surgical  center  was  traced  to  aerosols  derived  from  the  humidifier
water in the ventilation system.206 The organism proliferated because the ventilation
system  was  turned  off  routinely  when  the  center  was  not  in  operation;  the  air  was
filtered  before  humidification,  but  not  afterwards.  Most  health-care  facilities  have
contingency plans in case of disruption of HVAC services. These plans include back-up
power  generators  that  maintain  the  ventilation  system  in  high-risk  areas  (e.g.,
operating  rooms,  intensive-care  units,  negative-  and  positive-pressure  rooms,
transplantation  units,  and  oncology  units).  Alternative  generators  are  required  to
engage within 10 seconds of a loss of main power. If the ventilation system is out of
service, rendering indoor air stagnant, sufficient time must be allowed to clean the air
and  re-establish  the  appropriate  number  of  ACH  once  the  HVAC  system  begins  to
function  again.  Air  filters  may  also  need  to  be  changed,  because  reactivation  of  the
system can dislodge substantial amounts of dust and create a transient burst of fungal
spores.  Duct  cleaning  in  health-care  facilities  has  benefits  in  terms  of  system
performance,  but  its  usefulness  for  infection  control  has  not  been  conclusively
determined. Duct cleaning typically involves using specialized tools to dislodge dirt and
a  high-powered  vacuum  cleaner  to  clean  out  debris.263  Some  duct-cleaning  services
also  apply  chemical  biocides  or  sealants  to  the  inside  surfaces  of  ducts  to  minimize
fungal  growth  and  prevent  the  release  of  particulate  matter.  The  U.S.  Environmental
Protection  Agency  (EPA),  however,  has  concerns  with  the  use  of  sanitizers  and/or
disinfectants to treat the surfaces of ductwork, because the label indications for most of
these products may not specifically include the use of the product in HVAC systems.264
Further,  EPA  has  not  evaluated  the  potency  of  disinfectants  in  such  applications,  nor
has  the  agency  examined  the  potential  attendant  health  and  safety  risks.  The  EPA
recommends that companies use only those chemical biocides that are registered for
use in HVAC systems.264 Although infrequent cleaning of the exhaust ducts in AII areas
has been documented as a cause of diminishing negative pressure and a decrease in
the  air  exchange  rates,214  no  data  indicate  that  duct  cleaning,  beyond  what  is
recommended for optimal performance, improves indoor air quality or reduces the risk
of  infection.  Exhaust  return  systems  should  be  cleaned  as  part  of  routine  system
maintenance. Duct cleaning has not been shown to prevent any health problems,265
and EPA studies indicate that airborne particulate levels do not increase as a result of
dirty air ducts, nor do they diminish after cleaning, presumably because much of the
dirt  inside  air  ducts  adheres  to  duct  surfaces  and  does  not  enter  the  conditioned
space.265  Additional  research  is  needed  to  determine  if  air-duct  contamination  can
significantly increase the airborne infection risk in general areas of health-care facilities.
Environmental  disturbances  caused  by  construction  and/or  renovation  and  repair
activities (e.g., disruption of the above-ceiling area, running cables through the ceiling,
and structural repairs) in and near health-care facilities markedly increase the airborne
Aspergillus spp. spore counts in the indoor air of such facilities, thereby increasing the
risk  for  health-care  associated  aspergillosis  among  high-risk  patients.  Although  one
case  of  health-care  associated  aspergillosis  is  often  difficult  to  link  to  a  specific
environmental  exposure,  the  occurrence  of  temporarily  clustered  cases  increase  the
likelihood  that  an  environmental  source  within  the  facility  may  be  identified  and
corrected.  *  Reprinted  with  permission  of  the  publisher  of  reference  35  (Lippincott
Williams  and  Wilkins).  Construction,  renovation,  repair,  and  demolition  activities  in
health-care facilities require substantial planning and coordination to minimize the risk
for  airborne  infection  both  during  projects  and  after  their  completion.  Several
organizations and experts have endorsed a multi-disciplinary team approach (Box 4) to
coordinate the various stages of construction activities (e.g., project inception, project
implementation,
 final
 walk-through,
 and
 completion).120,
 249,
 250,
 273–276
Environmental  services,  employee  health,  engineering,  and  infection  control  must  be
represented  in  construction  planning  and  design  meetings  should  be  convened  with
architects and design engineers. The number of members and disciplines represented is
a  function  of  the  complexity  of  a  project.  Smaller,  less  complex  projects  and
maintenance  may  require  a  minimal  number  of  members  beyond  the  core
representation  from  engineering,  infection  control,  environmental  services,  and  the
directors  of  the  specialized  departments.  Members  Functions  and  responsibilities
Education  of  maintenance  and  construction  workers,  health-care  staff  caring  for
high-risk patients, and persons responsible for controlling indoor air quality heightens
awareness  that  minimizing  dust  and  moisture  intrusion  from  construction  sites  into
high-risk  patient-care  areas  helps  to  maintain  a  safe  environment.120,  250,  271,
275–278 Visual and printed educational materials should be provided in the language
spoken  by  the  workers.  Staff  and  construction  workers  also  need  to  be  aware  of  the
potentially  catastrophic  consequences  of  dust  and  moisture  intrusion  when  an  HVAC
system or water system fails during construction or repair; action plans to deal quickly
with these emergencies should be developed in advance and kept on file. Incorporation
of specific standards into construction contracts may help to prevent departures from
recommended
 practices
 as
 projects
 progress.
 Establishing
 specific
 lines
 of
communication is important to address problems (e.g., dust control, indoor air quality,
noise  levels,  and  vibrations),  resolve  complaints,  and  keep  projects  moving  toward
completion.  Health-care  facility  staff  should  develop  a  mechanism  to  monitor  worker
adherence  to  infection-control  guidelines  on  a  daily  basis  in  and  around  the
construction  site  for  the  duration  of  the  project.  The  three  major  topics  to  consider
before initiating any construction or repair activity are as follows: A checklist of design
and function considerations can help to ensure that a planned structure or area can be
easily  serviced  and  maintained  for  environmental  infection  control  (Box  5)  .17,  250,
273,  275–277  Specifications  for  the  construction,  renovation,  remodeling,  and
maintenance of health-care facilities are outlined in the AIA document, Guidelines for
Design  and  Construction  of  Hospitals  and  Health  Care  Facilities.  120,  275  *  Use  of
carpet cleaning methods (e.g., "bonneting") that disperse microorganisms into the air
may increase the risk of airborne infection among at-risk patients, especially if they are
in  the  vicinity  of  the  cleaning  activity.111  Proactive  strategies  can  help  prevent
environmentally mediated airborne infections in health-care facilities during demolition,
construction,  and  renovation.  The  potential  presence  of  dust  and  moisture  and  their
contribution  to  health-care  associated  infections  must  be  critically  evaluated  early  in
the  planning  of  any  demolition,  construction,  renovation,  and  repairs.120,  250,  251,
273, 274, 276–279 Consideration must extend beyond dust generated by major projects
to include dust that can become airborne if disturbed during routine maintenance and
minor renovation activities (e.g., exposure of ceiling spaces for inspection; installation
of  conduits,  cable,  or  sprinkler  systems;  rewiring;  and  structural  repairs  or
replacement).273,  276,  277  Other  projects  that  can  compromise  indoor  air  quality
include  construction  and  repair  jobs  that  inadvertently  allow  substantial  amounts  of
raw,  unfiltered  outdoor  air  to  enter  the  facility  (e.g.,  repair  of  elevators  and  elevator
shafts)  and  activities  that  dampen  any  structure,  area,  or  item  made  of  porous
materials or characterized by cracks and crevices (e.g., sink cabinets in need of repair,
carpets,  ceilings,  floors,  walls,  vinyl  wall  coverings,  upholstery,  drapes,  and
countertops).18,  273,  277  Molds  grow  and  proliferate  on  these  surfaces  when  they
become  and  remain  wet.21,  120,  250,  266,  270,  272,  280  Scrubbable  materials  are
preferred for use in patient-care areas. Containment measures for dust and/or moisture
control  are  dictated  by  the  location  of  the  construction  site.  Outdoor  demolition  and
construction require actions to keep dust and moisture out of the facility (e.g., sealing
windows  and  vents  and  keeping  doors  closed  or  sealed).  Containment  of  dust  and
moisture generated from construction inside a facility requires barrier structures (either
pre-fabricated  or  constructed  of  more  durable  materials  as  needed)  and  engineering
controls  to  clean  the  air  in  and  around  the  construction  or  repair  site.  An
infection-control risk assessment (ICRA) conducted before initiating repairs, demolition,
construction,  or  renovation  activities  can  identify  potential  exposures  of  susceptible
patients  to  dust  and  moisture  and  determine  the  need  for  dust  and  moisture
containment  measures.  This  assessment  centers  on  the  type  and  extent  of  the
construction  or  repairs  in  the  work  area  but  may  also  need  to  include  adjacent
patient-care areas, supply storage, and areas on levels above and below the proposed
project. An example of designing an ICRA as a matrix, the policy for performing an ICRA
and  implementing  its  results,  and  a  sample  permit  form  that  streamlines  the
communication  process  are  available.281  Knowledge  of  the  air  flow  patterns  and
pressure  differentials  helps  minimize  or  eliminate  the  inadvertent  dispersion  of  dust
that  could  contaminate  air  space,  patient-care  items,  and  surfaces.57,  282,  283  A
recent
 aspergillosis
 outbreak
 among
 oncology
 patients
 was
 attributed
 to
depressurization  of  the  building  housing  the  HSCT  unit  while  construction  was
underway in an adjacent building. Pressure readings in the affected building (including
12 of 25 HSCT-patient rooms) ranged from 0.1 Pa–5.8 Pa. Unfiltered outdoor air flowed
into  the  building  through  doors  and  windows,  exposing  patients  in  the  HSCT  unit  to
fungal  spores.283  During  long-term  projects,  providing  temporary  essential  services
(e.g.,  toilet  facilities)  and  conveniences  (e.g.,  vending  machines)  to  construction
workers within the site will help to minimize traffic in and out of the area. The type of
barrier systems necessary for the scope of the project must be defined.12, 120, 250,
279, 284 Depending on the location and extent of the construction, patients may need
to be relocated to other areas in the facility not affected by construction dust.51, 285
Such relocation might be especially prudent when construction takes place within units
housing immunocompromised patients (e.g., severely neutropenic patients and patients
on corticosteroid therapy). Advance assessment of high-risk locations and planning for
the  possible  transport  of  patients  to  other  departments  can  minimize  delays  and
waiting  time  in  hallways.51  Although  hospitals  have  provided  immunocompromised
patients with some form of respiratory protection for use outside their rooms, the issue
is complex and remains unresolved until more research can be done. Previous guidance
on  this  issue  has  been  inconsistent.9  Protective  respirators  (i.e.,  N95)  were  well
tolerated  by  patients  when  used  to  prevent  further  cases  of  construction-related
aspergillosis in a recent outbreak.283 The routine use of the N95 respirator by patients,
however,  has  not  been  evaluated  for  preventing  exposure  to  fungal  spores  during
periods of non-construction. Although health-care workers who would be using the N95
respirator for personal respiratory protect must be fit-tested, there is no indication that
either  patients  or  visitors  should  undergo  fit-testing.  Surveillance  activities  should
augment preventive strategies during construction projects.3, 4, 20, 110, 286, 287 By
determining baseline levels of health-care acquired airborne and waterborne infections,
infection-control staff can monitor changes in infection rates and patterns during and
immediately  after  construction,  renovations,  or  repairs.3  Air  sampling  in  health-care
facilities may be conducted both during periods of construction and on a periodic basis
to  determine  indoor  air  quality,  efficacy  of  dust-control  measures,  or  air-handling
system  performance  via  parametric  monitoring.  Parametric  monitoring  consists  of
measuring the physical periodic assessment of the system (e.g., air flow direction and
pressure, ACH, and filter efficiency) can give assurance of proper ventilation, especially
for special care areas and operating rooms.288 Air sampling is used to detect aerosols
(i.e.,  particles  or  microorganisms).  Particulate  sampling  (i.e.,  total  numbers  and  size
range  of  particulates)  is  a  practical  method  for  evaluating  the  infection-control
performance  of  the  HVAC  system,  with  an  emphasis  on  filter  efficiency  in  removing
respirable particles (<5 μm in diameter) or larger particles from the air. Particle size is
reported in terms of the mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD), whereas count
median aerodynamic diameter (CMAD) is useful with respect to particle concentrations.
Particle counts in a given air space within the health-care facility should be evaluated
against  counts  obtained  in  a  comparison  area.  Particle  counts  indoors  are  commonly
compared with the particulate levels of the outdoor air. This approach determines the
"rank  order"  air  quality  from  "dirty"  (i.e.,  the  outdoor  air)  to  "clean"  (i.e.,  air  filtered
through  high-efficiency  filters  [90%–95%  filtration])  to  "cleanest"  (i.e.,  HEPA-filtered
air).288  Comparisons  from  one  indoor  area  to  another  may  also  provide  useful
information  about  the  magnitude  of  an  indoor  air-quality  problem.  Making  rank-order
comparisons between clean, highly-filtered areas and dirty areas and/or outdoors is one
way  to  interpret  sampling  results  in  the  absence  of  air  quality  and  action  level
standards.35, 289 In addition to verifying filter performance, particle counts can help
determine  if  barriers  and  efforts  to  control  dust  dispersion  from  construction  are
effective. This type of monitoring is helpful when performed at various times and barrier
perimeter locations during the project. Gaps or breaks in the barriers' joints or seals can
then be identified and repaired. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists (ACGIH) has set a threshold limit value-time weighted average (TLV®-TWA)
of 10 mg/m3 for nuisance dust that contains no asbestos and <1% crystalline silica.290
Alternatively, OSHA has set permissible exposure limits (PELs) for inert or nuisance dust
as follows: respirable fraction at 5 mg/m3 and total dust at 15 mg/m3 . 291 Although
these standards are not measures of a bioaerosol, they are used for indoor air quality
assessment in occupational settings and may be useful criteria in construction areas.
Application of ACGIH guidance to health-care settings has not been standardized, but
particulate  counts  in  health-care  facilities  are  likely  to  be  well  below  this  threshold
value  and  approaching  clean-room  standards  in  certain  care  areas  (e.g.,  operating
rooms).100 Particle counters and anemometers are used in particulate evaluation. The
anemometer  measures  air  flow  velocity,  which  can  be  used  to  determine  sample
volumes. Particulate sampling usually does not require microbiology laboratory services
for the reporting of results. Microbiologic sampling of air in health-care facilities remains
controversial  because  of  currently  unresolved  technical  limitations  and  the  need  for
substantial  laboratory  support  (Box  6).  Infection-control  professionals,  laboratorians,
and engineers should determine if microbiologic and/or particle sampling is warranted
and assess proposed methods for sampling. The most significant technical limitation of
air  sampling  for  airborne  fungal  agents  is  the  lack  of  standards  linking  fungal  spore
levels with infection rates. Despite this limitation, several health-care institutions have
opted to use microbiologic sampling when construction projects are anticipated and/or
underway in efforts to assess the safety of the environment for immunocompromised
patients.35,  289  Microbiologic  air  sampling  should  be  limited  to  assays  for  airborne
fungi; of those, the thermotolerant fungi (i.e., those capable of growing at 95°F–98.6°F
[35°C–37°C])
 are
 of
 particular
 concern
 because
 of
 their
 pathogenicity
 in
immunocompromised hosts.35 Use of selective media (e.g., Sabouraud dextrose agar
and  inhibitory  mold  agar)  helps  with  the  initial  identification  of  recovered  organisms.
Microbiologic sampling for fungal spores performed as part of various airborne disease
outbreak  investigations  has  also  been  problematic.18,  49,  106,  111,  112,  289  The
precise  source  of  a  fungus  is  often  difficult  to  trace  with  certainty,  and  sampling
conducted  after  exposure  may  neither  reflect  the  circumstances  that  were  linked  to
infection  nor  distinguish  between  health-care  acquired  and  community-acquired
infections. Because fungal strains may fluctuate rapidly in the environment, health-care
acquired  Aspergillus  spp.  infection  cannot  be  confirmed  or  excluded  if  the  infecting
strain  is  not  found  in  the  health-care  setting.287  Sensitive  molecular  typing  methods
(e.g., randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) techniques and a more recent DNA
fingerprinting  technique  that  detects  restriction  fragment  length  polymorphisms  in
fungal genomic DNA) to identify strain differences among Aspergillus spp., however, are
becoming  increasingly  used  in  epidemiologic  investigations  of  health-care  acquired
fungal infection (A. Streifel, University of Minnesota, 2000).68, 110, 286, 287, 292–296
During case cluster evaluation, microbiologic sampling may provide an isolate from the
environment  for  molecular  typing  and  comparison  with  patient  isolates.  Therefore,  it
may  be  prudent  for  the  clinical  laboratory  to  save  Aspergillus  spp.  isolated  from
colonizations  and  invasive  disease  cases  among  patients  in  PE,  oncology,  and
transplant services for these purposes. *Material in this box is compiled from references
35,  100,  222,  289,  297.  Sedimentation  methods  using  settle  plates  and  volumetric
sampling methods using solid impactors are commonly employed when sampling air for
bacteria and fungi. Settle plates have been used by numerous investigators to detect
airborne  bacteria  or  to  measure  air  quality  during  medical  procedures  (e.g.,
surgery).17,  60,  97,  151,  161,  287  Settle  plates,  because  they  rely  on  gravity  during
sampling, tend to select for larger particles and lack sensitivity for respirable particles
(e.g.,  individual  fungal  spores),  especially  in  highly-filtered  environments.  Therefore,
they  are  considered  impractical  for  general  use.35,  289,  298–301  Settle  plates,
however, may detect fungi aerosolized during medical procedures (e.g., during wound
dressing  changes),  as  described  in  a  recent  outbreak  of  aspergillosis  among  liver
transplant patients.302 The use of slit or sieve impactor samplers capable of collecting
large volumes of air in short periods of time are needed to detect low numbers of fungal
spores  in  highly  filtered  areas.35,  289  In  some  outbreaks,  aspergillosis  cases  have
occurred when fungal spore concentrations in PE ambient air ranged as low as 0.9–2.2
colony-forming  units  per  cubic  meter  (CFU/m3  )  of  air.18,  94  On  the  basis  of  the
expected spore counts in the ambient air and the performance parameters of various
types of volumetric air samplers, investigators of a recent aspergillosis outbreak have
suggested  that  an  air  volume  of  at  least  1000  L  (1  m3  )  should  be  considered  when
sampling  highly  filtered  areas.283  Investigators  have  also  suggested  limits  of  15
CFU/m3 for gross colony counts of fungal organisms and <0.1 CFU/m3 for Aspergillus
fumigatus and other potentially opportunistic fungi in heavily filtered areas (≥12 ACH
and  filtration  of  ≥99.97%  efficiency).120  No  correlation  of  these  values  with  the
incidence  of  health-care–  associated  fungal  infection  rates  has  been  reported.  Air
sampling  in  health-care  facilities,  whether  used  to  monitor  air  quality  during
construction, to verify filter efficiency, or to commission new space prior to occupancy,
requires  careful  notation  of  the  circumstances  of  sampling.  Most  air  sampling  is
performed under undisturbed conditions. However, when the air is sampled during or
after  human  activity  (e.g.,  walking  and  vacuuming),  a  higher  number  of  airborne
microorganisms  likely  is  detected.297  The  contribution  of  human  activity  to  the
significance  of  air  sampling  and  its  impact  on  health-care  associated  infection  rates
remain  to  be  defined.  Comparing  microbiologic  sampling  results  from  a  target  area
(e.g., an area of construction) to those from an unaffected location in the facility can
provide  information  about  distribution  and  concentration  of  potential  airborne
pathogens. A comparison of microbial species densities in outdoor air versus indoor air
has been used to help pinpoint fungal spore bursts. Fungal spore densities in outdoor
air are variable, although the degree of variation with the seasons appears to be more
dramatic in the United States than in Europe.92, 287, 303 Particulate and microbiologic
air  sampling  have  been  used  when  commissioning  new  HVAC  system  installations;
however, such sampling is particularly important for newly constructed or renovated PE
or  operating  rooms.  Particulate  sampling  is  used  as  part  of  a  battery  of  tests  to
determine  if  a  new  HVAC  system  is  performing  to  specifications  for  filtration  and  the
proper  number  of  ACH.268,  288,  304  Microbiologic  air  sampling,  however,  remains
controversial in this application, because no standards for comparison purposes have
been determined. If performed, sampling should be limited to determining the density
of  fungal  spores  per  unit  volume  of  air  space.  High  numbers  of  spores  may  indicate
contamination  of  air-handling  system  components  prior  to  installation  or  a  system
deficiency when culture results are compared with known filter efficiencies and rates of
air  exchange.  External  demolition,  planned  building  implosions,  and  dirt  excavation
generate  considerable  dust  and  debris  that  can  contain  airborne  microorganisms.  In
one study, peak concentrations in outdoor air at grade level and HVAC intakes during
site excavation averaged 20,000 CFU/m3 for all fungi and 500 CFU/m3 for Aspergillus
fumigatus, compared with 19 CFU/m3 and 4 CFU/m3 , respectively, in the absence of
construction.280  Many  health-care  institutions  are  located  in  large,  urban  areas;
building  implosions  are  becoming  a  more  frequent  concern.  Infection-control  risk
assessment teams, particularly those in facilities located in urban renewal areas, would
benefit  by  developing  risk  management  strategies  for  external  demolition  and
construction as a standing policy. In light of the events of 11 September 2001, it may
be  necessary  for  the  team  to  identify  those  dust  exclusion  measures  that  can  be
implemented  rapidly  in  response  to  emergency  situations  (Table  8).  Issues  to  be
reviewed
 prior
 to
 demolition
 include
 +When
 health-care
 facilities
 have
immunosuppressed patients in their census, telephoning the city building department
each month to find out if buildings are scheduled for demolition is prudent. Minimizing
the  entry  of  outside  dust  into  the  HVAC  system  is  crucial  in  reducing  the  risk  for
airborne  contaminants.  Facility  engineers  should  be  consulted  about  the  potential
impact of shutting down the system or increasing the filtration. Selected air handlers,
especially those located close to excavation sites, may have to be shut off temporarily
to  keep  from  overloading  the  system  with  dust  and  debris.  Care  is  needed  to  avoid
significant facility-wide reductions in pressure differentials that may cause the building
to  become  negatively  pressured  relative  to  the  outside.  To  prevent  excessive
particulate overload and subsequent reductions in effectiveness of intake air systems
that cannot be shut off temporarily, air filters must be inspected frequently for proper
installation and function. Excessive dust penetration can be avoided if recirculated air is
maximally utilized while outdoor air intakes are shut down. Scheduling demolition and
excavation  during  the  winter,  when  Aspergillus  spp.  spores  may  be  present  in  lower
numbers,  can  help,  although  seasonal  variations  in  spore  density  differ  around  the
world.92, 287, 303 Dust control can be managed by misting the dirt and debris during
heavy dust-generating activities. To decrease the amount of aerosols from excavation
and
 demolition
 projects,
 nearby
 windows,
 especially
 in
 areas
 housing
immunocompromised patients, can be sealed and window and door frames caulked or
weather-stripped  to  prevent  dust  intrusion.50,  301,  306  Monitoring  for  adherence  to
these  control  measures  throughout  demolition  or  excavation  is  crucial.  Diverting
pedestrian  traffic  away  from  the  construction  sites  decreases  the  amount  of  dust
tracked back into the health-care facility and minimizes exposure of high-risk patients
to  environmental  pathogens.  Additionally,  closing  entrances  near  construction  or
demolition  sites  might  be  beneficial;  if  this  is  not  practical,  creating  an  air  lock  (i.e.,
pressurizing  the  entry  way)  is  another  option.  The  focus  of  a  properly  implemented
infection-control program during interior construction and repairs is containment of dust
and moisture. This objective is achieved by These activities should be coordinated with
engineering  staff  and  infection-control  professionals.  Physical  barriers  capable  of
containing  smoke  and  dust  will  confine  dispersed  fungal  spores  to  the  construction
zone.279, 284, 307, 308 The specific type of physical barrier required depends on the
project's scope and duration and on local fire codes. Short-term projects that result in
minimal  dust  dispersion  (e.g.,  installation  of  new  cables  or  wiring  above  ceiling  tiles)
require  only  portable  plastic  enclosures  with  negative  pressure  and  HEPA  filtration  of
the  exhaust  air  from  the  enclosed  work  area.  The  placement  of  a  portable
industrial-grade  HEPA  filter  device  capable  of  filtration  rate  of  300–800  ft3  /min.
adjacent  to  the  work  area  will  help  to  remove  fungal  spores,  but  its  efficacy  is
dependent  on  the  supplied  ACH  and  size  of  the  area.  If  the  project  is  extensive  but
short-term,  dust-abatement,  fire-resistant  plastic  curtains  (e.g.,  Visqueen®)  may  be
adequate.  These  should  be  completely  airtight  and  sealed  from  ceiling  to  floor  with
overlapping  curtains;276,  277,  309  holes,  tears,  or  other  perforations  should  be
repaired promptly with tape. A portable, industrial-grade HEPA filter unit on continuous
operation  is  needed  within  the  contained  area,  with  the  filtered  air  exhausted  to  the
outside of the work zone. Patients should not remain in the room when dust-generating
activities  are  performed.  Tools  to  assist  the  decision-making  process  regarding
selection  of  barriers  based  on  an  ICRA  approach  are  available.281  More  elaborate
barriers are indicated for long-term projects that generate moderate to large amounts
of  dust.  These  barrier  structures  typically  consist  of  rigid,  noncombustible  walls
constructed from sheet rock, drywall, plywood, or plaster board and covered with sheet
plastic  (e.g.,  Visqueen®).  Barrier  requirements  to  prevent  the  intrusion  of  dust  into
patient-care  areas  include  *Material  for  this  box  was  compiled  from  references  120,
250,  273,  276,  277.  Dust  and  moisture  abatement  and  control  rely  primarily  on  the
impermeable  barrier  containment  approach;  as  construction  continues,  numerous
opportunities  can  lead  to  dispersion  of  dust  to  other  areas  of  the  health-care  facility.
Infection-control  measures  that  augment  the  use  of  barrier  containment  should  be
undertaken  (Table  9).  Dust-control  measures  for  clinical  laboratories  are  an  essential
part of the infection-control strategy during hospital construction or renovation. Use of
plastic  or  solid  barriers  may  be  needed  if  the  ICRA  determines  that  air  flow  from
construction areas may introduce airborne contaminants into the laboratory space. In
one facility, pseudofungemia clusters attributed to Aspergillus spp. and Penicillium spp.
were  linked  to  improper  air  flow  patterns  and  construction  projects  adjacent  to  the
laboratory;  intrusion  of  dust  and  spores  into  a  biological  safety  cabinet  from
construction  activity  immediately  next  to  the  cabinet  resulted  in  a  cluster  of  cultures
contaminated with Aspergillus niger. 310, 311 Reportedly, no barrier containment was
used and the HEPA filtration system was overloaded with dust. In addition, an outbreak
of  pseudobacteremia  caused  by  Bacillus  spp.  occurred  in  another  hospital  during
construction  above  a  storage  area  for  blood  culture  bottles.207  Airborne  spread  of
Bacillus spp. spores resulted in contamination of the bottles' plastic lids, which were not
disinfected  or  handled  with  proper  aseptic  technique  prior  to  collection  of  blood
samples.  *Material  in  this  table  includes  information  from  D.  Erickson,  ASHE,  2000.  
+Material  in  this  table  was  compiled  from  references  19,  51,  67,  80,  106,  120,  250,
266, 273, 276–278, 280, 285, 309, 312–315. Areas in health-care facilities that require
special ventilation include The number of rooms required for PE and AII are determined
by  a  risk  assessment  of  the  health-care  facility.6  Continuous,  visual  monitoring  of  air
flow direction is required for new or renovated pressurized rooms. 120, 256 Although
the  exact  configuration  and  specifications  of  PEs  might  differ  among  hospitals,  these
care areas for high-risk, immunocompromised patients are designed to minimize fungal
spore counts in air by maintaining Air flow rates must be adjusted accordingly to ensure
sufficient  ACH,  and  these  rates  vary  depending  on  certain  factors  (e.g.,  room  air
leakage area). For example, to provide ≥12 ACH in a typical patient room with 0.5 sq.
ft.  air  leakage,  the  air  flow  rate  will  be  minimally  125  cubic  feet/min  (cfm).320,  321
Higher  air  flow  rates  may  be  needed.  A  general  ventilation  diagram  for  a
positive-pressure room is given in Figure 2. Directed room air flow in PE rooms is not
laminar;  parallel  air  streams  are  not  generated.  Studies  attempting  to  demonstrate
patient benefit from laminar air flow in a PE setting are equivocal.316, 318, 319, 322 –
327  Air  flow  direction  at  the  entrances  to  these  areas  should  be  maintained  and
verified,  preferably  on  a  daily  basis,  using  either  a  visual  means  of  indication  (e.g.,
smoke  tubes  and  flutter  strips)  or  manometers.  Permanent  installation  of  a  visual
monitoring  device  is  indicated  for  new  PE  construction  and  renovation.120  Facility
service structures can interfere with the proper unidirectional air flow from the patients'
rooms to the adjacent corridor. In one outbreak investigation, Aspergillus spp. infections
in a critical care unit may have been associated with a pneumatic specimen transport
system, a textile disposal duct system, and central vacuum lines for housekeeping, all
of which disrupted proper air flow from the patients' rooms to the outside and allowed
entry of fungal spores into the unit (M.McNeil, CDC, 2000). The use of surface fungicide
treatments  is  becoming  more  common,  especially  for  building  materials.329
Copper-based compounds have demonstrated anti-fungal activity and are often applied
to  wood  or  paint.  Copper-8-quinolinolate  was  used  on  environmental  surfaces
contaminated with Aspergillus spp. to control one reported outbreak of aspergillosis.310
The  compound  was  also  incorporated  into  the  fireproofing  material  of  a  newly
constructed hospital to help decrease the environmental spore burden.316 Acute-care
inpatient  facilities  need  at  least  one  room  equipped  to  house  patients  with  airborne
infectious disease. Every health-care facility, including ambulatory and long-term care
facilities, should undertake an ICRA to identify the need for AII areas. Once the need is
established,  the  appropriate  ventilation  equipment  can  be  identified.  Air  handling
systems for this purpose need not be restricted to central systems. Guidelines for the
prevention  of  health-care  acquired  TB  have  been  published  in  response  to  multiple
reports of health-care associated transmission of multi-drug resistant strains.4, 330 In
reports  documenting  health-care  acquired  TB,  investigators  have  noted  a  failure  to
comply fully with prevention measures in established guidelines.331 – 345 These gaps
highlight  the  importance  of  prompt  recognition  of  the  disease,  isolation  of  patients,
proper treatment, and engineering controls. AII rooms are also appropriate for the care
and management of smallpox patients.6 Environmental infection control with respect to
smallpox is currently being revisited (see Appendix E). Salient features of engineering
controls for AII areas include As with PE, airflow rates need to be determined to ensure
the proper numbers of ACH.320, 321 AII rooms can be constructed either with (Figure
3) or without  (Figure 4) an  anteroom.  When  the recirculation  of  air from AII  rooms  is
unavoidable, HEPA filters should be installed in the exhaust duct leading from the room
to the general ventilation system. In addition to UVGI fixtures in the room, UVGI can be
placed in the ducts as an adjunct measure to HEPA filtration, but it can not replace the
HEPA filter.4, 346 A UVGI fixture placed in the upper room, coupled with a minimum of
6  ACH,  also  provides  adequate  air  cleaning.248  One  of  the  components  of  airborne
infection  isolation  is  respiratory  protection  for  health-care  workers  and  visitors  when
entering AII rooms.4, 6, 347 Recommendations of the type of respiratory protection are
dependent on the patient's airborne infection (indicating the need for AII) and the risk
of infection to persons entering the AII room. A more in-depth discussion of respiratory
protection in this instance is presented in the current isolation guideline;6 a revision of
this  guideline  is  in  development.  Cough-inducing  procedures  (e.g.,  endotracheal
intubation  and  suctioning  of  known  or  suspected  TB  patients,  diagnostic  sputum
induction, aerosol treatments, and bronchoscopy) require similar precautions.348–350
Additional  engineering  measures  are  necessary  for  the  management  of  patients
requiring PE (i.e., allogeneic HSCT patients) who concurrently have airborne infection.
For  this  type  of  patient  treatment,  an  anteroom  (Figure  4)  is  required  in  new
construction  and  renovation  as  per  AIA  guidelines.120  The  pressure  differential  of  an
anteroom  can  be  positive  or  negative  relative  to  the  patient  in  the  room.120  An
anteroom can act as an airlock (Figure 4). If the anteroom is positive relative to the air
space in the patient's room, staff members do not have to mask prior to entry into the
anteroom if air is directly exhausted to the outside and a minimum of 10 ACH (Figure 4,
top diagram).120 When an anteroom is negative relative to both the AII room and the
corridor,  health-care  workers  must  mask  prior  to  entering  the  anteroom  (Figure  4,
bottom diagram). If an AII room with an anteroom is not available, use of a portable,
industrial-grade  HEPA  filter  unit  may  help  to  increase  the  number  of  ACHs  while
facilitating the removal of fungal spores; however, a fresh air source must be present to
achieve  the  proper  air  exchange  rate.  Incoming  ambient  air  should  receive  HEPA
filtration.  Operating  room  air  may  contain  microorganisms,  dust,  aerosol,  lint,  skin
squamous  epithelial  cells,  and  respiratory  droplets.  The  microbial  level  in  operating
room air is directly proportional to the number of people moving in the room.351 One
study documented lower infection rates with coagulase-negative staphylococci among
patients  when  operating  room  traffic  during  the  surgical  procedure  was  limited.352
Therefore,  efforts  should  be  made  to  minimize  personnel  traffic  during  operations.
Outbreaks of SSIs caused by group A beta-hemolytic streptococci have been traced to
airborne  transmission  from  colonized  operating-room  personnel  to  patients.150–154
Several  potential  health-care  associated  pathogens  (e.g.,  Staphylococcus  aureus  and
Staphylococcus  epidermidis)  and  drug-resistant  organisms  have  also  been  recovered
from areas adjacent to the surgical field,353 but the extent to which the presence of
bacteria near the surgical field influences the development of postoperative SSIs is not
clear.354  Proper  ventilation,  humidity  (<68%),  and  temperature  control  in  the
operating room is important for the comfort of surgical personnel and patients, but also
in  preventing  environmental  conditions  that  encourage  growth  and  transmission  of
microorganisms.355  Operating  rooms  should  be  maintained  at  positive  pressure  with
respect  to  corridors  and  adjacent  areas.356  Operating  rooms  typically  do  not  have  a
variable  air  handling  system.  Variable  air  handling  systems  are  permitted  for  use  in
operating rooms only if they continue to provide a positive pressure with respect to the
corridors  and  adjacent  areas  and  the  proper  ACHs  are  maintained  when  the  room  is
occupied.  Conventional  operating-room  ventilation  systems  produce  a  minimum  of
about  15  ACH  of  filtered  air  for  thermal  control,  three  (20%)  of  which  must  be  fresh
air.120,  357,  358  Air  should  be  introduced  at  the  ceiling  and  exhausted  near  the
floor.357, 359 Laminar airflow and UVGI have been suggested as adjunct measures to
reduce SSI risk for certain operations. Laminar airflow is designed to move particle-free
air  over  the  aseptic  operating  field  at  a  uniform  velocity  (0.3–0.5  m/sec),  sweeping
away particles in its path. This air flow can be directed vertically or horizontally, and
recirculated air is passed through a HEPA filter.360–363 Neither laminar airflow nor UV
light, however, has been conclusively shown to decrease overall SSI risk.356, 364–370
Elective surgery on infectious TB patients should be postponed until such patients have
received  adequate  drug  therapy.  The  use  of  general  anesthesia  in  TB  patients  poses
infection-control  challenges  because  intubation  can  induce  coughing,  and  the
anesthesia  breathing  circuit  apparatus  potentially  can  become  contaminated.371
Although  operating  room  suites  at  15  ACH  exceed  the  air  exchanges  required
transmission of TB to operating-room personnel. If feasible, intubation and extubation
of the TB surgical patient should be performed in AII. AIA currently does not recommend
changing pressure from positive to negative or setting it to neutral; most facilities lack
the
 capability
 to
 do
 so.120
 When
 emergency
 surgery
 is
 indicated
 for
 a
suspected/diagnosed infectious TB patient, taking specific infection-control measures is
prudent  (Box  8).  *Material  in  this  table  was  compiled  from  references  4,  347,  and
372–374. +The placement of portable HEPA filter units in the operating room must be
carefully evaluated for potential disruptions in normal air flow. The portable unit should
be  turned  off  while  the  surgical  procedure  is  underway  and  turned  on  following
extubation.  Portable  HEPA  filter  units  previously  placed  in  construction  areas  may  be
used  in  subsequent  patient  care,  provided  that  all  internal  and  external  surfaces  are
cleaned and the filter's performance is verified with appropriate particle testing and is
changed, if needed. * Material in this table is compiled from references 35 and 120. §
Positive  pressure  and  HEPA  filters  may  be  preferred  in  some  rooms  in  intensive  care
units (ICUs) caring for large numbers of immunocompromised patients. ¶ Clean-to-dirty:
negative to an infectious patient, positive away from an immunocompromised patient.
** Minimized infiltration for ventilation control; pertains to windows, closed doors, and
surface  joints.  ¶¶  Table  used  with  permission  of  the  publisher  of  reference  35
(Lippincott  Williams  and  Wilkins).  In  addition  to  infectious  bioaerosols,  several  crucial
non-infectious, indoor air-quality issues must be addressed by health-care facilities. The
presence  of  sensitizing  and  allergenic  agents  and  irritants  in  the  workplace  (e.g.,
ethylene
 oxide,
 glutaraldehyde,
 formaldehyde,
 hexachlorophene,
 and
 latex
allergens375  )  is  increasing.  Asthma  and  dermatologic  and  systemic  reactions  often
result with exposure to these chemicals. Anesthetic gases and aerosolized medications
(e.g.,  ribavirin,  pentamidine,  and  aminoglycosides)  represent  some  of  the  emerging
potentially hazardous exposures to health-care workers. Containment of the aerosol at
the source is the first level of engineering control, but personal protective equipment
(e.g., masks, respirators, and glove liners) that distances the worker from the hazard
also may be needed. Laser plumes and surgical smoke represent another potential risk
for  health-care  workers.376–378  Lasers  transfer  electromagnetic  energy  into  tissues,
resulting in the release of a heated plume that includes particles, gases, tissue debris,
and  offensive  smells.  One  concern  is  that  aerosolized  infectious  material  in  the  laser
plume  might  reach  the  nasal  mucosa  of  surgeons  and  adjacent  personnel.  Although
some viruses (i.e., varicella-zoster virus, pseudorabies virus, and herpes simplex virus)
do not aerosolize efficiently,379, 380 other viruses and bacteria (e.g., human papilloma
virus  [HPV],  HIV,  coagulasenegative  Staphylococcus,  Corynebacterium  spp.,  and
Neisseria  spp.)  have  been  detected  in  laser  plumes.381–387  The  presence  of  an
infectious agent in a laser plume may not, however, be sufficient to cause disease from
airborne exposure, especially if the normal mode of transmission for the agent is not
airborne.  No  evidence  indicated  that  HIV  or  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  has  been
transmitted  via  aerosolization  and  inhalation.388  Although  continuing  studies  are
needed to fully evaluate the risk of laser plumes to surgical personnel, the prevention
measures  in  these  other  guidelines  should  be  followed:  These  guidelines  recommend
the use of Although transmission of TB has occurred as a result of abscess management
practices that lacked airborne particulate control measures and respiratory protection,
use of a smoke evacuator or needle aspirator and a high degree of clinical awareness
can help protect healthcare workers when excising and draining an extrapulmonary TB
abscess.137  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help
reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/air.html
