A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Enterobacterales are a group of bacteria
(germs).  They  are  a  normal  part  of  the  animal  gut  but  can  also  cause  infections.
Carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  (CRE)  are  germs  resistant  to  one  or  several
antibiotics  called  carbapenems.   If  your  pet  has  CRE,  talk  to  your  veterinarian  about
what  to  expect  and  how  to  prevent  the  spread  of  germs  to  other  pets  and  people  in
your  home.  Pets  may  experience:  It  might  be  hard  to  know  exactly  where  and  when
your pet got CRE. Animals can get CRE from many sources, including other animals with
CRE  infections.  Animals  can  carry  CRE  in  their  gut  without  any  symptoms.   Pets  and
people  can  share  germs,  including  CRE.  We  don't  know  how  often  this  happens  with
CRE. Scientists are working to understand the risk of developing a CRE infection from
exposure to a pet, but currently believe the risk is low.  People or animals can carry the
germs  on  or  in  their  body  without  infection,  known  as  colonization.  If  you're  worried
about your risk of CRE infection, talk to your healthcare provider. You don't need to give
up a pet with CRE. If your pet has a CRE infection, your veterinarian might ask to do
additional  tests  to  be  sure  they  choose  the  correct  drug  to  treat  the  infection.
Antimicrobial-resistant infections may take longer to treat and can be more expensive
to treat. Pets can carry CRE without signs of infection. In these cases, your veterinarian
may  not  recommend  any  treatment.   Talk  to  your  veterinarian  about  what  to  expect
and how to prevent your pet's germs from spreading to other pets and people in your
home.  If  your  pet  has  a  CRE  infection,  they  may  continue  to  carry  the  germ  after
treatment and their symptoms disappear. Scientists are still working to understand how
long cats and dogs carry CRE.1 CRE spreads easily in healthcare settings but infections
can  be  prevented.  CRE  infections  can  be  difficult  to  treat  and  some  are  resistant  to
antibiotics. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/cre/about/animals.html
