Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations and Reports / April 10, 2020 / 69(2);1–17
Sarah Schillie, MD1; Carolyn Wester, MD1; Melissa Osborne, PhD1; Laura Wesolowski,
PhD1; A. Blythe Ryerson, PhD1 (View author affiliations) Views equals page views plus
PDF  downloads  Box  1  Box  2  Figure  1  Figure  2  Hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)  infection  is  a
major  source  of  morbidity  and  mortality  in  the  United  States.  HCV  is  transmitted
primarily through parenteral exposures to infectious blood or body fluids that contain
blood, most commonly through injection drug use. No vaccine against hepatitis C exists
and  no  effective  pre-  or  postexposure  prophylaxis  is  available.  More  than  half  of
persons  who  become  infected  with  HCV  will  develop  chronic  infection.  Direct-acting
antiviral  treatment  can  result  in  a  virologic  cure  in  most  persons  with  8–12  weeks  of
all-oral  medication  regimens.  This  report  augments  (i.e.,  updates  and  summarizes)
previously published recommendations from CDC regarding testing for HCV infection in
the United States (Smith BD, Morgan RL, Beckett GA, et al. Recommendations for the
identification  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  virus  infection  among  persons  born  during
1945–1965.  MMWR  Recomm  Rec  2012;61[No.  RR-4]).  CDC  is  augmenting  previous
guidance with two new recommendations: 1) hepatitis C screening at least once in a
lifetime for all adults aged ≥18 years, except in settings where the prevalence of HCV
infection  is  <0.1%  and  2)  hepatitis  C  screening  for  all  pregnant  women  during  each
pregnancy,  except  in  settings  where  the  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  is  <0.1%.  The
recommendation for HCV testing that remains unchanged is regardless of age or setting
prevalence, all persons with risk factors should be tested for hepatitis C, with periodic
testing  while  risk  factors  persist.  Any  person  who  requests  hepatitis  C  testing  should
receive it, regardless of disclosure of risk, because many persons might be reluctant to
disclose stigmatizing risks. Top Hepatitis C is the most commonly reported bloodborne
infection in the United States (1), and surveys conducted during 2013–2016 indicated
an estimated 2.4 million persons (1.0%) in the nation were living with hepatitis C (2).
Percutaneous  exposure  is  the  most  efficient  mode  of  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)
transmission,  and  injection  drug  use  (IDU)  is  the  primary  risk  factor  for  infection  (1).
National  surveillance  data  revealed  an  increase  in  reported  cases  of  acute  HCV
infection every year from 2009 through 2017 (1). The highest rates of acute infection
are among persons aged 20–39 years (1). As new HCV infections have increased among
reproductive  aged  adults,  rates  of  HCV  infection  nearly  doubled  during  2009–2014
among  women  with  live  births  (3).  In  2015,  0.38%  of  live  births  were  delivered  by
mothers  with  hepatitis  C  (4).  This  report  augments  (i.e.,  updates  and  summarizes)
previous  CDC  recommendations  for  testing  of  hepatitis  C  among  adults  in  the  United
States  published  in  1998  and  2012  (5,6).  The  recommendations  in  this  report  do  not
replace or modify previous recommendations for hepatitis C testing that are based on
known  risk  factors  or  clinical  indications.  Previously  published  recommendations  for
hepatitis  C  testing  of  persons  with  risk  factors  and  alcohol  use  screening  and
intervention  for  persons  identified  as  infected  with  HCV  remain  in  effect  (5,6).  This
report  is  intended  to  serve  as  a  resource  for  health  care  professionals,  public  health
officials, and organizations involved in the development, implementation, delivery, and
evaluation of clinical and preventive services. In 2017, a total of 3,216 cases (1.0 per
100,000  population)  of  acute  HCV  infection  were  reported  to  CDC  (1).  The  reported
number of cases in any given year likely represents less than 10% of the actual number
of cases because of underascertainment and underreporting (7). An estimated 44,700
new cases of HCV infection occurred in 2017. The rate of reported acute HCV infections
increased from 0.7 cases per 100,000 population in 2013 to 1.0 in 2017 (Figure 1) (1).
In  2017,  acute  HCV  incidence  was  greatest  for  persons  aged  20–29  years  (2.8)  and
30–39  years  (2.3)  (1).  Persons  aged  ≤19  years  had  the  lowest  incidence  (0.1)  (1).
Incidence was slightly greater for males than females (1.2 cases and 0.9, respectively)
(1).  During  2006–2012,  the  combined  incidence  of  acute  HCV  infection  in  four  states
(Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia)  increased  364%  among  persons
aged ≤30 years. Among cases in these states with identified risk information, IDU was
most  commonly  reported  (73%).  Those  infected  were  primarily  non-Hispanic  white
persons  from  nonurban  areas  (8).  On  the  basis  of  2013–2016  National  Health  and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data and considering populations not sampled
in NHANES, an estimated 1.0% of all adults in the United States, or 2,386,100 persons,
were living with HCV infection (HCV RNA positive) (2). Nine states comprise 51.9% of all
persons  living  with  HCV  infection:  California,  Florida,  New  York,  North  Carolina,
Michigan,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Tennessee,  and  Texas  (Figure  2)  (9).  HCV  is  a  small,
single-stranded,  enveloped  RNA  virus  in  the  flavivirus  family  with  a  high  degree  of
genetic heterogeneity. Seven distinct HCV genotypes have been identified. Genotype 1
is  the  most  prevalent  genotype  in  the  United  States  and  worldwide,  accounting  for
approximately 75% and 46% of cases, respectively (10,11). Geographic differences in
global  genotype  distribution  are  important  because  some  treatment  options  are
genotype specific (11,12). High rates of mutation in the HCV RNA genome are believed
to play a role in the pathogen’s ability to evade the immune system (11). Prior infection
with  HCV  does  not  protect  against  subsequent  infection  with  the  same  or  different
genotypes.  HCV  is  primarily  transmitted  through  direct  percutaneous  exposure  to
blood. Mucous membrane exposures to blood also can result in transmission, although
this route is less efficient. HCV can be detected in saliva, semen, breast milk, and other
body  fluids,  although  these  body  fluids  are  not  believed  to  be  efficient  vehicles  of
transmission (11,13). IDU is the most common means of HCV transmission in the United
States.  Invasive  medical  procedures  (e.g.,  injections  and  hemodialysis)  pose  risks  for
HCV infection when standard infection-control practices are not followed (14,15). Health
care–related hepatitis C outbreaks also stem from drug diversion (e.g., tampering with
fentanyl  syringes)  (16,17).  Although  HCV  infection  is  primarily  associated  with  IDU,
high-risk behaviors (e.g., anal sex without using a condom), primarily among persons
with HIV, are also important risk factors for transmission (18). Other possible exposures
include sharing personal items contaminated with blood (e.g., razors or toothbrushes),
unregulated tattooing, needlestick injuries among health care personnel, and birth to a
mother with hepatitis C. Receipt of donated blood, blood products, and organs was once
a  common  means  of  transmission  but  is  now  rare  in  the  United  States  (19).  Before
implementing  universal  blood  product  testing  in  1992,  children  acquired  hepatitis  C
predominantly through blood transfusion. Because of the increasing incidence of HCV
infection  among  women  of  childbearing  age,  perinatal  transmission  (intrauterine  or
intrapartum) has become an increasingly important mode of HCV transmission (20,21).
Among  pregnant  women  from  2011  to  2016,  hepatitis  C  virus  testing  increased  by
135% (from 5.7% to 13.4%), and positivity increased by 39% (from 2.6% to 3.6%) (4).
The  risk  for  perinatal  transmission  is  informed  by  a  systematic  review  and
meta-analysis of studies conducted in multiple countries and is 5.8% for infants born to
mothers  infected  with  HCV  but  not  with  HIV  and  doubles  for  infants  born  to  mothers
co-infected with HCV and HIV. Perinatal HCV transmission is almost always confined to
infants  born  to  mothers  with  detectable  HCV  RNA  (22).  Only  approximately  20%  of
infants  with  perinatally  acquired  hepatitis  C  clear  the  infection,  50%  have  chronic
asymptomatic infection, and 30% have chronic active infection (23). HCV-related liver
disease rarely causes complications during childhood. Because fibrosis increases with
disease duration, perinatally infected persons might develop severe disease as young
adults (20,21). Persons with acute HCV infection are typically either asymptomatic or
have a mild clinical illness like that of other types of viral hepatitis (24). Jaundice might
occur  in  20%–30%  of  persons,  and  nonspecific  symptoms  (e.g.,  anorexia,  malaise,  or
abdominal  pain)  might  be  present  in  10%–20%  of  persons.  Fulminant  hepatic  failure
following acute hepatitis C is rare. The average time from exposure to symptom onset
is 2–12 weeks (range: 2–26 weeks) (25,26). HCV antibodies (anti-HCV) can be detected
4–10  weeks  after  infection  and  are  present  in  approximately  97%  of  persons  by  6
months after exposure. HCV RNA can be detected as early as 1–2 weeks after exposure.
The
 presence
 of
 HCV
 RNA
 indicates
 current
 infection
 (27–29).
 Historically,
approximately  15%–25%  of  persons  were  believed  to  resolve  their  acute  infection
without sequelae (30); however, more recent data suggest that spontaneous clearance
might  be  as  high  as  46%,  varying  by  age  at  the  time  of  infection  (31).  Spontaneous
clearance is lower among persons co-infected with HIV (11). Predictors of spontaneous
clearance include jaundice; elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level; hepatitis B
virus surface antigen (HBsAg) positivity; female sex; younger age; HCV genotype 1; and
host genetic polymorphisms, most notably those near the IL28B gene (27–29). Chronic
HCV infection develops when viral replication evades the host immune response. The
course  of  chronic  liver  disease  is  usually  insidious,  progressing  slowly  without
symptoms or physical signs in most persons during the first 20 years or more following
infection.  Approximately  5%–25%  of  persons  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  will  develop
cirrhosis over 10–20 years (30). Those with cirrhosis experience a 1%–4% annual risk
for hepatocellular carcinoma (30). Persons who are male, aged >50 years, use alcohol,
have  nonalcoholic  fatty  liver  disease,  have  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  or  HIV  coinfection,
and  who  are  undergoing  immunosuppressive  therapy  have  increased  rates  of
progression  to  cirrhosis.  Extrahepatic  manifestations  of  chronic  HCV  infection  might
occur
 and
 include
 membranoproliferative
 glomerulonephritis,
 essential
 mixed
cryoglobulinemia, porphyria cutanea tarda (27–29), and lymphoma (32). In one report,
the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine explored the feasibility
of hepatitis C elimination and concluded that hepatitis C could be eliminated as a public
health problem in the United States, but that substantial obstacles exist (33). In another
report,  specific  actions  were  recommended  to  achieve  elimination  considering
information, interventions, service delivery, financing, and research (34). These reports
were  the  culmination  of  decades  of  progress  in  the  development  of  HCV  infection
diagnostic and therapeutic tools. In 1990, serologic tests to detect immunoglobulin G
anti-HCV by enzyme immunoassay were licensed and became commercially available in
the  United  States,  and  U.S.  blood  banks  voluntarily  began  testing  donations  for
anti-HCV  (35).  In  1991,  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  issued  interagency  guidelines
addressing  hepatitis  C  screening  of  blood,  organs,  and  tissues  (35).  These  guidelines
recommended hepatitis C testing for all donations of whole blood and components for
transfusion, as well as testing serum/plasma from donors of organs, tissues, or semen
intended  for  human  use  (35).  In  1998,  CDC  expanded  the  interagency  guidelines  to
provide recommendations for preventing transmission of HCV; identifying, counseling,
and testing persons at risk for hepatitis C; and providing appropriate medical evaluation
and management of persons with hepatitis C (6). The guidelines recommended testing
on the basis of risk factors for HCV infection for persons who ever injected drugs and
shared  needles,  syringes,  or  other  drug  preparation  equipment,  including  those  who
injected once or a few times many years ago and do not consider themselves as drug
users;  with  selected  medical  conditions,  including  those  who  received  clotting  factor
concentrates  produced  before  1987;  who  were  ever  on  chronic  hemodialysis
(maintenance  hemodialysis);  with  persistently  abnormal  ALT  levels;  who  were  prior
recipients of transfusions or organ transplants, including those who were notified that
they  received  blood  from  a  donor  who  later  tested  positive  for  HCV  infection;  who
received a transfusion of blood or blood components before July 1992, or who received
an organ transplant before July 1992; and with a recognized exposure, including health
care, emergency medical, and public safety workers after a needlestick injury, sharps
injury,  or  mucosal  exposure  to  blood  infected  with  hepatitis  C  or  children  born  to
mothers  infected  with  hepatitis  C  (6).  In  1999,  the  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  and
Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America  (IDSA)  guidelines  recommended  hepatitis  C
testing  for  persons  with  HIV  (36).  Because  of  the  limited  effectiveness  of  risk-based
hepatitis  C  testing,  CDC  considered  strategies  to  increase  the  proportion  of  infected
persons  who  are  aware  of  their  status  and  are  linked  to  care  (5).  In  2012,  CDC
augmented its guidance to recommend one-time hepatitis C screening for persons born
during  1945–1965  (birth  cohort)  without  ascertainment  of  risk  (5).  With  an  anti-HCV
positivity  prevalence  of  3.25%,  persons  born  in  the  1945–1965  birth  year  cohort
accounted for approximately three fourths of chronic HCV infections among U.S. adults
during 1999–2008 (37). Approximately 45% of persons infected with HCV do not recall
or  report  having  specific  risk  factors  (38).  Included  in  the  2012  guidelines  were
recommendations for alcohol use screening and intervention for persons identified with
HCV  infection  (5).  This  report  expands  hepatitis  C  screening  to  at  least  once  in  a
lifetime for all adults aged >18 years, except in settings where the prevalence of HCV
infection is <0.1%. The 2012 CDC guidelines recommended that pregnant women be
tested  for  hepatitis  C  only  if  they  have  known  risk  factors  (5).  However,  in  2018,
universal hepatitis C screening during pregnancy was recommended by the American
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and IDSA (39). This report expands hepatitis
C screening for all pregnant women during each pregnancy, except in settings where
the  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  is  <0.1%.  Existing  strategies  for  hepatitis  C  testing
have had limited success. The 2013–2016 surveys indicate only approximately 56% of
persons with HCV infection reported having ever been told they had hepatitis C (38).
Therefore, strengthened guidance for universal hepatitis C testing is warranted. Models
to  address  barriers  related  to  access  to  direct-acting  antiviral  (DAA)  treatment  are
needed  to  ensure  health  care  equity  and  the  success  of  expanded  hepatitis  C
screening. The recommendation for HCV testing that remains unchanged is regardless
of age or setting prevalence, all persons with risk factors should be tested for hepatitis
C, with periodic testing while risk factors persist. Any person who requests hepatitis C
testing should receive it regardless of disclosure of risk because many persons might be
reluctant  to  disclose  stigmatizing  risks.  The  treatment  for  HCV  infection  has  evolved
substantially  since  the  introduction  of  DAA  agents  in  2011.  DAA  therapy  is  better
tolerated, of shorter duration, and more effective than interferon-based regimens used
in  the  past  (39,40).  The  antivirals  for  hepatitis  C  treatment  include  next-generation
DAAs,  categorized  as  either  protease  inhibitors,  nucleoside  analog  polymerase
inhibitors,  or  nonstructural  (NS5A)  protein  inhibitors.  Many  agents  are  pangenotypic,
meaning  they  have  antiviral  activity  against  all  genotypes  (20,21,40).  A  sustained
virologic  response  (SVR)  is  indicative  of  cure  and  is  defined  as  the  absence  of
detectable  HCV  RNA  12  weeks  after  completion  of  treatment.  Approximately  90%  of
HCV-infected  persons  can  be  cured  of  HCV  infection  with  8–12  weeks  of  therapy,
regardless of HCV genotype, prior treatment experience, fibrosis level, or presence of
cirrhosis (39–41). Despite their favorable safety profile, DAAs are not yet approved for
use in pregnancy. Safety data during pregnancy are preliminary and larger studies are
required.  A  small  study  of  seven  pregnant  women  treated  with  ledipasvir/sofosbuvir
identified  no  safety  concerns  (42).  Until  DAAs  become  available  for  use  during
pregnancy, testing women during pregnancy for HCV infection still has benefits to both
the  mother  and  the  infant.  Many  women  only  have  access  to  health  care  during
pregnancy  and  the  immediate  postpartum  period.  In  2017,  12.4%  of  women  aged
19–44 years were not covered by public or private health insurance (43). Pregnancy is
an  opportune  time  for  women  to  receive  a  hepatitis  C  test  while  simultaneously
receiving  other  prenatal  pathogen  testing  such  as  for  HIV  or  hepatitis  B.  The
postpartum period might represent a unique time to transition women who have had
HCV infection diagnosed during pregnancy to treatment with DAAs. Treatment during
the  interconception  (interpregnancy)  period  reduces  the  transmission  risk  for
subsequent  pregnancies.  Identification  of  HCV  infection  during  pregnancy  also  can
inform pregnancy and delivery management issues that might reduce the likelihood of
HCV transmission to the infant. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine recommends a
preference  for  amniocentesis  over  chorionic  villus  sampling  when  needed,  and  for
avoiding  internal  fetal  monitoring,  prolonged  rupture  of  the  membranes,  and
episiotomy  among  HCV-infected  women,  unless  it  is  unavoidable  (44).  Testing  during
pregnancy  allows  for  simultaneous  identification  of  infected  mothers  and  infants  who
should receive testing at a pediatric visit. Testing of infants consists of HCV RNA testing
at or after age 2 months or anti-HCV testing at or after age 18 months (39). Although
DAA treatment is not approved for children aged <3 years, infected children aged <3
years  should  be  monitored.  In  2017,  ledipasvir/sofosbuvir  became  the  first  DAA
approved for use in persons aged 12–17 years (20,21). In 2019 glecaprevir/pibrentasvir
became  approved  for  use  in  persons  aged  ≥12  years  (45),  and  ledipasvir/sofosbuvir
became approved for use in persons aged ≥3 years (46). No vaccine against hepatitis C
exists  and  no  effective  pre-  or  postexposure  prophylaxis  (e.g.,  immune  globulin)  is
available.  Prenatal  treatment  options  and/or  infant  antiviral  postexposure  prophylaxis
might  become  available  to  prevent  perinatal  transmission.  HCV  infection  is  not  an
indication for Cesarean delivery and is not a contraindication to breastfeeding if nipples
are  not  bleeding  or  cracked  (44).  Top  To  inform  these  recommendations,
comprehensive  systematic  reviews  of  the  literature  were  conducted,  analyzed,  and
assessed in two stages. These reviews examined the availability of evidence regarding
HCV infection prevalence and the health benefits and harms associated with one-time
hepatitis C screening for persons unaware of their status. CDC determined that the new
recommendations  constituted  scientific  information  that  will  have  a  clear  and
substantial impact on important public policies and private sector decisions. Therefore,
the Information Quality Act required peer review by specialists in the field who were not
involved in the development of these recommendations. CDC solicited nominations for
reviewers from the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), IDSA,
and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Six clinicians with
expertise in hepatology, gastroenterology, internal medicine, infectious diseases and/or
obstetrics and gynecology provided structured peer reviews. In addition, feedback from
the  public  was  solicited  through  a  Federal  Register  notice  released  on  October  28,
2019,  announcing  the  availability  of  the  draft  recommendations  for  public  comment
through December 27, 2019. CDC received 69 public comments on the draft document
from  academia,  professional  organizations,  industry,  and  the  public.  Many  of  the
comments  from  both  peer  reviewers  and  the  public  were  in  support  of  the
recommendations. For those comments that proposed changes, the majority related to
screening for hepatitis C in every pregnancy or removing the prevalence threshold for
universal  screening.  Feedback  attained  during  both  the  peer  review  process  and  the
public  comment  period  was  reviewed  by  CDC.  Ultimately,  no  changes  to  the
recommendations were made; however, additional references and justification for the
recommendation  to  screen  during  every  pregnancy  and  maintaining  the  prevalence
threshold  were  added  to  the  document.  To  facilitate  the  systematic  review  of  the
evidence,  two  research  questions  were  formulated  to  guide  the  development  of  the
recommendations: An analytic framework describing the chain of indirect evidence was
developed:  Key  questions  (KQ)  were  formulated  for  each  link  of  the  chain
(Supplementary
 Table
 1,
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840):
 Because
 the
diagnostic  accuracy  of  anti-HCV  testing  and  treatment  effects  have  been  described
previously,  K.Q.2.a.  and  K.Q.3.a.–d.  key  questions  were  not  included  in  this  review.
Systematic  reviews  were  conducted  to  examine  benefits  and  harms  of  hepatitis  C
screening.  The  systematic  review  process  for  these  recommendations  was  separated
into two stages: 1) a review of evidence to inform the hepatitis C screening strategy
among all adults and 2) a review of the evidence to inform the hepatitis C screening
strategy  among  pregnant  women.  Systematic  reviews  were  conducted  for  literature
published worldwide in Medline (OVID), Embase (OVID), CINAHL (EBSCO), Scopus, and
Cochrane  Library.  For  the  all-adult  review,  the  beginning  search  date  was  2010  to
capture  studies  reflecting  the  changing  epidemiology  of  HCV  infection  and  the
availability  of  DAAs,  and  the  end  date  was  the  run  date  of  August  6,  2018
(Supplementary  Table  2,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840).  For  the  pregnancy
review, the beginning search date was 1998 to capture studies published since previous
recommendations were issued in 1998, and the end date was the run date of July 2,
2018 (Supplementary Table 3, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840). Duplicates were
identified  using  the  Endnote  (Clarivate  Analytics,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  United
States)  automated  “find  duplicates”  function  with  preference  set  to  match  on  title,
author,  and  year.  Duplicates  were  removed  from  the  Endnote  library.  Following  the
initial collection of results from the search, titles/abstracts were independently reviewed
by two persons. For papers in which the title indicated the study was irrelevant to the
research question, abstracts were not reviewed. Titles/abstracts for the all-adult review
were  independently  reviewed  by  two  reviewers,  one  of  whom  was  always  a  senior
abstractor (and author LW or SS). Conflicts were resolved by SS. If a conflict arose from
a  study  whose  title/abstract  was  reviewed  only  by  both  LW  and  SS,  that  study  was
retrieved for the full text review. All full texts were screened by both MO and LW. SS
made  the  final  decision  regarding  conflicts.  Information  from  the  full  texts  was
extracted for the evidence review. A systematic review software program (Covidence;
Melbourne,  Victoria,  Australia)  was  used  to  facilitate  the  all-adult  review  process.
Titles/abstracts  for  the  pregnancy  review  were  independently  reviewed  by  two  senior
abstractors  (LW  or  SS).  Studies  that  either  abstractor  deemed  as  potentially  relevant
were  retrieved  for  full  text  review.  All  full  texts  were  screened  by  both  senior
abstractors.  Information  from  the  full  texts  was  extracted  for  the  evidence  review.
Studies  were  excluded  if  they  were  conducted  in  a  correctional  facility  because
separate  CDC  guidance  for  hepatitis  C  screening  in  correctional  facilities  is  under
development. Other reasons for exclusion were: if prevalence data from 2010 forward
could  not  be  abstracted  (all-adult  review  only);  if  the  study  reported  estimated,
projected, or self-reported data; if data were only available from a conference abstract,
or  if  the  study  population  was  non-U.S.  based,  unless  the  study  examined  outcomes
related  to  harms  of  screening.  Studies  related  to  harms  of  screening  were  included
broadly to help ensure all potential harms were captured in the review. When multiple
studies reported data for the same patients (e.g., when results of an initial pilot study
were reported or when multiple studies reported outcomes of the CDC-funded Hepatitis
Testing and Linkage to Care Project) (47), only the study with the most complete data
was  included.  Linkage-to-care  data  were  abstracted  from  2010  forward  from  studies
formally  assessing  linkage-to-care  and  reporting  arrangement  of  or  attendance  at  a
follow-up appointment with a provider with special training for hepatitis C management.
HCV RNA testing alone was not deemed linkage-to-care for purposes of this review, and
studies did not have to report achievement of SVR to be included in the linkage-to-care
review.  Study  design  and  setting  were  abstracted  for  all  applicable  studies.  After  the
formal  literature  review  was  conducted,  relevant  studies  identified  through  reference
lists and those that were newly published were added for review. To capture recently
published studies, a supplementary literature search was conducted on November 15,
2019 for all adults (Supplementary Table 4, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840) and
on
 October
 29,
 2019
 for
 pregnant
 women
 (Supplementary
 Table
 5,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840).  The  search  strategy  was  the  same  as  for  the
original  searches.  Titles/abstracts  were  independently  reviewed  by  BR  and  SS.  In  the
case of a conflict, the study was kept for full text review. Full texts were independently
reviewed  by  two  reviewers,  one  of  whom  was  either  MO,  BR,  or  SS  for  the  all-adult
review and BR or SS for the pregnant women review. Information from the full texts was
abstracted  and  added  to  the  original  review.  For  the  all-adult  review,  the  initial
literature  search  yielded  4,867  studies.  Twenty-nine  duplicates  were  identified.  Of
4,838  unique  studies,  4,170  (86.2%)  were  deemed  irrelevant  by  title/abstract
screening, resulting in 668 (13.8%) full texts for review. Among these, 368 studies had
data available to extract. For the pregnancy review, the initial literature search yielded
1,500 studies. Two duplicates were identified. Of 1,498 unique studies, 1,412 (94.3%)
were deemed irrelevant by title/abstract screening, resulting in 86 (5.7%) full texts for
review. The supplementary review yielded an additional 1,038 and 195 studies among
all adults and pregnant women, respectively. Of these, 912 (87.9%) and 168 (86.2%),
respectively,  were  deemed  irrelevant  by  title/abstract  screening,  resulting  in  126
(12.1%) and 27 (13.9%), respectively, full texts for review. One study was added to the
pregnant women review outside of the formal literature search (i.e., the study was not
among  the  retrieved  studies  but  was  known  by  the  authors)  (3).  Considering  all  104
applicable  studies,  the  median  anti-HCV  positivity  prevalence  (indicative  of  past  or
current  infection)  among  all  adults  was  6.6%  (range:  0.0%–76.1%)  (Table).  Median
anti-HCV  positivity  prevalence  was  1.7%  (range:  0.02%–7.9%)  for  the  general
population
 (nine
 studies)
 (Supplementary
 Table
 6,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840), 7.5% (range: 0.5%–25.8%) for ED patients (19
studies) (Supplementary Table 7, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840), 3.3% (range:
0.0%–43.5%)  for  birth  cohort  members  (31  studies)  (Supplementary  Table  8,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840),  9.3%  (range:  1.6%–76.1%)  for  others/multiple
risk
 factors
 (23
 studies)
 (Supplementary
 Table
 9,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840),  54.2%  (range:  12.7%–67.1%)  for  persons  who
use
 drugs
 (11
 studies)
 (Supplementary
 Table
 10,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840), 5.2% (range: 1.2%–32.9%) for persons with HIV
or
 sexual
 risk
 (eight
 studies)
 (Supplementary
 Table
 11,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840),  and  4.7%  (range:  3.4%–7.5%)  for  immigrants
(three  studies)  (Supplementary  Table  12,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840).
Considering 26 applicable studies among pregnant women, median anti-HCV positivity
prevalence
 was
 1.2%
 (range:
 0.1%–70.8%)
 (Supplementary
 Table
 13,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840).  Considering  all  61  applicable  studies,  the
median  rate  of  HCV  RNA  positivity  (indicative  of  viremia)  among  those  who  were
anti-HCV positive was 68.7% (range: 20.0%–100%) (Table). Median HCV RNA positivity
was
 55.2%
 (range:
 36.8%–83.0%)
 for
 the
 general
 population
 (six
 studies)
(Supplementary  Table  6),  69.0%  (range:  42.5%–90.5%)  for  ED  patients  (12  studies)
(Supplementary Table 7), 62.7% (20.0%–95.3%) for birth cohort members (21 studies)
(Supplementary Table 8), 74.1% (range: 47.0%–100%) for others/multiple (14 studies)
(Supplementary  Table  9),  73.8%  (range:  69.9%–100%)  for  persons  who  use  drugs
(three  studies)  (Supplementary  Table  10),  63.4%  (range:  41.4%–83.8%)  for  persons
with  HIV  or  sexual  risk  (four  studies)  (Supplementary  Table  11),  and  81.8%  for
immigrants  (one  study)  (Supplementary  Table  12).  Median  HCV  RNA  positivity  was
66.1% (range: 61.3%–77.2%) for pregnant women (four studies) (Supplementary Table
13). One primary study (2) and one follow-up modeling study (9) examined nationally
representative anti-HCV and HCV RNA data for adults from the 2013–2016 NHANES as
well as data from the literature to estimate prevalence among populations not sampled
by NHANES. The national estimate for anti-HCV positivity among adults was 1.7% (95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.4–2.0) (2). The HCV RNA prevalence estimate among adults
was 1.0% (95% CI = 0.8%–1.1%) (2). Forty-two studies informed linkage-to-care among
adults. Follow-up appointments or referrals were made for a median of 76.0% of HCV
RNA positive patients (range: 25%–100%) (23 studies). A median of 73.9% of patients
attended  their  first  follow-up  appointment  (range:  0.0%–100%)  (25  studies).  This
excludes  self-reported  data  and  studies  that  reported  patients  who  were  “linked  to
care”  without  explicitly  stating  the  patient  attended  an  appointment.  A  median  of
39.0%  of  those  attending  a  follow-up  appointment  received  treatment  (range:
21.5%–76.1%) (13 studies). Among those who received treatment, a median of 85.2%
of  patients  achieved  SVR  (range:  66.7%–100%)  (14  studies)  (Supplementary  Tables
6–12, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/85840). Because DAAs are not approved for use
during  pregnancy,  linkage-to-care  was  not  assessed  for  pregnant  women.  Harms
associated with hepatitis C screening were initially informed by 21 and 12 studies from
the
 all-adult
 and
 pregnancy
 review,
 respectively,
 including
 U.S.-based
 and
non-U.S.-based studies. The supplementary literature search identified five studies from
the  all-adult  review  and  one  study  from  the  pregnancy  review  informing  harms.  No
study  compared  harms  systematically  using  comparison  groups  associated  with
different  screening  approaches.  Harms  informed  by  the  all-adult  review  included
physical harms of screening (two studies) (48,49); anxiety/stress related to testing or
waiting  for  results  (five  studies)  (49–53);  cost  (one  study)  (54);  anxiety  related  to
receiving  positive  results  (one  study)  (55);  interpersonal  outcomes  (e.g.,  problems
related to family, friends from learning HCV infection status) (five studies) (51,55–58);
attitudes toward persons with hepatitis C, including stigma (11 studies) (49,55,57–65);
time for screening (two studies) (49,66); and false-positive results, including among left
ventricular assist device patients, possibly precluding heart transplantation (six studies)
(67–72). Harms informed by the pregnancy review included physical harms of screening
(one study) (73), anxiety (five studies) (74–78), stigma (one study) (77), psychological
issues (two studies) (73,79), fears related to sexual relationships (one study) (80), legal
ramifications and potential loss of infant custody (one study) (81), decreased quality of
life (one study) (82), social repercussions (one study) (83), reluctance to disclose illegal
risky  behaviors  because  potential  impact  on  mother  or  newborn  (one  study)  (84),
expense  (two  studies)  (78,85),  and  false-positive  results  (one  study)  (73).  Other
plausible harms associated with hepatitis C screening identified outside of these studies
(i.e.,  by  subject  matter  experts,  from  the  peer  review  process,  or  among  studies  not
captured  through  the  formal  literature  review)  include  harms  associated  with
undergoing  a  liver  biopsy  (e.g.,  pain,  bleeding,  intestinal  perforation,  and  death),
insurability  and  employability  issues,  treatment  adverse  effects,  the  need  to  wait  or
return  for  test  results,  difficulty  accessing  treatment,  and  unnecessary  Cesarean
deliveries and unnecessary avoidance of breastfeeding. CDC concluded that identified
or potential harms did not outweigh the benefits of screening. These literature reviews
are subject to at least three limitations. First, heterogeneity of individual study results
might  not  be  comparable  across  studies.  For  example,  regarding  anti-HCV  positivity,
some studies reported the proportion of persons testing positive out of the number of
persons tested, while other studies reported the total population as the denominator.
Other  examples  of  heterogeneity  between  studies  include  varying  definitions  for
follow-up (e.g., variations in provider types [specialist versus primary care provider] for
which  linkage-to-care  was  considered  and  varying  definitions  of  “treated”  [e.g.,
treatment  initiated  versus  completed  or  not  specified]).  Second,  limitations  of  the
included studies also exist and could carry over into the systematic review findings. For
example,  recall  bias  and  low  response  rates  might  have  occurred  within  individual
studies, potentially contributing to similar bias in the overall systematic review results.
In addition, studies performed in high-burden areas might not be representative of the
general populations and could impact external validity of the systematic review. Finally,
publication  bias  might  favor  publication  of  studies  reporting  high  disease  prevalence,
also potentially impacting external validity. Certain recent economic analyses provide
information on the cost-effectiveness of hepatitis C screening. One analysis determined
universal screening for persons aged ≥18 years, using a health care perspective, and
yielded an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of $11,378 per quality-adjusted
life year (QALY) gained when compared with 1945–1965 birth cohort screening, using a
base  case  hepatitis  C  prevalence  of  2.6%  and  0.29%  for  birth  cohort  members  and
nonbirth  cohort  members,  respectively  (86).  ICER  remained  below  $50,000  per  QALY
gained,
 a
 threshold
 sometimes
 considered
 as
 a
 cut-off
 for
 determining
cost-effectiveness,  until  the  anti-HCV  positivity  prevalence  dropped  below  0.07%
among nonbirth cohort members. Another analysis calculated an ICER of $28,000/QALY
gained under a health care perspective for a strategy of screening all persons aged ≥18
years  compared  with  birth  cohort  screening,  with  an  additional  280,000  cures  and
4,400  fewer  cases  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma  (87).  When  the  national  hepatitis  C
prevalence was halved from the base case of 0.84%, ICER increased to $39,400. ICER
remained below $100,000 per QALY gained when varying key parameters across broad
ranges  (e.g.,  when  there  was  no  improvement  in  quality  of  life  and  costs  decreased
following  early-stage  cure,  when  cost  of  early-stage  disease  was  $0,  when  treatment
costs  varied,  and  when  there  was  no  mortality  benefit  from  SVR).  A  third  analysis
reported  an  ICER  of  $7,900/QALY  gained  for  one-time  general  population  hepatitis  C
screening  of  persons  aged  20–69  years  compared  with  risk-based  screening  using  a
societal  perspective  and  a  base  case  hepatitis  C  prevalence  of  1.6%  (88).  ICER  was
$5,400/QALY  gained  for  screening  persons  born  during  1945–1965  compared  with
risk-based  screening  with  a  hepatitis  C  prevalence  of  3.3%  for  persons  in  the  birth
cohort.  Birth  cohort  screening  dominated  general  population  screening,  although  the
model  also  included  treatment  with  ribavirin  and  pegylated  interferon;  protease
inhibitor therapy was modeled for treatment naïve genotype 1 patients at costs ranging
from  $61,773–$88,248.  Studies  using  higher  treatment  costs  would  be  expected  to
calculate  ICERs  higher  than  those  with  lower  treatment  costs.  Several  other  studies
provide similar cost effectiveness estimates of a universal screening strategy for adults,
with ICERs ranging from cost saving to $71,000/QALY gained (89–91). Analyses focusing
on  pregnant  women  have  yielded  similar  results.  One  analysis  calculated  an  ICER  of
$2,826 for universal screening of pregnant women under the health care perspective,
compared  with  risk-based  screening  at  an  HCV  RNA  positivity  prevalence  of  0.73%;
sensitivity  analyses  generated  an  ICER  of  $50,000  per  QALY  gained  or  less  until  the
prevalence  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  infection  dropped  to  0.03%–0.04%  (92).  Although
real-world  data  informing  screening  during  each  pregnancy  are  lacking,  a  modeled
analysis  suggests  that  hepatitis  C  screening  during  each  pregnancy  would  be
cost-effective.  Using  a  hepatitis  C  prevalence  of  0.38%  among  pregnant  women,  as
determined  from  national  birth  certificate  data,  the  analysis  found  that  universal
hepatitis C screening during the first trimester of each pregnancy under a health care
perspective compared with the current practice of risk-based screening had an ICER of
$41,000/QALY  gained  (93).  The  model  assumed  no  hepatitis  C  treatment  would  be
offered  until  after  6  months  postpartum  and  that  25%  of  women  would  be  linked  to
care,  with  92%  of  those  linked  initiating  treatment.  Only  current  injecting  drug  users
were deemed at risk for new HCV infection or reinfection after cure. Universal screening
reduced  HCV-attributable  mortality  by  16%  and  more  than  doubled  the  proportion  of
infants born to mothers with hepatitis C who were identified as HCV-exposed, from 44%
to 92%. ICER remained at or below $100,000 per QALY gained if hepatitis C prevalence
was higher than 0.16%. This study did not account for any cost savings associated with
prevention  of  risks  for  subsequent  pregnancies  or  the  potential  benefits  to  early
detection and management of infected infants. The goal of hepatitis C screening is to
identify  persons  who  are  currently  infected  with  HCV.  Hepatitis  C  testing  should  be
initiated  with  a  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)-approved  anti-HCV  test.
Persons who test anti-HCV positive are either currently infected or had past infection
that  has  resolved  naturally  or  with  treatment.  Immunocompetent  persons  without
hepatitis  C  risks  who  test  anti-HCV  negative  are  not  infected  and  require  no  further
testing.  Persons  testing  anti-HCV  positive  should  have  follow-up  testing  with  an
FDA-approved  nucleic  acid  test  (NAT)  for  detection  of  HCV  RNA.  NAT  for  HCV  RNA
detection  determines  viremia  and  current  HCV  infection.  Persons  who  test  anti-HCV
positive but HCV RNA negative do not have current HCV infection. CDC encourages use
of reflex HCV RNA testing, in which specimens testing anti-HCV positive undergo HCV
RNA testing immediately and automatically in the laboratory, using the same sample
from  which  the  anti-HCV  test  was  conducted.  Hepatitis  C  testing  should  be  provided
on-site when feasible. The recommended HCV RNA prevalence threshold of 0.1% was
determined  based,  in  part,  on  review  of  published  ICERs,  as  a  function  of  hepatitis  C
prevalence, and the most up-to-date estimated prevalence of hepatitis C within states.
In general, cost analyses determined that for all adults, ICER would be approximately
$50,000 per QALY gained or less at current treatment costs (approximately $25,000 per
course  of  treatment)  at  an  anti-HCV  positivity  prevalence  of  0.07%  in  the  nonbirth
cohort,  which  is  similar  to  the  HCV  RNA  prevalence  in  all  adults.  At  a  hepatitis  C
prevalence  of  0.1%,  ICER  would  be  approximately  $36,000  per  QALY  gained  (86).
Certain
 economists
 use
 $50,000
 as
 a
 conservative
 threshold
 to
 determine
cost-effectiveness.  As  treatment  costs  decrease,  ICERs  also  will  decrease,  assuming
other parameters remain stable. According to modeling results using NHANES data, no
state  has  a  hepatitis  C  prevalence  in  adults  below  0.1%  (9).  Similarly,  for  universal
testing in pregnant women, ICER would be approximately $50,000 per QALY gained or
less at an HCV RNA positivity prevalence of 0.05%; at a prevalence of 0.1%, ICER would
be approximately $15,000 per QALY gained (92). ICERs might be higher for testing in
subsequent  pregnancies  when  testing  during  the  index  pregnancy  identifies  women
with hepatitis C who receive treatment following pregnancy, resulting in a decrease in
hepatitis C prevalence among women with more than one pregnancy. According to birth
certificate data (likely an underestimate of current maternal HCV infections), only three
states  were  below  the  0.1%  prevalence  among  pregnant  women  (4).  Although  the
intent  of  public  health  screening  is  usually  to  identify  undiagnosed  disease,  many
persons previously diagnosed with hepatitis C are not appropriately linked to care and
are  not  cured  of  their  HCV  infection,  thereby  representing  an  ongoing  source  of
transmission. Therefore, the prevalence threshold of 0.1% should be determined on the
basis of estimates of chronic hepatitis C prevalence, regardless of whether hepatitis C
has  been  diagnosed  previously.  Top  The  following  recommendations  for  hepatitis  C
screening augment those issued by CDC in 2012 (5). The recommendations issued by
CDC in 1998 remain in effect (6). CDC recommends (Box 1): In the absence of existing
data for hepatitis C prevalence, health care providers should initiate universal hepatitis
C  screening  until  they  establish  that  the  prevalence  of  HCV  RNA  positivity  in  their
population  is  <0.1%,  at  which  point  universal  screening  is  no  longer  explicitly
recommended but might occur at the provider’s discretion. Hepatitis C screening can
be  conducted  in  a  variety  of  settings  or  programs  that  serve  populations  at  different
risk and with varying hepatitis C prevalence. Regardless of the provider, organization,
or program providing testing, health care providers should initiate universal screening
for  adults  and  pregnant  women  unless  the  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  (HCV  RNA
positivity prevalence) in their patients has been documented to be <0.1%. There are
statistical  challenges  with  determining  a  “number  needed  to  screen”  to  detect  a
relatively rare disease in lower-risk settings; therefore, providers and program directors
are encouraged to consult their state or local health departments or CDC to determine
a  reasonable  estimate  of  baseline  prevalence  in  their  setting  or  a  methodology  for
determining how many persons they need to screen before confidently establishing that
the prevalence is <0.1%. As a general guide: as HCV RNA prevalence is predicated on
first testing for anti-HCV, and according to the most current serologic data in the United
States, approximately 59% of anti-HCV positive persons are HCV RNA positive (2), an
estimated  507  randomly  selected  patients  in  a  setting  of  any  size  would  need  to  be
tested using any of the available anti-HCV tests (94) to detect an anti-HCV prevalence
positivity of ≤0.17%, corresponding to an expected HCV RNA positivity prevalence of
0.1%  with  95%  confidence  and  5%  tolerance  (95)  (https://epitools.ausvet.com.au).
Providers  and  patients  can  discuss  hepatitis  C  screening  as  part  of  a  person’s
preventive  health  care.  For  persons  identified  with  current  HCV  infection,  CDC
recommends that they receive appropriate care, including hepatitis C-directed clinical
preventive services (e.g., screening and intervention for alcohol or drug use, hepatitis A
and hepatitis B vaccination, and medical monitoring of disease). Recommendations are
available to guide management of persons infected with HCV (Box 2). Persons infected
with  HCV  can  benefit  from  treatment,  prevention,  and  other  counseling  messages.
Universal hepatitis C screening was compared with risk-based screening for adults and
pregnant  women.  As  such,  the  marginal  benefits  and  harms  of  universal  screening
compared  with  birth  cohort  screening  was  not  directly  assessed.  For  the  purposes  of
this literature review, the birth cohort was deemed a risk group, and studies comparing
birth  cohort  with  universal  screening  strategies  were  eligible  for  inclusion.  The
incidence  of  acute  hepatitis  C  is  greatest  among  persons  younger  than  birth  cohort
members (5). Because most pregnant women are younger than persons born during the
1945–1965  birth  cohort,  hepatitis  C  testing  among  pregnant  women  has  previously
been  based  on  the  presence  of  risk  factors.  The  new  recommendations  apply  to  all
pregnant  women,  including  those  aged  <18  years.  Data  informing  the  optimal  time
during  pregnancy  for  hepatitis  C  testing  are  lacking.  If  DAA  treatment  becomes
available  for  use  during  pregnancy,  testing  at  an  early  prenatal  visit  would  allow  for
identification of women who could benefit from treatment. Testing early in pregnancy
also  could  inform  pregnancy  and  delivery  management  per  the  Society  for
Maternal-Fetal  Medicine  recommendations  for  a  preference  for  amniocentesis  over
chorionic villus sampling and for avoiding internal fetal monitoring, prolonged rupture of
the  membranes,  and  episiotomy  (44).  Testing  at  an  early  prenatal  visit  harmonizes
testing  for  hepatitis  C  with  testing  for  other  infectious  diseases  during  pregnancy;
however,  this  strategy  might  miss  women  who  acquire  HCV  infection  later  during
pregnancy. Pregnant women with ongoing risk factors tested early in pregnancy could
undergo repeat testing later in pregnancy to identify those who acquired HCV infection
later in pregnancy. Hepatitis C screening during pregnancy should be an opportunity to
promote  a  dialogue  between  the  pregnant  woman  and  her  medical  provider  about
hepatitis  C  transmission  and  risk  factors.  Hepatitis  C  prevalence  in  U.S.  correctional
settings is high because of high incarceration rates among persons who use drugs (96).
Two  recent  systematic  reviews  estimated  average  anti-HCV  positivity  prevalence  in
correctional  settings  at  16.1%  and  23%  (2,97).  Hepatitis  C  prevalence  varies  across
individual  correctional  jurisdictions  based  on  factors  including  underlying  community
prevalence,  sentencing  standards  for  drug-related  offenses,  and  type  of  institution.
These  estimates  exceed  both  the  general  population  prevalence  of  1.7%  (2)  and  the
target threshold of ≥0.1% at which these guidelines recommend universal hepatitis C
testing in other settings. Therefore, the well-documented prevalence of HCV infection in
a  variety  of  correctional  jurisdictions  supports  the  application  of  these  guidelines  to
prisons and jails. Universal hepatitis C testing in correctional facilities can be expected
to  yield  higher  infection  identification  rates  compared  with  the  risk-based  testing
practices  that  many  jurisdictions  employ  (98,99)  and  to  support  broader  hepatitis  C
elimination  efforts  (34,100,101).  Cases  of  hepatitis  C  should  be  reported  to  the
appropriate  state  or  local  health  jurisdiction  in  accordance  with  requirements  for
reporting  acute,  perinatal,  and  chronic  HCV  infection.  Case  definitions  for  the
classification  of  reportable  cases  of  HCV  infection  have  been  published  previously  by
the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists  (102).  Recommendations  in  this
report  for  hepatitis  C  screening  among  certain  groups  differ  somewhat  from  the
recommendations of other organizations. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (103)
and AASLD and IDSA (39) also make recommendations for hepatitis C testing. Top CDC
will review and possibly revise these recommendations as new epidemiology or other
information related to hepatitis C becomes available, including potential availability of
DAA treatments for pregnant women, infants, and younger children, and the experience
gained from the implementation of these recommendations. A review of the evidence
regarding  infant  testing  is  needed  to  inform  future  recommendations  for  an  infant
testing algorithm. Evidence should examine the benefits and harms of HCV RNA testing
beginning at age 2 months compared with anti-HCV testing at or after age 18 months.
The greater expense of HCV RNA testing might be justified as earlier testing will likely
minimize loss to follow-up. Additional data on the safety of DAA use during pregnancy
are  needed  to  inform  treatment  during  pregnancy,  which  might  reduce  the  risk  for
perinatal transmission. Finally, for expanded screening to be effective in reducing the
morbidity and mortality of hepatitis C in the United States, models to address barriers
related  to  access  to  DAA  treatment  are  needed.  Top  CDC  recommends  hepatitis  C
screening  of  all  adults  aged  ≥18  years  once  in  their  lifetimes,  and  screening  of  all
pregnant  women  (regardless  of  age)  during  each  pregnancy.  The  recommendations
include  an  exception  for  settings  where  the  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  is
demonstrated to be <0.1%; however, few settings are known to exist with a hepatitis C
prevalence below this threshold (2,9). The recommendation for testing of persons with
risk  factors  remains  unchanged;  those  with  ongoing  risk  factors  should  be  tested
regardless of age or setting prevalence, including continued periodic testing as long as
risks persist. These recommendations can be used by health care professionals, public
health  officials,  and  organizations  involved  in  the  development,  implementation,
delivery,  and  evaluation  of  clinical  and  preventive  services.  Top  Peter  Havens,  MD,
Medical  College  of  Wisconsin/Children’s  Hospital  of  Wisconsin,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin;
Jean  Anderson,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  Medicine,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Susan  Clark,  MPH,
Alycia  Downs,  MPH,  Liesl  Hagan,  MPH,  Cynthia  Jorgensen,  DrPH,  Maja  Kodani,  PhD,
Elizabeth  McClune,  MSW,  MPA,  Matthew  Pauly,  PhD,  Alexandra  Tejada-Strop,  MS,
Nicholas  Wiese,  PhD,  Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral
Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC;  Randy  Elder,  PhD,  Office  of  Science,  CDC;
Shanna  Cox,  MSPH,  Division  of  Reproductive  Health,  National  Center  for  Chronic
Disease  Prevention  and  Health  Promotion,  CDC;  Kakoli  Roy,  PhD,  National  Center  for
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; Joanna Taliano, MLS, Office of
Library  Science,  CDC.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Sarah  Schillie,  MD,  Division  of  Viral
Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC.
Telephone:  404-718-8608;  E-mail:  sschillie@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,
National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC  Top  All
authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of
interest were disclosed. Top Top Source: CDC, National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance
System.
* Per 100,000 population. Top Abbreviations: HCV = hepatitis C virus; RNA = ribonucleic
acid; NHANES = National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. * State estimates of
HCV  RNA  positivity  among  all  adults  are  based  on  a  statistical  model  that  allocated
nationally  representative  hepatitis  C  prevalence  from  the  2013–2016  NHANES  and
additional previously published data for populations not sampled in NHANES to states
according  to  the  spatial  demographics  and  distributions  of  1999–2016  hepatitis  C
mortality and narcotic overdose deaths in the National Vital Statistics System. † Data
are from an analysis of 2015, National Center for Health Statistics birth certificate data
(live  births)  (Schillie  SF,  Canary  L,  Koneru  A,  et  al.  Hepatitis  C  virus  in  women  of
childbearing  age,  pregnant  women,  and  children.  Am  J  Prev  Med  2018;55:633–41).  §
Connecticut did not report maternal HCV infection on 2015 birth certificates and New
Jersey  reported  infections  from  only  a  limited  number  of  facilities;  therefore,  women
residing  in  these  two  states  were  not  included  in  the  analysis.  Top  Abbreviations:
anti-HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus  antibody;  HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus;  NHANES  =  National
Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey;  RNA  =  ribonucleic  acid;  SVR  =  sustained
virologic response; Top Top Top Suggested citation for this article: Schillie S, Wester C,
Osborne  M,  Wesolowski  L,  Ryerson  AB.  CDC  Recommendations  for  Hepatitis  C
Screening  Among  Adults  —  United  States,  2020.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2020;69(No.
RR-2):1–17. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6902a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6902a1.htm
