  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Sarah  Schillie,  MD1  Trudy  V.
Murphy, MD1 Mark Sawyer, MD2 Kathleen Ly, MPH1 Elizabeth Hughes, DrPH1 Ruth Jiles,
PhD1  Marie  A.  de  Perio,  MD3  Meredith  Reilly,  MPH4  Kathy  Byrd,  MD1  John  W.  Ward,
MD1  1National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC
2University  of  California  at  San  Diego  3National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and
Health, CDC 4Johns Hopkins University, School of Public Health Corresponding preparer:
Sarah  Schillie,  MD,  Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral
Hepatitis,
 STD,
 and
 TB
 Prevention,
 CDC.
 Telephone:
 404-718-8608;
 E-mail:
sschillie@cdc.gov.  Summary  This  report  contains  CDC  guidance  that  augments  the
2011 recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
evaluating hepatitis B protection among health-care personnel (HCP) and administering
post-exposure prophylaxis. Explicit guidance is provided for persons working, training,
or  volunteering  in  health-care  settings  who  have  documented  hepatitis  B  (HepB)
vaccination  years  before  hire  or  matriculation  (e.g.,  when  HepB  vaccination  was
received  as  part  of  routine  infant  [recommended  since  1991]  or  catch-up  adolescent
[recommended  since  1995]  vaccination).  In  the  United  States,  2,890  cases  of  acute
hepatitis  B  were  reported  to  CDC  in  2011,  and  an  estimated  18,800  new  cases  of
hepatitis  B  occurred  after  accounting  for  underreporting  of  cases  and  asymptomatic
infection.  Although  the  rate  of  acute  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  infections  have  declined
approximately 89% during 1990–2011, from 8.5 to 0.9 cases per 100,000 population in
the United States, the risk for occupationally acquired HBV among HCP persists, largely
from  exposures  to  patients  with  chronic  HBV  infection.  ACIP  recommends  HepB
vaccination  for  unvaccinated  or  incompletely  vaccinated  HCP  with  reasonably
anticipated risk for blood or body fluid exposure. ACIP also recommends that vaccinated
HCP receive postvaccination serologic testing (antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen
[anti-HBs])  1–2  months  after  the  final  dose  of  vaccine  is  administered  (CDC.
Immunization  of  health-care  personnel:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  [ACIP].  MMWR  2011;60  [No.  RR-7]).  Increasing  numbers  of
HCP  have  received  routine  HepB  vaccination  either  as  infants  (recommended  since
1991)  or  as  catch-up  vaccination  (recommended  since  1995)  in  adolescence.  HepB
vaccination  results  in  protective  anti-HBs  responses  among  approximately  95%  of
healthy-term  infants.  Certain  institutions  test  vaccinated  HCP  by  measuring  anti-HBs
upon hire or matriculation, even when anti-HBs testing occurs greater than 2 months
after vaccination. This guidance can assist clinicians, occupational health and student
health providers, infection-control specialists, hospital and health-care training program
administrators, and others in selection of an approach for assessing HBV protection for
vaccinated  HCP.  This  report  emphasizes  the  importance  of  administering  HepB
vaccination for all HCP, provides explicit guidance for evaluating hepatitis B protection
among previously vaccinated HCP (particularly those who were vaccinated in infancy or
adolescence),  and  clarifies  recommendations  for  postexposure  management  of  HCP
exposed to blood or body fluids. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) has long been recognized as an
occupational  risk  for  health-care  personnel  (HCP),  including  HCP  trainees  (1,2).  The
virus  remains  infectious  for  prolonged  periods  on  environmental  surfaces  and  is
transmissible in the absence of visible blood (1). HCP do not recognize all exposures to
potentially  infectious  blood  or  body  fluids  (2)  and,  even  if  exposures  are  recognized,
often  do  not  seek  postexposure  prophylactic  management  (3).  In  serologic  studies
conducted  in  the  United  States  during  the  1970s,  HCP  had  a  prevalence  of  HBV
infection approximately 10 times greater than the general population (1). In 1983, an
estimated  17,000  HBV  infections  occurred  among  HCP  (4).  Vaccines  to  prevent  HBV
became available in the United States in 1981 and were recommended by the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  for  HCP  in  1982  (5).  Although  a  high
proportion of healthy vaccine recipients in clinical trials respond to hepatitis B (HepB)
vaccination, the proportion of responders can be lower among the general population,
particularly  among  persons  with  chronic  medical  conditions  (6,7).  Acute  and  chronic
HBV infections are rare among HCP who respond to HepB vaccination, but HCP who do
not respond to vaccination are thought to remain susceptible. Postvaccination serologic
testing  for  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (anti-HBs)  identifies  vaccine
nonresponders and guides the need for revaccination, additional testing for chronic HBV
infection,  and  counseling  for  HCP  who  remain  susceptible  after  failing  to  respond  to
vaccination.  In  1991,  ACIP  recommended  consideration  of  postvaccination  serologic
testing  for  anti-HBs  for  HCP  at  risk  for  needlestick  exposures  (8).  In  1997,  ACIP
recommended  postvaccination  serologic  testing  1–2  months  after  completion  of  the
HepB vaccine series for HCP who have contact with patients or blood and who are at
ongoing risk for injuries with sharp instruments or needlesticks (9). Since 1982 (when
HepB vaccine was recommended for HCP), major declines have occurred in reports of
acute  hepatitis  B  among  HCP  (10).  In  2011,  ACIP  reaffirmed  that  unvaccinated  and
incompletely  vaccinated  HCP  at  reasonably  anticipated  risk  for  blood  or  body  fluid
exposure should receive HepB vaccination before potential exposure, and HCP at high
risk  for  exposure  should  receive  postvaccination  serologic  testing  1–2  months  after
completion of the vaccine series (11). This report provides CDC guidance for persons
working, training, or volunteering in health-care settings who have documented HepB
vaccination  received  years  before  hire  or  matriculation  (e.g.,  when  HepB  vaccination
was  received  as  part  of  routine  infant  [recommended  since  1991]  or  catch-up
adolescent  [recommended  since  1995]  vaccination).  No  postvaccination  serologic
testing is recommended after routine infant or adolescent HepB vaccination. Although
acute  HBV  infections  have  declined  substantially  since  HepB  vaccination  was
introduced in the United States, a risk for occupational exposure to HBV persists (10),
largely  from  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection.  Because  vaccine-induced  anti-HBs
wanes over time, testing HCP for anti-HBs years after vaccination might not distinguish
vaccine  nonresponders  from  responders.  Pre-exposure  assessment  of  current  or  past
anti-HBs results upon hire or matriculation, followed by one or more additional doses of
HepB vaccine for HCP with anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL, if necessary, helps to ensure that HCP
will be protected if they have an exposure to HBV-containing blood or body fluids. An
expert  panel  convened  by  CDC  acknowledged  that  the  risk  for  HBV  infection  for
vaccinated HCP can vary widely by setting and profession, and might be low enough in
certain  settings  that  assessment  of  anti-HBs  status  and  appropriate  follow-up  can  be
done  at  the  time  of  exposure  to  potentially  infectious  blood  or  body  fluids.  This
approach relies on HCP recognizing and reporting blood and body fluid exposures and
therefore might be applied on the basis of documented low risk, implementation, and
cost considerations. Certain HCP occupations have lower risk for occupational blood and
body  fluid  exposures  (e.g.,  occupations  involving  counseling  versus  performing
procedures), and nontrainees have lower risks for blood and body fluid exposures than
trainees. Some settings also will have a lower prevalence of HBV infection in the patient
population served than in other settings, which will influence the risk for HCP exposure
to  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg)-positive  blood  and  body  fluids.  All  health-care
institutions should ensure that HCP receive training to recognize and report exposures,
have systems in place to facilitate reporting and postexposure assessment, and have
prophylaxis readily accessible for timely administration. This report can guide clinicians,
occupational health and student health clinicians, infection-control specialists, hospital
and health-care training program administrators, and others in selection of an approach
for  assessing  HBV  protection  for  vaccinated  HCP.  HCPs  are  defined  as  all  paid  and
unpaid  persons  providing  health  care,  or  working  or  training  in  health-care  settings,
who  have  reasonably  anticipated  risks  for  exposure  to  infectious  materials,  including
blood or body fluids, contaminated medical supplies and equipment, or contaminated
environmental  surfaces.  HCP  might  include  but  are  not  limited  to  physicians,  nurses,
nursing  assistants,  nurse  practitioners,  physician  assistants,  therapists,  technicians,
emergency  medical  services  personnel,  dental  personnel,  pharmacists,  laboratory
personnel, autopsy personnel, health-care students and trainees, contractual staff not
employed by the health-care facility, and persons not directly involved in patient care
but  with  potential  exposure  to  infectious  agents  that  can  be  transmitted  between
patients and HCP (e.g., housekeeping, laundry, security, maintenance, and volunteers)
(1,11).  This  guidance  applies  but  is  not  limited  to  HCP  in  acute-care  hospitals,
long-term–care  facilities  (e.g.,  nursing  homes,  skilled  nursing  facilities,  and  assisted
living  facilities),  physician's  offices,  dental  offices,  rehabilitation  centers,  urgent-care
centers,  ambulatory  surgical  centers,  dialysis  centers,  and  outpatient  clinics,  and  to
persons who provide home health care and emergency medical services. Although this
guidance pertains to HCP, the same principles might be applicable to persons in other
professions  with  reasonably  anticipated  risk  for  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  (e.g.,
public safety workers, embalmers, and crime scene cleanup crews). Recommendations
for  testing  HCP  in  certain  populations  at  risk  for  acquisition  of  HBV  infection  before
matriculation or hire can be found elsewhere and will be reviewed only briefly in this
document
 (11–13).
 HCP
 protection
 against
 hepatitis
 C
 virus
 (HCV),
 human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and other infections also is covered elsewhere (1,11,14).
Postvaccination  serologic  testing  and  the  need  for  revaccination  specific  to  HCP  with
immunocompromising  conditions  (e.g.,  HCP  who  are  on  dialysis,  infected  with  HIV,
hematopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  recipients,  and  receiving  chemotherapy)  are
addressed in separate recommendations (15). Additional guidance on the management
of  HCP  with  chronic  HBV  infection  has  been  published  (13).  A  list  of  frequently  used
abbreviations is provided (Box). This document examines approaches for assessing HBV
protection  for  vaccinated  HCP  and  offers  additional  guidance  for  postexposure
evaluation and testing of HCP in consideration of: In 2012, CDC identified and convened
subject  matter  experts  in  the  fields  of  HBV  infection,  health-care  epidemiology,  and
evidence-based medicine to form an expert panel to address mechanisms for assessing
HBV protection for vaccinated HCP.* The expert panel was comprised of professionals
from  academic  medicine  (e.g.,  pediatrics,  family  medicine,  internal  medicine,  and
infectious  diseases)  and  occupational  health;  federal  and  state  public  health
professionals  with  expertise  in  hepatitis  and  health-care  associated  infections;  and
liaisons  from  the  Society  for  Healthcare  Epidemiology  of  America  (SHEA),  Healthcare
Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC),  American  Medical  Directors
Association  (AMDA),  American  College  Health  Association  (ACHA),  American  Academy
of  Family  Physicians  (AAFP),  and  the  Society  for  Adolescent  Health  and  Medicine
(SAHM). The expert panel convened 21 teleconferences for deliberations during January
19,  2012–January  8,  2013.  Materials  for  teleconference  discussion  were  electronically
distributed  to  members.  The  expert  panel  reviewed  relevant  published  literature
identified through PubMed searches, citations, and personal files. Reference lists were
reviewed to retrieve additional relevant information. The expert panel considered the
changing  epidemiology  of  hepatitis  B  infections  from  surveillance  reports,  which
included  follow-up  with  state  health  departments  to  obtain  additional  information  on
HCP with acute hepatitis B during 2005–2010 reported as having a positive or unknown
HepB vaccination history. The expert panel reviewed previous recommendations from
ACIP, HICPAC, and the U.S. Public Health Service; including recommendations defining
HCP at risk for occupational exposure, HepB vaccination, and postvaccination serologic
testing.  The  panel  also  reviewed  postexposure  prophylaxis  (1,5,9,11,13,15,16),  and
results  from  an  electronic  survey  administered  to  health-care  institutions  regarding
current practices (see Hepatitis B Vaccination and Postvaccination Testing among HCP).
Various members of the expert panel were consulted to address issues throughout the
development  of  these  guidelines.  Evidence  also  was  summarized  in  presentations
discussed during expert panel teleconferences. The panel identified two approaches for
assessing HBV protection for vaccinated HCP, on the basis of expert opinion, which form
the foundation of this guidance. Members of the expert panel critically reviewed earlier
drafts of this guidance document, which was developed by CDC, individually and as a
group by teleconference. Names and affiliations of persons who provided input in the
drafting of these recommendations are included at the beginning of this document and
in the acknowledgments section.  Hepatitis B is a nationally reportable disease (17). In
the United States, 2,890 cases of acute hepatitis B were reported to CDC in 2011, and
an  estimated  18,800  new  cases  of  hepatitis  B  occurred  after  accounting  for
underreporting  of  cases  and  asymptomatic  infection  (Figure  1)  (10).  Among  patients
with  reported  cases  of  acute  hepatitis  B  with  information,  approximately  55%  were
hospitalized and 1.3% died from hepatitis B (10). Acute HBV infection becomes chronic
in  90%  of  infants,  30%  of  children  aged  <5  years,  and  <1%–12%  of  adults  (18).
Approximately 25% of persons who become chronically infected during childhood and
15%  of  those  who  become  chronically  infected  after  childhood  die  prematurely  from
cirrhosis or liver cancer (1,15). An estimated 800,000–1.4 million persons in the United
States are living with chronic HBV infection; these persons serve as the main reservoir
for HBV (12). In contrast to a decline in reports of acute hepatitis B, the prevalence of
chronic HBV, which is often asymptomatic, remained relatively stable (Figure 2) (19) at
3 per 100,000 persons (95% confidence interval = 2–5 per 100,000) during 2005–2010,
as  did  death  certificate-registered  deaths  (20).  A  national  strategy  to  eliminate  HBV
transmission was implemented in 1991 (16). A key component was a recommendation
for routine vaccination of infants (16). As a result, the rate of newly reported acute HBV
infections in the United States declined approximately 89% during 1990–2011, from 8.5
to 0.9 cases per 100,000 population (10,11). The incidence was lowest (0.04 cases per
100,000  population)  among  persons  aged  ≤19  years  (10),  the  population  routinely
vaccinated as infants and adolescents. Although HepB vaccine coverage rates in 2011
were high among infants, children, and adolescents (91.1% among children aged 19–35
months  and  92.3%  among  adolescents  aged  13–17  years)  (21,22),  self-reported
≥3-dose coverage remained considerably lower for adults (35.9% for adults aged 19–49
years in 2011) (23). Blood from persons with HBV infection contains the highest HBV
titers  of  all  body  fluids  and  is  the  most  important  vehicle  of  transmission  in  the
health-care  setting  (1).  The  following  body  fluids  also  are  considered  potentially
infectious:  cerebrospinal  fluid,  synovial  fluid,  pleural  fluid,  peritoneal  fluid,  pericardial
fluid, and amniotic fluid (1). Although studies have documented HBV in saliva and tears,
these body fluids have generally not represented an occupational risk for HBV infection
unless they contain blood (1). Semen and vaginal secretions have been implicated in
the  sexual  transmission  of  HBV,  but  they  have  not  been  implicated  in  occupational
transmission from patients to HCP (1). The presence of HBsAg, usually an indicator of
active  HBV  infection,  also  is  found  in  other  body  fluids  (e.g.,  breast  milk,  bile,  feces,
nasopharyngeal  washings,  and  sweat).  However,  most  body  fluids  are  not  efficient
vehicles  of  transmission  (unless  they  contain  blood)  because  they  contain  low
quantities  of  infectious  HBV  (1).  Sputum,  urine,  and  vomitus  are  not  considered
potentially  infectious  unless  they  contain  blood  (1).  HBV  is  highly  infectious,  can  be
transmitted in the absence of visible blood (1), and remains infectious on environmental
surfaces  for  at  least  7  days  (24).  HBV  is  transmitted  through  percutaneous  (i.e.,
needlesticks), mucosal (i.e., direct contact with mucous membranes), or nonintact skin
(e.g.,  psoriasis,  eczema,  burns,  wounds,  cuts,  and  scratches)  exposure  to  infectious
blood  or  body  fluids.  Although  percutaneous  exposures  are  among  the  most  efficient
modes of HBV transmission, these exposures might account for only a minority of HBV
infections among HCP. In several investigations of HBV outbreaks, most infected HCP
could not recall an overt percutaneous exposure (2,25). Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)
is a marker for high HBV replication and viral load (15). Although testing occupational
exposure source patients for HBeAg is not practical and is not recommended, the risk
for  acquiring  HBV  infection  is  particularly  high  in  occupational  exposures  to  blood  or
body  fluids  from  source  patients  who  are  HBeAg-positive  (4).  In  studies  of  HCP  who
sustained  injuries  from  needles  contaminated  with  blood  containing  HBV,  the  risk  for
developing  clinical  hepatitis  if  the  blood  was  both  HBsAg-positive  and  HBeAg-positive
was  22%–31%;  the  risk  for  developing  serologic  evidence  of  HBV  infection  was
37%–62% (1,26). By comparison, the risk for developing clinical hepatitis from a needle
contaminated with HBsAg-positive, HBeAg-negative blood was 1%–6%, and the risk for
developing serologic evidence of HBV infection was 23%–37% (1,26). The Needlestick
Safety  and  Prevention  Act  of  2001  directed  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health
Administration  (OSHA)  to  revise  the  Occupational  Exposure  to  Bloodborne  Pathogens
Standard  and  established  in  greater  detail  requirements  for  employers  regarding  the
identification and use of effective and safer medical devices (27). Percutaneous injuries
have since decreased from 39.6 injuries per 100 occupied beds in 1999 to 19.5 injuries
per 100 occupied beds in 2011 (Figure 3) (28). Data since 2002 indicate that 18% of
HCP  trainees  sustain  a  percutaneous  exposure  annually,  and  54%  of  percutaneous
exposures  are  reported  to  occupational  health  (3,29–32).  Reluctance  to  report
exposures  to  occupational  health  might  be  influenced  by  fear  of  being  reprimanded,
concerns  regarding  confidentiality,  and  the  belief  that  reporting  might  be  time
consuming (29,31). The annual risk for a mucosal exposure among trainees is 22%, of
which  17%  are  reported  to  occupational  health  (3,29–32).  The  risk  for  exposure  is
generally  lower  among  nontrainees  and  varies  by  occupation  and  job  duties  (32,33).
Surveillance  data  indicate  nurses  and  physicians  account  for  41.9%  and  22.8%,
respectively, of HCP reporting percutaneous exposures (28). The purpose of the sharp
item that resulted in the exposure was for intramuscular or subcutaneous injection in
30.5% of exposures and was for suturing in 18.7% of exposures (28). Medical students
account  for  44.3%  of  HCP  reporting  a  mucosal  exposure  (28).  The  probability  of  HBV
infection among HCP trainees will vary by the prevalence of HBsAg-positivity of source
patients and the approach to assessment (Figure 4). Exposure logs during 2000–2012
representing  7,170  exposures  at  three  health-care  systems  in  the  United  States
indicated  that  0.9%  of  source  patients  were  HBsAg-positive  (34).  This  figure  likely
varies  substantially  by  setting;  in  some  community  screening  programs  among
populations considered at higher risk, 11%–25% of persons screened are infected with
HBV  (35).  The  source  patient  is  identifiable  in  approximately  95%  of  exposures  (28).
The  source  patient  might  not  be  identifiable  after  exposure  from  an  item  protruding
from a disposal container, an item disposed of in an inappropriate container, or from an
item left in an inappropriate place (28). HepB vaccine is available as a single-antigen
formulation  and  also  in  combination  with  other  vaccines  (Table  1)  (15).  Two
single-antigen  recombinant  HBsAg  vaccines  are  available  in  the  United  States:
Recombivax  HB  (Merck  and  Co,  Inc.,  Whitehouse  Station,  NJ)  and  Engerix-B
(GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals,  Rixensart,  Belgium)  (15).  Of  the  three  licensed
combination  vaccines,  one  (Twinrix  [GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals])  is  available  for
persons aged ≥18 years. Twinrix contains recombinant HBsAg and inactivated hepatitis
A virus (15). Primary HepB vaccination of adults usually consists of 3 doses of 10 or 20
µg of recombinant HBsAg protein administered intramuscularly into the deltoid muscle
on  a  0,  1,  and  6  month  schedule  (15).  Alternative  schedules  (including  a  4-dose
schedule  at  0,  1,  2,  and  12  months)  are  U.S.-approved  for  routine  vaccination  for
specific ages and vaccine formulations; vaccination according to these schedules elicits
final rates of seroprotection similar to those obtained on a 0, 1, and 6 month schedule
(15).  Obese  persons  might  require  adjustment  in  the  needle  length  for  administering
HepB  vaccine  to  achieve  optimal  seroprotection  (11,15).  HepB  vaccines  have  been
demonstrated to be safe among persons in all age groups (15). During 1982–2004, an
estimated 70 million adolescents and adults in the United States received ≥1 dose of
HepB vaccine (15). The most frequently reported side effects are pain at the injection
site
 (3%–29%)
 and
 temperature
 of
 >99.9°F
 (>37.7°C)
 (1%–6%)
 (15).
 In
placebo-controlled studies, these side effects were reported no more frequently among
persons  receiving  HepB  vaccine  than  among  persons  receiving  placebo  (15).
Administration of additional vaccine doses for nonresponders is not associated with an
increase  in  adverse  events  (36).  Epidemiologic  and  mechanistic  assessment  by  the
Institute of Medicine for 27 adverse events supported a causal association with HepB
vaccination  only  for  anaphylaxis  in  persons  who  are  sensitive  to  yeast  (37).  HepB
vaccination is contraindicated for persons with a history of hypersensitivity to yeast or
any  vaccine  component  (15).  Persons  with  a  history  of  serious  adverse  events  (e.g.,
anaphylaxis) after receipt of HepB vaccine should not receive additional doses. As with
other  vaccines,  vaccination  of  persons  with  moderate  or  severe  acute  illness,  with  or
without  fever,  should  be  deferred  until  illness  resolves  (15).  Vaccination  is  not
contraindicated in persons with a history of multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barré Syndrome,
autoimmune disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosis and rheumatoid arthritis), or
other  chronic  diseases  (15).  HepB  vaccination  is  not  contraindicated  for  pregnant
(15,38,39) or lactating (1) women. Available vaccines contain noninfectious HBsAg and
do not pose a risk for infection to the fetus (15). Immunocompetent adults and children
who  have  vaccine-induced  anti-HBs  levels  of  ≥10  mIU/mL  1–2  months  after  having
received  a  complete,  ≥3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series  are  considered  seroprotected  and
deemed  vaccine  responders  (15).  Vaccine  efficacy  studies  have  demonstrated
protection against acute and chronic disease in immunocompetent vaccine responders
(40,41). Vaccine-induced seroprotection is a useful surrogate of vaccine efficacy (42).
Postvaccination  seroprotection  is  achieved  in  approximately  95%  of  healthy  infants
(43,44),  approximately  92%  of  HCP  aged  <40  years,  and  approximately  84%  of  HCP
aged  ≥40  years  (6).  Among  infants  vaccinated  at  birth,  low  birthweight  is  associated
with  a  lower  proportion  of  infants  achieving  seroprotection  (45).  Among  persons
vaccinated  as  adults,  smoking,  obesity,  aging,  chronic  medical  conditions,  male  sex,
genetic factors, and immune suppression are associated with a decrease in proportions
seroprotected
 (6,11,36,46–48).
 Although
 immunogenicity
 is
 less
 among
immunocompromised persons, those who achieve and maintain seroprotective antibody
levels before exposure to HBV have a high level of protection (15). Anti-HBs levels after
vaccination decline over time. The persistence of detectable anti-HBs levels varies by
age  at  vaccination.  By  18  years  after  vaccination,  approximately  16%  of  persons
vaccinated  at  age  <1  year  have  detectable  antibody  levels  of  ≥10  mIU/mL  (49–54)
(Figure  5),  compared  with  74%  for  those  vaccinated  at  age  ≥1  year  (41,54–62).  In  a
study  of  matriculating  health  science  students,  92.9%  of  those  who  had  received  3
doses  of  HepB  vaccine  had  anti-HBs  ≥10  mIU/mL  (58).  Median  age  at  receipt  of  the
primary  series  was  14.5  years  (interquartile  range:  11.6–20.2  years)  and  at
postvaccination testing was 23.2 years (interquartile range: 22.1–24.8 years) (58). To
assess vaccine response in remotely vaccinated HCP, a challenge dose of HepB vaccine
can  be  used  to  determine  the  presence  of  vaccine-induced  immunologic  memory
through generation of an anamnestic response. The term "booster dose" has been used
to refer to a dose of HepB vaccine administered after a primary vaccination series to
provide rapid protective immunity against significant infection (i.e., infection resulting
in  serologic  test  results  positive  for  HBV  and/or  clinically  significant  disease)  (40).
Among persons vaccinated 5.9–17.5 years previously at age <1 year who have anti-HBs
levels  <10  mIU/mL,  approximately  60.0%–97.4%  showed  a  response  to  a  single
challenge  dose  of  HepB  vaccine  demonstrating  protective  levels  of  anti-HBs  ≥10
mIU/mL (50–54). Among persons vaccinated 9–22 years previously at age ≥1 year who
have  anti-HBs  levels  <10  mIU/mL,  69.2%–96.4%  showed  a  response  to  a  single
challenge  dose  of  HepB  vaccine  demonstrating  protective  levels  of  anti-HBs  ≥10
mIU/mL (41,54,60,62). The proportion of responders to a challenge dose might vary by
population  and  age  at  receiving  the  primary  HepB  series.  HCP  with  a  response  ≥10
mIU/mL  following  a  challenge  dose  are  considered  protected,  regardless  of  future
declines in anti-HBs. Conclusions about the response to a challenge dose are made on
the  basis  of  relatively  few  studies  and  might  change  as  additional  data  become
available.  Among  immunocompetent  HepB  vaccine  responders,  studies  suggest
protection against acute symptomatic and chronic hepatitis B infection persists for ≥22
years (9,15,40). Three cohort studies that monitored 1,006 subjects for ≥20 years have
been  informative  (41,63,64).  In  two  of  the  cohorts  from  areas  with  high  HBV
endemicity, new chronic HBV infections were documented in 0.8% (0 and 1.0%) of 513
(109 and 404) subjects, respectively, who responded or presumably responded to HepB
vaccination  starting  at  birth  (63,64).  Approximately  20%  of  subjects  had  evidence  of
natural boosting of anti-HBs, presumably from exposure to HBV (63,64). A third cohort
of 493 subjects in an area with intermediate HBV endemicity received HepB vaccination
between ages 6 months and ≥50 years (41). Among vaccine responders, no acute or
chronic  HBV  was  detected,  although  1%  of  subjects  experienced  subclinical  HBV
infection without chronic infection during ≥20 years of follow-up (41). The significance
of  subclinical  breakthrough  HBV  infection  without  chronic  HBV  and  transient  HBV
infection  is  unknown.  The  Bloodborne  Pathogens  Standard  issued  in  1991  by  OSHA
mandates  that  HepB  vaccination  be  made  available  at  the  employer's  expense  to
employees  who  have  reasonably  anticipated  skin,  eye,  mucous  membrane,  or
parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials that might result
from  the  performance  of  an  employee's  duties  (27).  HepB  vaccination  coverage  data
obtained  through  the  National  Health  Interview  Survey  (NHIS)  in  2011  demonstrated
≥3-dose  coverage  of  63.8%  among  HCP  aged  ≥19  years  (23).  NHIS  2010  data
demonstrated ≥3-dose coverage of 74% for HCP with direct patient contact, and 46%
for HCP without direct patient contact (65), substantially below the Healthy People 2020
target  of  90%  HepB  vaccination  coverage  among  HCP  (objective  no.  IID-15.3)  (66).
Postvaccination serologic testing for anti-HBs is recommended 1–2 months after the last
vaccine dose for HCP at risk for occupational percutaneous or mucosal exposures (11).
During  2012,  a  survey  was  administered  to  389  California  acute  care  hospitals  or
centers comprised of more than one hospital to assess current practices for ensuring
HCP protection against HBV. Hospitals were identified from a listserv of 580 infection
prevention and employee health staff (67). Responses were obtained from 153 listserv
subscribers,  comprising  approximately  39%  of  hospitals  (67).  Responding  hospitals
were not representative of all hospitals in the United States (67). Of the 153 responding
hospitals,  most  (92  [60.1%])  were  nongovernment  not-for-profit  community  hospitals,
followed by investor-owned (for-profit) community hospitals (32 [20.9%]), and state and
local government community hospitals (13 [8.5%]) (67). One fourth (37 [24.2%]) were
teaching  hospitals  (67).  Responding  hospitals  had  between  35  and  15,421  (median:
1,000) HCP with reasonably anticipated risk for blood or body fluid exposure (67). The
majority of respondents (71.9%) indicated current practices at their institution consist
of  measuring  anti-HBs  on  a  pre-exposure  basis,  followed  by  HepB  vaccination  if
anti-HBs  is  <10  mIU/mL  (67).  A  smaller  proportion  of  respondents  (15.7%)  indicated
their  institution  follows  an  approach  relying  upon  postexposure  management  (67).
Postvaccination  anti-HBs  results  were  known  for  approximately  69%  of  HCP  at  these
facilities (67). Revaccination with ≥1dose of HepB vaccine for nonresponse subsequent
to  the  primary  series  increases  the  proportion  of  persons  achieving  vaccine-induced
seroprotection (15). Among 178 persons with occupational risk for HBV infection, 47%
of those without protective antibody levels after a primary vaccination series developed
vaccine-induced  seroprotection  after  one  additional  dose  of  HepB  vaccine  (6).  An
estimated  42%  of  86  persons  without  protective  anti-HBs  levels  after  the  first
revaccination dose and who received 2 additional doses developed protective levels of
anti-HBs representing a cumulative response rate of 69% among initial nonresponders
after  3  revaccination  doses  (6).  Persons  who  have  measurable  but  low  (i.e.,  1–9
mIU/mL) levels of anti-HBs after the initial series have better response to revaccination
than  persons  who  have  no  measurable  anti-HBs  (36,62,68,69).  Single  dose
revaccination  with  a  higher  dosage  has  not  been  demonstrated  to  increase  the
proportion of healthy adult nonresponders (70,71) or previous responders revaccinated
as  part  of  a  clinical  trial  (62)  who  achieve  vaccine-induced  seroprotection.  However,
3-dose  revaccination  with  a  higher  dosage  (40  µg)  did  improve  the  proportion  of
nonresponders achieving anti-HBs levels of ≥10 mIU/mL in one study (100% among 17
persons receiving 40 µg dose versus 62.5% among 18 persons receiving 10 µg dose, p
= 0.015, Fisher's exact test) (70). Revaccination with >3 doses (i.e., >6 total doses) is
not recommended (11). From 1983 to 2010, the number of HBV infections among HCP
declined  approximately  98%,  from  an  estimated  17,000  infections  to  263  acute  HBV
infections (considering that occupational history was assessed for 43.6% of cases and
using  a  correction  factor  of  10.5  to  account  for  underreporting  and  asymptomatic
infection) (10). The decrease in acute HBV infection among HCP probably resulted from
routine  pre-exposure  HepB  vaccination  and  reduced  risk  for  exposure  through
improvements  in  infection-control  practices  (28,72,73).  Although  few  studies  have
evaluated the vaccination history of persons with acute hepatitis B (74), some cases of
acute hepatitis B and chronic HBV infection can be expected in unvaccinated persons
and among vaccine nonresponders. During 2005–2010, a total of 203 cases of persons
with acute hepatitis B among HCP were reported to CDC's National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance  System  (NNDSS)  (75).  Six  of  17  patients  with  information  on  the
development of chronic HBV infection developed chronic HBV infection (75). Follow-up
of  67  (76.1%)  of  88  HCP  initially  reported  as  having  a  positive  or  unknown  HepB
vaccination history indicated that 35 HCP reported vaccination with ≥3 HepB vaccine
doses  (seven  had  documentation  to  support  the  reported  vaccination  history)  (75).
Among  the  35  HCP  reporting  vaccination  with  ≥3  HepB  vaccine  doses,  one  HCP
demonstrated an immune response (i.e., anti-HBs ≥10 mlU/mL); the remaining 34 were
nonresponders  or  had  an  unknown  response  status  (75).  Four  of  eight  HCP  with
≥3-dose HepB  vaccination  with  information  developed  chronic  HBV  infection;  none of
the four had complete documentation of ≥3 HepB vaccine doses (75). Postvaccination
serologic  testing  was  available  for  only  one  of  seven  HCPs  with  documentation  of
≥3-doses of HepB vaccine; this HCP had an anti-HBs level <10 mIU/mL after 4 doses of
vaccine  (75).  Although  reported  data  did  not  enable  identification  of  the  modes  of
transmission or information on receipt of postexposure prophylaxis, 28 (16.7%) of 168
HCP  for  whom  data  were  available  reported  an  accidental  stick  or  puncture  with  a
needle or other object contaminated with blood during the 6 weeks through 6 months
before  illness,  possibly  representing  occupational  acquisition  of  infection  (75).
Unrecognized exposures might have resulted in HBV infections among HCP who did not
report an exposure (2). Other risk factors for HBV exposure in the 6 weeks through 6
months  before  illness  (i.e.,  injection  drug  use,  men  who  have  sex  with  men,  multiple
sex  partners,  contact  with  a  hepatitis  B  case,  dialysis  patient,  receipt  of  blood
transfusion, surgery, acupuncture, and tattoo receipt) were present among 121 (59.6%)
of  203  HCP,  possibly  suggesting  their  exposures  were  not  occupational  (75).
Immunization  information  systems  (IIS)  provide  consolidated  vaccination  histories  for
use by vaccination providers in determining appropriate vaccinations (76). Accessing IIS
for vaccination records might decrease unnecessary revaccination among HCP who no
longer  have  records  of  HepB  vaccination.  IIS  do  not  accept  postvaccination  anti-HBs
test results (77). To reduce the cost and inconvenience of repeat anti-HBs testing when
HCP are employed by different health-care facilities, CDC recommends that institutions
consider systems for long-term management of anti-HBs and other hepatitis B serologic
test results. Mechanisms for tracking vaccination and hepatitis B serologic test results
in health information technology products could also reduce cost and inconvenience of
repeat  anti-HBs  testing.  Hepatitis  B  immune  globulin  Hepatitis  B  immune  globulin
(HBIG) provides passive anti-HBs and temporary (i.e., 3–6 months) protection (15). HBIG
is  prepared  from  human  plasma  known  to  contain  a  high  titer  of  anti-HBs.  HBIG  is
typically  used  together  with  HepB  vaccine  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  (15).  For
persons who do not respond to HepB vaccine, HBIG administered alone is the primary
method of protection after HBV exposure (15). The standard adult dose of HBIG is 0.06
mL/kg.  HBIG  is  administered  by  intramuscular  injection;  an  appropriate  muscle  mass
(i.e., deltoid or gluteal) should be chosen in which to deliver the large volume of HBIG
required and a needle length appropriate for the HCP's size should be used. HBIG can
be administered simultaneously with HepB vaccine but at a different injection site (15).
Safety The plasma from which HBIG is prepared is screened for HBsAg, HCV, and HIV
(15). The process used to prepare HBIG inactivates HBV, HCV, and HIV from the final
product. No evidence exists that HBV, HCV, or HIV has ever been transmitted by HBIG
thar is commercially available in the United States (15). Serious adverse effects from
HBIG, when administered as recommended, are rare (1). Local pain and tenderness at
the  injection  site,  urticaria,  and  angioedema  might  occur;  anaphylactic  reactions,
although  rare,  have  been  reported  following  the  injection  of  human  immune  globulin
(IG)  preparations  (1).  HBIG  is  not  contraindicated  for  pregnant  (1,78)  or  lactating
women  (1).  Efficacy  The  effectiveness  of  HBIG  and  HepB  vaccine  in  various
postexposure  settings  has  been  evaluated  by  prospective  studies.  For  perinatal
exposure to a mother positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg, a regimen combining HBIG
and  initiation  of  the  HepB  vaccine  series  at  birth  is  85%–95%  effective  in  preventing
HBV  infection  (79,80).  Regimens  involving  either  multiple  doses  of  HBIG  alone  or  the
HepB  vaccine  series  alone  are  70%–75%  effective  in  preventing  HBV  infection  when
administered shortly after exposure (81). In the occupational setting, multiple doses of
HBIG starting within 1 week following percutaneous exposure to HBsAg-positive blood
provide  an  estimated  75%  protection  from  HBV  infection  (82–86).  Administration  of
HBIG might prolong the incubation period of HBV infection among persons who develop
infection (82,85,87,88). A comparison of the postexposure efficacy of the combination
of  HBIG  and  the  HepB  vaccine  series  or  HBIG  alone  has  not  been  evaluated  in  the
occupational setting (1). Whether the increased efficacy of HBIG added to HepB vaccine
observed in the perinatal setting, compared with HBIG alone, applies to adults exposed
occupationally  remains  unknown.  Cost-Effectiveness  Considerations  To  examine  the
cost-effectiveness of various strategies for assessing HCP protection from hepatitis B,
two  economic  models  that  yielded  calculations  of  the  incremental  cost  per
quality-adjusted  life-year  (QALY)  saved  were  developed.  One  model  represented  an
approach  in  which  anti-HBs  is  measured  on  a  pre-exposure  basis,  and  HCP  with
anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL receive an additional dose of HepB vaccine, followed by repeat
anti-HBs  measurement.  If  anti-HBs  remains  <10  mIU/mL  after  the  first  revaccination
dose, the HCP receives two additional revaccination doses of HepB vaccine followed by
repeat
 anti-HBs
 measurement.
 Another
 model
 represented
 a
 postexposure
management approach; at the time of exposure, the HCP is tested for anti-HBs and the
source patient is tested simultaneously for HBsAg, and postexposure prophylaxis would
be  administered  on  the  basis  of  these  results.  Results  from  the  two  models  were
compared. A decision-tree analysis was used to combine all parameters and calculate
the
 total
 intervention
 costs
 and
 probability
 of
 infection.
 In
 addition,
 HBV
infection-related  costs  and  QALY  loss  (accounting  for  acute  and  asymptomatic
infections and a 6% probability of chronic infection) were determined from an existing
model (89) and were considered for the HCP's remaining lifetime. The intervention time
frame included a 1-year analysis and a multiyear analysis covering up to 10 years of
exposure. A 3% annual discount rate was used, and all final cost figures were converted
to  2010  U.S.  dollars  using  the  Medical  Consumer  Price  Index.  The  baseline
cost-effectiveness models assumed that an ideal 95% of HCP have initial and sustained
protection  against  HBV  infection  after  a  primary  ≥3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series,
irrespective of the presence of detectable anti-HBs. Ninety-five percent protection was
derived from the proportion of persons aged <40 years, including term newborns that
have  measurable  anti-HBs  ≥10  mIU/mL  soon  after  a  primary  vaccination  series.
Approximately 18–25 years after vaccination, approximately 20% of HCP (vaccinated at
age <1 year) or approximately 80% of HCP (vaccinated at age ≥1 year) retain anti-HBs
≥10  mIU/mL.  The  model  did  not  account  for  unrecognized  exposures,  as  probability
data for unrecognized exposures are not available, or suboptimal vaccine coverage that
exists  among  HCP.  For  pre-exposure  anti-HBs  testing  followed  by  revaccination  and
retesting,  if  necessary,  compared  with  doing  nothing,  the  incremental  cost  per  QALY
saved  was  $4,542,467  for  trainees  and  $3,149,183  for  nontrainees  at  year  one,  and
decreased  to  $893,619  and  $796,140,  respectively,  over  10  years.  This  approach  is
expected  to  result  in  3.7  and  1.6  visits  to  occupational  health  for  trainees  and
nontrainees, respectively. The expected number of infections is 0.7 per 100,000 and 0.4
per 100,000 for trainees and nontrainees, respectively. For an approach relying upon
postexposure  management,  compared  with  doing  nothing,  the  incremental  cost  per
QALY saved was $2,270,801 for trainees and $1,610,998 for nontrainees at year one,
and decreased to $917,859 and $1,114,364 respectively, over 10 years. The expected
number  of  infections  is  3.0  per  100,000  and  1.7  per  100,000  for  trainees  and
nontrainees,
 respectively.
 Although
 an
 approach
 relying
 upon
 postexposure
management  might  be  less  costly  per  QALY  saved  initially  for  many  institutions,
pre-exposure anti-HBs testing with possible revaccination becomes more cost-effective
compared with a postexposure approach over time. Sensitivity analyses demonstrated
that  cost-effectiveness  improves  in  settings  where  a  greater  proportion  of  source
patients  are  HBsAg-positive  and  among  HCP  with  higher  risk  for  exposure  (e.g.,
surgeons).  Cost-effectiveness  can  change  as  new  antivirals  become  available  for
treatment of HBV infection. Vaccinating previously unvaccinated HCP trainees followed
by postvaccination serologic testing, compared with doing nothing, has an incremental
cost per QALY saved of $374,646 at year one and $51,537 over 10 years, accounting
for direct costs to the health-care system and direct medical costs of hepatitis B-related
illness and complications. At the time of hire or matriculation, health-care providers and
health-care  institutions  should  provide  training  to  HCP  to  improve  recognition  and
encourage timely reporting of blood and body fluid exposures. The possibility that the
postexposure evaluation will cause the HCP to have time lost from work should not be a
barrier  to  reporting.  Institutions  should  ensure  that  HCP  have  rapid  access  to
postexposure  testing  and  prophylaxis,  including  HBIG  and  HepB  vaccine.  Testing
unvaccinated  HCP  for  HBV  infection  is  not  generally  indicated  for  persons  being
evaluated  for  hepatitis  B  protection  because  of  occupational  risk.  Prevaccination
serologic  testing  is  indicated  for  all  persons  born  in  geographic  regions  with  HBsAg
prevalence of ≥2% (e.g., much of Eastern Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and the
Pacific Islands) and certain indigenous populations from countries with overall low HBV
endemicity (<2%); persons with behavioral exposures to HBV (e.g., men who have sex
with  men  and  past  or  current  injection  drug  users);  persons  receiving  cytotoxic  or
immunosuppressive therapy; and persons with liver disease of unknown etiology.  HBV
endemicity (HBsAg prevalence) can be described as low (<2%), moderate (2%–<8%),
and  high  (≥8%).  Because  certain  persons  might  have  been  infected  with  HBV  before
they  received  HepB  vaccination,  HBsAg  testing  is  recommended  regardless  of
vaccination  history  for  persons  born  in  geographic  regions  with  HBsAg  prevalence  of
≥2%, U.S.-born persons not vaccinated as infants whose parents were born in regions
with  high  HBV  endemicity  (HBsAg  prevalence)  (≥8%),  persons  who  received  HepB
vaccination  as  adolescents  or  adults  after  the  initiation  of  risk  behaviors  (12),  and
persons who are HIV-positive or who receive hemodialysis (11). Testing HCP at risk for
HBV  infection  should  consist  of  a  serologic  assay  for  HBsAg,  in  addition  to  either
anti-HBc or anti-HBs (11,12). For unvaccinated HCP at risk for previous HBV infection,
blood should be drawn for testing before the first dose of vaccine is administered. All
HCP  whose  work-,  training-,  and  volunteer-related  activities  involve  reasonably
anticipated  risk  for  exposure  to  blood  or  body  fluids  should  be  vaccinated  with  a
complete, ≥3-dose HepB vaccine series. OSHA mandates that vaccination be available
for employees within 10 days of initial assignment (27). HCP trainees should complete
the series before the potential for exposure with blood or body fluids, when possible, as
higher  risk  has  been  reported  during  professional  training  (e.g.,  residency  training).
Incompletely vaccinated HCP should receive additional dose(s) to complete the vaccine
series  (15).  The  vaccine  series  does  not  need  to  be  restarted  for  HCP  with  an
incomplete series; however, minimum dosing intervals should be heeded (15). Minimum
dosing intervals are 4 weeks between the first and second dose, 8 weeks between the
second and third dose, and 16 weeks between the first and third dose (15). HCP lacking
documentation  of  HepB  vaccination  should  be  considered  unvaccinated  (when
documentation  for  HepB  vaccine  doses  is  lacking)  or  incompletely  vaccinated  (when
documentation for some HepB vaccine doses is lacking) and should receive additional
doses to complete a documented HepB series. Health-care institutions are encouraged
to  seek  documentation  of  "missing"  HepB  doses  in  IIS,  when  feasible,  to  avoid
unnecessary vaccination. OSHA mandates that HCP who refuse HepB vaccination sign a
declination
 statement
(http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_id=10052&p_table=STA
NDARDS). HCP refusing HepB vaccination can obtain vaccination at a later date at no
expense  if  the  HCP  is  still  covered  under  OSHA's  Bloodborne  Pathogens  Standard.
Health-care  institutions  should  encourage  HepB  vaccination  among  HCP  to  improve
HBV protection and to achieve the Healthy People 2020 target of 90% vaccination (66).
HCP who have written documentation of a complete, ≥3-dose HepB vaccine series and
subsequent postvaccination anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL are considered hepatitis B immune.
Immunocompetent  persons  have  long-term  protection  against  HBV  and  do  not  need
further periodic testing to assess anti-HBs levels (Figure 6). All HCP recently vaccinated
or recently completing HepB vaccination who are at risk for occupational blood or body
fluid exposure should undergo anti-HBs testing. Anti-HBs testing should be performed
1–2 months after administration of the last dose of the vaccine series when possible.
HCP  with  documentation  of  a  complete  ≥3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series  but  no
documentation of anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL who are at risk for occupational blood or body
fluid  exposure  might  undergo  anti-HBs  testing  upon  hire  or  matriculation.  Testing
should use a quantitative method that allows detection of the protective concentration
of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL) (e.g., enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]). All HCP
should  adhere  to  infection-control  guidelines  and  follow  Standard  Precautions  (90),
including the use of engineering and work-practice controls, to reduce the risk for blood
or  body  fluid  exposure.  All  HCP,  including  those  who  have  demonstrated  protection
against HBV, should be advised to immediately report blood or body fluid exposures to
occupational health for evaluation of the appropriate measures to prevent transmission
of  bloodborne  pathogens  (including  HIV,  hepatitis  C,  and  hepatitis  B).  Initial
Postexposure Management Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood
or body fluids should be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be
flushed  with  water.  Using  antiseptics  (e.g.,  2%–4%  chlorhexidine)  for  wound  care  or
expressing  fluid  by  squeezing  the  wound  further  have  not  been  shown  to  reduce  the
risk for HBV transmission; however, the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The
application of caustic agents (e.g., bleach) or the injection of antiseptics or disinfectants
into the wound is not recommended. Procedures should be followed for testing known
source  persons,  including  obtaining  informed  consent,  in  accordance  with  applicable
laws.  Source  patients  determined  to  be  HBsAg-positive  should  be  referred  for
appropriate  management  and  should  be  reported  to  the  state  or  local  health
department. When a source patient is unknown (e.g., as occurs from a puncture with a
needle in the trash), the exposed HCP should be managed as if the source patient were
HBsAg-positive. Testing needles and other sharp instruments implicated in an exposure
is not recommended, regardless of whether the source patient is known or unknown.
The  reliability  and  interpretation  of  findings  in  such  circumstances  are  unknown,  and
testing  could  be  hazardous  to  persons  handling  the  sharp  instrument.  Exposures
involving  human  bites  should  be  managed  with  the  knowledge  that  both  the  person
being  bitten  and  the  person  who  engaged  in  biting  were  potentially  exposed.
Institutions should ensure that HCP have timely access to postexposure management
and  prophylaxis,  including  HBIG  and  HepB  vaccine.  For  exposed  HCP  thought  to  be
susceptible to HBV infection, HBIG and HepB vaccine should be administered as soon as
possible  after  an  exposure  when  indicated.  The  effectiveness  of  HBIG  when
administered  >7  days  after  percutaneous,  mucosal,  or  nonintact  skin  exposures  is
unknown.  HBIG  and  HepB  vaccine  can  be  administered  simultaneously  at  separate
injection sites. Anti-HBs testing of HCP who received HBIG should be performed after
anti-HBs  from  HBIG  is  no  longer  detectable  (6  months  after  administration)  (11).
Anti-HBs  testing  should  be  performed  using  a  method  that  allows  detection  of  the
protective concentration of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL) (Table 2). Managing Vaccinated HCP
For  vaccinated  HCP  (who  have  written  documentation  of  a  complete,  ≥3-dose  HepB
vaccine series) with subsequent documented anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL, testing the source
patient for HBsAg is unnecessary. No postexposure management for HBV is necessary,
regardless of the source patient's HBsAg status. For vaccinated HCP (who have written
documentation  of  HepB  vaccination)  with  anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL  after  two  complete,
≥3-dose HepB vaccine series, the source patient should be tested for HBsAg as soon as
possible  after  the  exposure.  If  the  source  patient  is  HBsAg-positive  or  has  unknown
HBsAg status, the HCP should receive 2 doses of HBIG (1,11). The first dose should be
administered as soon as possible after the exposure, and the second dose should be
administered 1 month later. If the source patient is HBsAg-negative, neither HBIG nor
HepB vaccine is necessary. For vaccinated HCP (who have written documentation of a
complete,  ≥3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series)  without  previous  anti-HBs  testing,  the  HCP
should  be  tested  for  anti-HBs  and  the  source  patient  (if  known)  should  be  tested  for
HBsAg as soon as possible after the exposure. Testing the source patient and the HCP
should  occur  simultaneously;  testing  the  source  patient  should  not  be  delayed  while
waiting for the HCP anti-HBs test results, and likewise, testing the HCP should not be
delayed  while  waiting  for  the  source  patient  HBsAg  results.  Managing  HCP  Who  Lack
Documentation  of  Vaccination,  are  Unvaccinated  or  Incompletely  Vaccinated  For
unvaccinated
 or
 incompletely
 vaccinated
 HCP
 (including
 those
 who
 refused
vaccination), the source patient should be tested for HBsAg as soon as possible after
the exposure. Testing unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated HCP for anti-HBs is not
necessary and is potentially misleading, because anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL as a correlate of
vaccine-induced protection has only been determined for persons who have completed
an approved vaccination series (15,42). Testing of HCP Exposed to an HBsAg-Positive or
Unknown  Source  HCP  who  have  anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL,  or  who  are  unvaccinated  or
incompletely vaccinated, and who sustain a percutaneous, mucosal, or nonintact skin
exposure  to  a  source  patient  who  is  HBsAg-positive  or  has  unknown  HBsAg  status
should  undergo  baseline  testing  for  HBV  infection  as  soon  as  possible  after  the
exposure,  and  follow-up  testing  approximately  6  months  later.  Testing  immediately
after the exposure should consist of total anti-HBc, and follow-up testing approximately
6  months  later  should  consist  of  HBsAg  and  total  anti-HBc.  HCP  exposed  to  a  source
patient who is HBsAg-positive or has unknown HBsAg status do not need to take special
precautions  to  prevent  secondary  transmission  during  the  follow-up  period;  however,
they  should  refrain  from  donating  blood,  plasma,  organs,  tissue,  or  semen  (1).  The
exposed  HCP  does  not  need  to  modify  sexual  practices  or  refrain  from  becoming
pregnant (1). If an exposed HCP is breast feeding, she does not need to discontinue (1).
No  modifications  to  an  exposed  HCP's  patient-care  responsibilities  are  necessary  to
prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to a source patient who is
HBsAg-positive or has unknown HBsAg status. Vaccinated HCP whose anti-HBs remains
<10 mIU/mL after revaccination (i.e., after receiving a total of 6 doses) should be tested
for HBsAg and anti-HBc to determine infection status. Those determined not to be HBV
infected (vaccine nonresponders) should be considered susceptible to HBV infection. No
specific  work  restrictions  are  recommended  for  vaccine  nonresponders  (91).
Health-care  institutions  should  maintain  records,  ideally  electronic  records  that  are
easily  retrievable  following  exposures,  of  documented  vaccination  histories  and
serologic test results for reference in managing occupational exposures, and to provide
to other health-care institutions if requested by the HCP. The vaccination information
should be entered into an IIS accepting records from adult vaccination, if available. HCP
should  be  provided  a  copy  of  HepB  vaccination  and  anti-HBs  testing  results  and
encouraged  to  keep  them  with  their  personal  health  records  so  they  can  readily  be
made  available  to  future  employers.  HCP  who  are  positive  for  HBsAg  should  be
counseled  how  to  prevent  HBV  transmission  to  others  and  referred  for  further
evaluation  (92).  Those  who  perform  exposure-prone  procedures  should  be  advised
regarding
 the
 procedures
 they
 can
 perform
 safely
 as
 per
 updated
 CDC
recommendations  for  the  management  of  HBsAg-positive  health-care  providers  and
students (11,13). Chronic hepatitis B infection in itself should not preclude the practice
or  study  of  medicine,  surgery,  dentistry,  or  allied  health  professions  (13).  National
surveillance  systems  to  accurately  assess  the  burden  of  hepatitis  B  among  HCP  and
health-care  facility  databases  tracking  occupational  exposures  among  HCP  are
important  for  monitoring  the  changing  epidemiology  of  occupationally  acquired  HBV
infections  and  other  bloodborne  pathogens.  Systems  and  databases  could  ideally  be
electronically linked to employee health records and should include results that identify
HepB  vaccine  responders  and  nonresponders,  the  nature  and  HBV  status  of  the
exposure  source  and  postexposure  management,  and  the  HCP's  anti-HBs  level.
Appropriate  safeguards  should  be  in  place  to  protect  the  privacy  of  the  health
information.  Data  collection  should  be  representative  of  HCP  in  a  variety  of  settings
(e.g.,  acute  care,  long-term  care,  and  dialysis),  including  settings  with  frequent  staff
turnover.  Studies  assessing  HBV  transmission  among  all  HCP  exposed  to  an
HBsAg-positive
 source,
 regardless
 of
 vaccination
 history
 or
 anti-HBs
 levels,
approximately  6  months  after  an  exposure  will  help  to  inform  duration  of  vaccine
protection.  Surveillance  activities  for  acute  hepatitis  B  infection  should  continue  to
ascertain occupation among cases, in addition to HepB vaccination history. Long-term
follow-up studies assessing disease incidence and duration of anti-HBs among persons
vaccinated as infants and older adults, including persons who received booster doses
subsequent to the primary vaccine series and persons from HBV-endemic areas, also
might  provide  information  on  duration  of  vaccine-induced  protection.  Other  subject
areas  that  would  benefit  from  research  include  efficacy  and  cost-effectiveness  of
antiviral agents for postexposure prophylaxis, immunogenicity of higher dosage or new
vaccines  for  revaccinating  vaccine  nonresponders,  and  an  examination  of  the  future
role  of  postexposure  hepatitis  B  virus  deoxyribonucleic  acid  (HBV  DNA)  testing.  The
following  persons  were  consulted  during  the  drafting  of  these  recommendations:
Thomas  J.  Hoerger,  PhD,  Christina  Ludlow-Bradley,  Research  Triangle  Institute,
International, Durham, North Carolina; Henry Roberts, PhD, Emily Smith, MPH, Steven
Veselsky,  MPH,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention;
Donna  Weaver,  RN,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases;  Tara
MacCannell,  PhD,  Ronda  Sinkowitz-Cochran,  MPH,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases. *A list of the members of the panel appears on page 20.
BOX.
 Abbreviations.
 ACIPAdvisory
 Committee
 on
 Immunization
 Practices
anti-HBcantibody to hepatitis B core antigen anti-HBsantibody to hepatitis B surface
antigen  ELISAenzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay  HBeAghepatitis  B  e  antigen
HBIGhepatitis B immune globulin HBsAghepatitis B surface antigen HBVhepatitis B
virus  HBV  DNAhepatitis  B  virus  deoxyribonucleic  acid  HCP  health-care  personnel
HCVhepatitis  C  virus  HepBhepatitis  B  vaccine  HIVhuman  immunodeficiency  virus
IDUinjection  drug  use  IGimmune  globulin  IISImmunization  Information  System
IOMInstitute  of  Medicine  MSMmen  who  have  sex  with  men  NHISNational  Health
Interview
 Survey
 NNDSSNational
 Notifiable
 Diseases
 Surveillance
 System
OSHAOccupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  PCRpolymerase  chain  reaction
QALYquality-adjusted life-year FIGURE 1. Number* of reported acute hepatitis B cases
— National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, United States, 2000–2011 Source:
CDC.
 Viral
 hepatitis
 statistics
 and
 surveillance.
 Available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/index.htm.  *For  2011,  the  reported  number  of
cases  was  2,890;  the  estimated  number  of  cases  (18,800)  was  computed  after
accounting for underreporting and asymptomatic infections. Alternate Text: This figure
above is a line graph representing the number of cases reported during the years 2000
through  2011.  For  2011,  the  reported  number  of  cases  is  2,890  and  the  estimated
number  of  cases  (18,800)  is  after  accounting  for  underreporting  and  asymptomatic
infection.
                     FIGURE 2. Weighted prevalence of chronic hepatitis B* — National Health
and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey,  United  States,  1976–2010  Sources:  Wasley  A,
Kruszon-Moran D, Kuhnert W, et al. The prevalence of hepatitis B virus infection in the
United  States  in  the  era  of  vaccination.  J  Infect  Dis  2010;202:192–201.  Personal
communication.  Roberts  H,  PhD.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC;2012.  *Chronic  Hepatitis  B  is
defined  as  the  presence  of  both  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg)  and  antibody  to
hepatitis  B  core  antigen  (anti-HBc).  †Represents  95%  confidence  interval.  Alternate
Text: This figure above is a graph that represents the prevalence of chronic hepatitis B
infection, which is defined as the presence of both hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
and  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  core  antigen  (anti-Hbc).  The  period  represented  is
1976-2010.
                     FIGURE 3. Incidence* of percutaneous injury† and mucosal exposure§ —
Exposure  Prevention  Information  Network,  1997–2011   Source:  University  of  Virginia
Health  System.   International  Healthcare  Worker  Safety  Center.  Available  at
http://www.healthsystem.virginia.edu/pub/epinet/home.html. *Per 100 occupied beds.
†Includes needlesticks, cuts, and bites. §Includes contact with mucous membranes or
nonintact  skin  (termed  "blood  and  body  fluid  exposures"  by  the  Exposure  Prevention
Information  Network  [EPINet]).  Alternate  Text:  This  figure  above  is  a  bar  graph  that
provides the incidence of injury by needle stick and mucosal exposure, as reported by
the Exposure Prevention and Information Network during the period 1997-2011.
                     FIGURE 4. Hepatitis B virus infection rate among health-care personnel
trainees, by prevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen positivity of source patients and
approach to assessment Source: Personal communication. Hoerger TJ, Ludlow-Bradley
C.  Durham,  North  Carolina:  Research  Triangle  Institute,  International;  2012.  *Per
100,000 population of health-care personnel.  Alternate Text: This figure above is a line
graph that presents the probability of HBV infection among HCP trainees on the basis of
prevalence of HBsAg-positivity of source patients and approach to assessment.
                     TABLE  1.  Recommended  dosages  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  by  age,
immunocompetency,
 and
 vaccine
 type
 Characteristic
 Single-antigen
 vaccine*
Combination  vaccine  Recombivax  HB  Engerix-B  Twinrix†  Dosage(µg)  Volume(mL)
Dosage(µg) Volume(mL) Dosage(µg) Volume(mL) Age (yrs) 11–15 10§ 1  NA NA NA NA
11–19  5  0.5  10  0.5  NA  NA  ≥20   10  1  20  1  20  1  Hemodialysis  patients  and  other
immunocompromised  persons  <20¶  5  0.5  10  0.5  NA  NA  ≥20  40**  1  40††  2  NA  NA
Abbreviation: NA = not applicable.  *Single-antigen vaccine is usually administered
on  a  3-dose  schedule  at  0,  1,  and  6  months.  Other  schedules  are  available.  See
package insert.  †Combined hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccine is recommended for
persons   aged  ≥18  years  at  increased  risk  for  both  hepatitis  B  virus  and  hepatitis  A
virus infections.  §Adult formulation administered on a 2-dose schedule.  ¶Higher
dosages  might  be  more  immunogenic,  but  no  specific  recommendations  have  been
made.   **Dialysis  formulation  administered  on  a  3-dose  schedule  at  0,  1,  and  6
months.  ††Two 1 mL doses administered at one site on a 4-dose schedule at 0, 1, 2,
and 6 months.  FIGURE 5. Serologic evidence of protection, by years since vaccination
among persons vaccinated at age <1 year* Sources: Samandari T, Fiore AE, Negus S, et
al.  Differences  in  response  to  a  hepatitis  B  vaccine  booster  dose  among  Alaskan
children  and  adolescents  vaccinated  during  infancy.  Pediatrics  2007;120:e373–81.
Petersen KM, Bulkow LR, McMahon BJ, et al. Duration of hepatitis B immunity in low risk
children
 receiving
 hepatitis
 B
 vaccinations
 from
 birth.
 Pediatr
 Infect
 Dis
 J
2004;23:650–5.  Hammitt  LL,  Hennessy  TW,  Fiore  AE,  et  al.  Hepatitis  B  immunity  in
children vaccinated with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine beginning at birth: a follow-up
study at 15 years. Vaccine. 2007;25:6958–64. Dentinger CM, McMahon BJ, Butler JC, et
al.  Persistence  of  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  and  protection  from  disease  among  Alaska
natives immunized at birth. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2005;24:786–92. Middleman AB, Baker
C, Hu DJ, et al. Duration of immunity from hepatitis B vaccine administered soon after
birth  among  16  to  19  year  old  youth  in  the  United  States.  Presented  to  the  Pediatric
Academic Societies, Boston, MA, April 29, 2012. *Includes U.S. studies only. Alternate
Text: This figure above is a graph that presents evidence of protection from hepatitis B
virus  on  the  basis  of  years  since  vaccination,  in  5-year  increments,  measured  by  the
proportion of persons with anti-HBs  ≥10 mIU/mL.
                     FIGURE 6. Pre-exposure evaluation for health-care personnel previously
vaccinated  with  complete,  ≥3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series  who  have  not  had
postvaccination  serologic  testing*   Source:  Adapted  from  CDC.  A  comprehensive
immunization  strategy  to  eliminate  transmission  of  hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the
United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP).  Part  II:  immunization  of  adults.  MMWR  2006;55(No.  RR-16).  *Should  be
performed 1–2 months after the last dose of vaccine using a quantitative method that
allows  detection  of  the  protective  concentration  of  anti-HBs  (≥10  mIU/mL)  (e.g.,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]). †A nonresponder is defined as a person
with anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL after ≥6 doses of HepB vaccine. Persons who do not have a
protective concentration of anti-HBs after revaccination should be tested for HBsAg. If
positive, the person should receive appropriate management or vaccination. Alternate
Text:  This  figure  provides  guidance  for  pre-exposure  evaluation  of  health-care
personnel who have been completely vaccinated with ≥3 dose HepB vaccine series and
who have not had postvaccination serologic testing.
                     TABLE 2. Postexposure management of health-care personnel after
occupational  percutaneous  and  mucosal  exposure  to  blood  and  body  fluids,  by
health-care  personnel  HepB  vaccination  and  response  status  Health-care  personnel
status  Postexposure  testing  Postexposure  prophylaxis  Postvaccination  serologic
testing†  Source  patient(HBsAg)  HCP  testing(anti-HBs)  HBIG*  Vaccination  Documented
responder§  after  complete  series  (≥3  doses)  No  action  needed  Documented
nonresponder¶ after 6 doses Positive/unknown —** HBIG x2 separated by 1 month —
No  Negative  No  action  needed  Response  unknown  after  3  doses  Positive/unknown
<10mIU/mL** HBIG x1 Initiate revaccination Yes Negative <10mIU/mL None Any result
≥10mIU/mL  No  action  needed  Unvaccinated/incompletely  vaccinated  or  vaccine
refusers  Positive/unknown  —**  HBIG  x1  Complete  vaccination  Yes  Negative  —  None
Complete  vaccination  Yes  Abbreviations:  HCP  =  health-care  personnel;  HBsAg  =
hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HBIG =
hepatitis B immune globulin. *HBIG should be administered intramuscularly as soon
as  possible  after  exposure  when  indicated.  The  effectiveness  of  HBIG  when
administered  >7  days  after  percutaneous,  mucosal,  or  nonintact  skin  exposures  is
unknown. HBIG dosage is 0.06 mL/kg.  †Should be performed 1–2 months after the last
dose of the HepB vaccine series (and 4–6 months after administration of HBIG to avoid
detection of passively administered anti-HBs) using a quantitative method that allows
detection of the protective concentration of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL).   §A responder is
defined as a person with anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL after ≥3 doses of HepB vaccine.  ¶A
nonresponder is defined as a person with anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL after ≥6 doses of HepB
vaccine.  **HCP  who  have  anti-HBs  <10mIU/mL,  or  who  are  unvaccinated  or
incompletely  vaccinated,  and  sustain  an  exposure  to  a  source  patient  who  is
HBsAg-positive or has unknown HBsAg status, should undergo baseline testing for HBV
infection  as  soon  as  possible  after  exposure,  and  follow-up  testing  approximately  6
months later. Initial baseline tests consist of total anti-HBc; testing at approximately 6
months  consists  of  HBsAg  and  total  anti-HBc.  Expert  Panel  Members  Douglas
Campos-Outcalt, MD, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona; Alexis
Elward,  MD,  Washington  University  School  of  Medicine,  St  Louis,  Missouri;  Kathleen
Harriman,  PhD,  California  Department  of  Public  Health,  Richmond,  California;  Samuel
Katz,  MD,  Duke  University,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  Harry  Keyserling,  MD,  Emory
University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Thomas  Koinis,  MD,  Duke  University,
Oxford,  North  Carolina;  Susan  Lett,  MD,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Boston,  Massachusetts;  Brian  McMahon,  MD,  Alaska  Native  Tribal  Health  Consortium,
Anchorage, Alaska; Amy Middleman, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas;
David A. Nace, MD, American Medical Directors Association, Columbia, Maryland; Mark
Sawyer,  MD,  University  of  California  at  San  Diego,  California;  Brenna  Simons,  PhD,
Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, Anchorage, Alaska; Jonathan Temte, MD, PhD,
University  of  Wisconsin  School  of  Medicine  and  Public  Health,  Madison,  Wisconsin;
James  Turner,  MD,  University  of  Virginia  School  of  Medicine,  Charlottesville,  Virginia;
David Weber, MD, Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Marion Major, PhD, Food and Drug Administration,
Bethesda, Maryland; Marie A. de Perio, MD, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health; Geoff Beckett, PA-C, Kathy Byrd, MD, Scott Holmberg, MD, Trudy V. Murphy,
MD, Sarah Schillie, MD, Philip Spradling, MD, Eyasu Teshale, MD, Fujie Xu, MD, National
Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention;  Erin  Kennedy,  DVM,
National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases;  David  Kuhar,  MD,  Cindy
Weinbaum, MD, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases. Use of
trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6210a1.htm
