Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. For Immediate Release: Friday, September 22, 2023
Contact: Media Relations
(404)  639-3286  Today,  CDC  recommended  the  first  respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)
vaccine for pregnant people to protect their newborn from severe RSV illness. RSV is
the  leading  cause  of  hospitalization  for  U.S.  infants.  This  new  vaccine,  Pfizer’s
bivalent RSVpreF vaccine (trade name Abrysvo TM), has been shown to reduce the risk
of  RSV  hospitalization  for  babies  by  57  percent  in  the  first  six  months  after  birth.  To
maximize protection for babies after birth, CDC recommends seasonal administration of
one dose of RSV vaccine for pregnant people during weeks 32 through 36 of pregnancy.
The vaccine is one of two new tools we have this season to protect babies from severe
RSV illness. Last month, CDC recommended a new RSV immunization for infants that
has been shown to reduce the risk of both RSV-related hospitalizations and healthcare
visits in infants by about 80 percent. Most infants will likely only need protection from
either  the  maternal  RSV  vaccine  or  infant  immunization,  but  not  both.  However,  for
example,  if  a  baby  is  born  less  than  two  weeks  after  maternal  immunization,  then  a
doctor  may  recommend  that  the  baby  also  receive  the  infant  immunization.  “This  is
another  new  tool  we  can  use  this  fall  and  winter  to  help  protect  lives,”  said  CDC
Director Dr. Mandy Cohen. “I encourage parents to talk to their doctors about how to
protect their little ones against serious RSV illness, using either a vaccine given during
pregnancy,  or  an  RSV  immunization  given  to  your  baby  after  birth.”  The  RSVpreF
vaccine is available in some locations in the U.S. and availability is expected to increase
in the coming weeks. This is the first fall and winter virus season where vaccines are
available  for  the  three  major  respiratory  viruses  –COVID-19,  RSV  and  flu.  Updated
COVID-19  and  flu  vaccines  are  recommended  for  everyone  6  months  and  older.  CDC
now  recommends  RSV  vaccine  for  adults  ages  60  and  over,  using  shared  clinical
decision-making. This means these individuals should talk to their healthcare provider
about  whether  RSV  vaccination  is  appropriate  for  them  at  this  time.  Talk  to  your
healthcare  provider,  pharmacist,  or  local  community  health  center  about  which
vaccines  you  need  to  stay  protected  this  fall  and  winter.  Final  Vote  Language   On
September 22, 2023, members of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) voted, 11-1, to recommend maternal RSV vaccine for pregnant people during 32
through  36  weeks  gestation,  using  seasonal  administration,  to  prevent  RSV  lower
respiratory  tract  infection  in  infants.  They  also  voted  to  approve  Pfizer’s  bivalent
RSVpreF  vaccine  for  the  Vaccines  for  Children  Program  (applying  to  pregnant  people
under 19 years of age). ###
U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  HEALTH  AND  HUMAN  SERVICES  CDC  works  24/7  protecting
America’s health, safety and security. Whether diseases start at home or abroad, are
curable or preventable, chronic or acute, or from human activity or deliberate attack,
CDC  responds  to  America’s  most  pressing  health  threats.  CDC  is  headquartered  in
Atlanta and has experts located throughout the United States and the world.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2023/p0922-RSV-maternal-vaccine.html
