Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Recommendations  and  Reports  /  November  3,  2023  /
72(4);1–19 Lakshmi Panagiotakopoulos, MD1; Amy L Sandul; DHSc1; Erin E. Conners,
PhD1;  Monique  A.  Foster,  MD2;  Noele  P.  Nelson,  MD1;  Carolyn  Wester,  MD1;
Collaborators  (View  author  affiliations)  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Table 1 Table 2   The elimination of hepatitis C is a
national
 priority
(https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/Viral-Hepatitis-National-Strategic-Plan-2021-202
5.pdf).  During  2010–2021,  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)  acute  and  chronic  infections
(hereinafter referred to as HCV infections) increased in the United States, consequences
of which include cirrhosis, liver cancer, and death. Rates of acute infections more than
tripled among reproductive-aged persons during this time (from 0.8 to 2.5 per 100,000
population among persons aged 20–29 years and from 0.6 to 3.5 among persons aged
30–39  years).  Because  acute  HCV  infection  can  lead  to  chronic  infection,  this  has
resulted in increasing rates of HCV infections during pregnancy. Approximately 6%–7%
of perinatally exposed (i.e., exposed during pregnancy or delivery) infants and children
will  acquire  HCV  infection.  Curative  direct-acting  antiviral  therapy  is  approved  by  the
Food and Drug Administration for persons aged ≥3 years. However, many perinatally
infected  children  are  not  tested  or  linked  to  care.  In  2020,  because  of  continued
increases  in  HCV  infections  in  the  United  States,  CDC  released  universal  screening
recommendations  for  adults,  which  included  recommendations  for  screening  for
pregnant persons during each pregnancy (Schillie S, Wester C, Osborne M, Wesolowski
L, Ryerson AB. CDC recommendations for hepatitis C screening among adults—United
States, 2020. MMWR Recomm Rep 2020;69[No. RR-2]:1–17). This report introduces four
new  CDC  recommendations:  1)  HCV  testing  of  all  perinatally  exposed  infants  with  a
nucleic  acid  test  (NAT)  for  detection  of  HCV  RNA  at  age  2–6  months;  2)  consultation
with a health care provider with expertise in pediatric hepatitis C management for all
infants  and  children  with  detectable  HCV  RNA;  3)  perinatally  exposed  infants  and
children with an undetectable HCV RNA result at or after age 2 months do not require
further  follow-up  unless  clinically  warranted;  and  4)  a  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  is
recommended  for  perinatally  exposed  infants  and  children  aged  7–17  months  who
previously  have  not  been  tested,  and  a  hepatitis  C  virus  antibody  (anti-HCV)  test
followed by a reflex NAT for HCV RNA (when anti-HCV is reactive) is recommended for
perinatally exposed children aged ≥18 months who previously have not been tested.
Proper  identification  of  perinatally  infected  children,  referral  to  care,  and  curative
treatment are critical to achieving the goal of hepatitis C elimination. Top Hepatitis C
virus  (HCV)  is  a  single-stranded  RNA  virus  that  causes  liver  inflammation  that  can
progress over time to advanced fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
(1–3). Rates of HCV acute and chronic infections (referred hereinafter as HCV infections)
have  been  steadily  increasing  in  the  United  States  since  2010,  with  rates  of  acute
infections more than tripling among reproductive-aged persons as of 2021, from 0.8 to
2.5  per  100,000  population  among  persons  aged  20–29  years  and  from  0.6  to  3.5
among  persons  aged  30–39  years  (4,5).  As  a  result  of  increasing  rates  of  acute
infections in reproductive-aged persons and subsequent chronic infections, overall rates
of HCV infections during pregnancy have increased by 20% during 2016–2020 and up to
tenfold during 2000–2019 (6,7). HCV is transmitted through percutaneous exposure to
infected blood; increases in infection rates have corresponded to increases in injection
drug use(IDU) (8–11). In 2020, because of the changing epidemiology of HCV infections
in  the  United  States,  CDC  expanded  previous  risk-based  testing  recommendations  to
include  universal  screening  for  all  adults  aged  ≥18  years  at  least  once  and  for  all
pregnant persons during each pregnancy (12). Studies have estimated that chronic HCV
infection  will  develop  in  5.8%–7.2%  of  all  perinatally  exposed  (i.e.,  exposed  during
pregnancy or delivery) infants and children (13,14), and curative direct-acting antiviral
(DAA) therapy can be administered beginning at age 3 years (15,16). However, most
perinatally exposed infants and children are not tested for HCV infection and are not
referred for hepatitis C care (17–20); reasons for this might include lack of awareness of
perinatal exposure by pediatric providers, lack of regular pediatric care among exposed
infants and children, changes in health care providers before the time of HCV testing
(recommended  at  age  18  months),  and  challenging  social  circumstances  for  parents
and  guardians.  This  report  supplements  the  2020  CDC  recommendations  for  HCV
screening among adults in the United States (12), which includes universal screening
among  pregnant  persons  during  each  pregnancy,  by  recommending  the  timing  and
type  of  test  for  diagnosis  of  current  HCV  infection  for  infants  and  children  born  to
HCV-infected  pregnant  persons.  Because  HCV  epidemiology  and  methods  of  testing
infants  and  children  for  HCV  infection  have  evolved,  this  report  replaces  a  previous
recommendation for testing perinatally exposed infants and children included in a CDC
recommendation  from  1998  (21).  This  report  is  intended  to  serve  as  a  resource  for
persons  involved  in  the  development,  implementation,  delivery,  and  evaluation  of
clinical  and  preventive  services,  including  health  care  professionals;  public  health
officials; and professional, academic, and public health and advocacy organizations. If
recommendations are implemented, more perinatally infected children will be identified
and linked to care. This approach would increase the chances of timely treatment and
subsequent cure that can mitigate the consequences from chronic hepatitis C and limit
further  transmission.  Top  In  2021,  a  total  of  5,023  cases  of  acute  hepatitis  C  were
reported  to  CDC,  a  rate  of  1.6  cases  per  100,000  persons  (4).  However,  because
underreporting
 and
 underascertainment
 are
 common,
 CDC
 estimated
 that
approximately
 69,800
 acute
 infections
 occurred
 during
 2021
 (95%
 CI
 =
55,300–238,100)  (22).  Rates  have  increased  annually  since  2010  and  were  highest
among persons aged 20–39 years, representing approximately 52% of reported acute
cases (Figure 1). These increasing rates also occurred among groups at highest risk for
fatal overdose from IDU (10). Although data on risk behaviors or exposures are most
often  missing,  among  those  cases  with  risk  factors  reported,  approximately  57%
reported  IDU.  Furthermore,  because  of  the  increase  in  acute  HCV  infections,  newly
reported chronic cases are now highest among persons aged 20–39 years (Figure 2).
Additional  information  on  the  epidemiology  of  reported  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C
cases
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2021surveillance/hepatitis-c.htm.
 Although
 a
history  of  IDU  is  the  most  commonly  reported  risk  factor  among  adults  for  acquiring
HCV infection, perinatal transmission is the primary risk factor among young children.
Perinatal  HCV  infection  has  been  notifiable  since  2018  (23).  In  2021,  a  total  of  199
perinatal  hepatitis  C  cases  were  reported  to  CDC  from  28  states,  with  approximately
one  half  of  cases  reported  by  six  states;  this  approximation  is  likely  a  substantial
underestimate  of  the  number  of  cases  in  the  United  States  (24).  The  states  with  the
highest  number  of  cases  were  Ohio  (42),  Pennsylvania  (15),  Indiana  (15),  and
Tennessee  (12)  (4).  A  study  using  commercial  laboratory  data  during  2011–2014
determined  that  0.73%  (95%  CI  =  0.71%–0.75%)  of  pregnant  persons  tested  had
current HCV infection (25). Applying these proportions to the annual birth rate during
2011–2014, the study estimated that 29,000 women with HCV infection gave birth to
1,700  infants  with  perinatal  HCV  infection  each  year.  HCV,  previously  known  as
posttransfusion  non-A,  non-B  hepatitis  virus,  was  first  characterized  in  1989  (26,27).
HCV is a single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Flaviviridae family and includes at
least seven genotypes known to infect humans, with differences in geographic spread
and  implications  for  treatment  (28–33).  Approximately  90%  of  infections  globally
represent genotypes 1, 2, 3, and 4; in the United States, genotype 1 is most common
(31).  HCV  is  a  bloodborne  pathogen  spread  parenterally;  the  most  common  mode  of
transmission  is  IDU.  HCV  infection  also  can  be  transmitted  to  the  fetus  and  newborn
during  pregnancy  and  delivery,  respectively.  Less  common  modes  of  transmission
include  sexual  contact,  health  care  procedures,  needlestick  injuries  in  health  care
settings,  unregulated  tattooing,  and  sharing  personal  items  contaminated  with
infectious  blood.  Historically,  children  were  most  commonly  infected  through
transfusions;  however,  routine  screening  of  blood  products  since  1992  has  largely
eliminated  this  mode  of  transmission  in  the  United  States  (4,34,35).  A  systematic
review  and  meta-analysis  of  109  articles  found  that  the  risk  for  perinatally  acquired
infection from an HCV antibody-reactive pregnant person with detectable HCV RNA was
5.8%  (95%  CI  =  4.2%–7.8%)  in  the  absence  of  HIV  infection  and  10.8%  (95%  CI  =
7.6%–15.2%)  among  those  with  poorly  controlled  HIV  coinfection  (13).  A  statistical
reanalysis of data, including 1,749 children in three prospective cohorts that corrected
for infections that might have cleared before they were detected, calculated an overall
perinatal  transmission  rate  of  7.2%  (95%  CI  =  5.6%–8.9%)  among  pregnant  persons
who  were  HIV  negative  and  12.1%  (95%  CI  =  8.6%–16.8%)  among  those  with  poorly
controlled  HIV  coinfection  (14).  This  study  also  estimated  that  24.8%  of  perinatal
infections occur early in utero, 66% later in utero, and 9.3% during delivery. Perinatal
transmission  is  limited  to  infants  born  to  pregnant  persons  with  detectable  HCV  RNA
(36,37).  Transmission  occurs  more  frequently  among  pregnant  persons  with  poorly
controlled  HIV  coinfection  and  also  might  be  more  common  in  pregnant  persons
injecting drugs (36,38–42). The use of antiretroviral therapy for HIV during pregnancy to
lower HIV viral load is associated with lower rates of perinatal HCV transmission, which
are  closer  to  transmission  rates  among  pregnant  persons  with  HCV  monoinfection
(43–45). Although detectable HCV RNA in a pregnant person is a known risk factor for
perinatal transmission, the specific levels of HCV RNA or a specific HCV genotype are
not known to be associated with increased risk for transmission (36,38). Giving birth to
a  child  who  was  perinatally  infected  also  does  not  increase  risk  for  perinatal
transmission  over  baseline  in  subsequent  pregnancies;  HCV  infections  are  equally
distributed  among  first-born  infants  and  subsequent  births  (46).  Data  on  prenatal
testing and risk for perinatal HCV transmission are limited; however, amniocentesis is
usually recommended over chorionic villus sampling when invasive testing is indicated
(47–49).  Caesarean  delivery  is  not  recommended  over  vaginal  delivery  to  prevent
perinatal HCV transmission (36,50). Membrane rupture lasting ≥6 hours before delivery
and the use of internal fetal monitoring have been associated with an increased risk for
transmission  (37).  After  delivery,  breastfeeding  does  not  increase  HCV  transmission
unless nipples are cracked or bleeding (36,48). Data on the effects of HCV infection on
pregnancy, birth, and neonatal outcomes have been mixed (51–57). Associations might
be  confounded  by  maternal  substance  use  during  pregnancy  and  unmeasured
sociodemographic factors. However, studies have consistently illustrated an increased
risk  for  gestational  diabetes  mellitus  and  intrahepatic  cholestasis  of  pregnancy  to  be
associated  with  HCV  infection  (52,54,56,58).  Certain  studies  have  found  associations
between  HCV  infection  and  adverse  birth  and  neonatal  outcomes.  A  meta-analysis  of
birth outcomes after HCV infection among 4,185,414 participants, 5,094 of whom had
HCV  infection,  found  a  statistically  significant  association  between  maternal  HCV
infection
 and
 intrauterine
 growth
 restriction
 and
 low
 birthweight
 (55).
 A
population-based cohort study in Washington using birth certificate data compared 506
pregnant persons infected with HCV with 2,022 mothers who were HCV negative and
1,439 mothers who were HCV negative and known to use drugs (52). After controlling
for maternal age, race, tobacco use, alcohol use, and prenatal care, infants perinatally
exposed  to  HCV  infection  were  more  likely  to  have  low  birthweight,  be  small  for
gestational age, and have neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission and assisted
ventilation.  In  addition,  compared  with  the  maternal  drug-using  cohort  without  HCV
infection, the maternal cohort with HCV infection was more likely to have infants with
NICU  admission  who  required  assisted  ventilation.  A  study  of  births  in  Florida
determined  that  after  adjusting  for  sociodemographic  variables  and  obstetric
complications,  HCV  infection  during  pregnancy  was  associated  with  preterm  delivery,
low  birthweight  infants,  and  congenital  anomalies  (54).  Another  study  indicated
approximately  22%  increased  odds  of  having  an  infant  with  an  adverse  neurologic
outcome (odds ratio = 1.22; 95% CI = 1.03–1.44) among pregnant persons with HCV
infection compared with pregnant persons without HCV infection (59). Among children
with  perinatally  acquired  HCV  infection,  spontaneous  clearance  of  infection  (i.e.,
resolution  of  the  infection  without  treatment  resulting  in  undetectable  virus)  typically
occurs  in  20%–40%  of  children  by  age  5  years  (37,60–64).  However,  a  recent  study
analyzed  data  from  three  prospective  studies,  accounting  for  interval  censoring  and
left-truncated data, to evaluate HCV RNA clearance more precisely by age (65). Among
106  infants  aged  <36  months  with  current  infection  included  in  the  analysis,  57.3%
cleared by age 3 years and 65.9% cleared by age 5 years. Clearance is associated with
sustained  undetectable  HCV  RNA;  viral  RNA  levels  are  initially  high  and  then  slowly
decline. Antibody to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) typically persists for life but can wane
over  time  (62).  Limited  studies  have  evaluated  long-term  outcomes  among  children
perinatally infected with HCV (64,66). One of the largest studies was a cohort of 266
children  infected  perinatally  and  followed  prospectively  through  a  median  age  of  4.2
years (range: 3.2 months to 15.9 years) (64). Children were recruited from 30 European
Paediatric HCV Network centers and were considered infected if they had ≥2 positive
nucleic acid tests (NATs) for HCV RNA or a positive anti-HCV test at age ≥18 months. In
this study, 10% of children had hepatomegaly, which was found to be associated with
elevated
 alanine
 aminotransaminase
 (ALT)
 levels.
 Among
 the
 children
 with
hepatomegaly,  the  study  estimated  median  age  at  first  diagnosis  to  be  7.1  months,
with  approximately  13%  of  children  developing  hepatomegaly  by  age  5  years  and
approximately 28% by age 10 years. Among the infected cohort, approximately 20% of
children  cleared  the  infection  (median  age:  14.9  months),  50%  had  chronic
asymptomatic infection, and 30% had chronic active infection (i.e., persistent viremia
with  or  without  hepatomegaly  and  elevated  ALT).  Another  prospective  study  of  45
children infected perinatally found that all children were asymptomatic for liver disease;
however,  11  children  had  evidence  of  mild-to-moderate  fibrosis  (62).  In  addition,
autoimmune
 phenomena,
 including
 nonorgan-specific
 autoantibodies,
cryoglobulinemia,  low  C4  levels,  and  persistent  proteinuria  were  also  found  among
perinatally  infected  children.  A  retrospective  study  followed  35  perinatally  infected
children recruited from seven European centers for a mean of 4 years (SD: 2.2 years)
after  diagnosis  of  HCV  infection  (67).  Of  these  children,  77%  had  persistently  or
intermittently abnormal ALT levels. In addition, ALT levels tended to be higher during
the first year of life among those in the study who subsequently spontaneously cleared
their infections. Another prospective study of 45 children with perinatally acquired HCV
infection  (median  age:  12  years)  found  that  children  who  spontaneously  cleared  the
infection had higher ALT levels during the first 2 years of life than those who did not
(62). Descriptive evaluations of liver pathology among children with chronic hepatitis C
have  been  reported  (68–70).  However,  clinical  outcomes  in  these  studies  are  not
generalizable to all children at risk because findings are reported among a sample of
children  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  with  clinical  indications  for  liver  biopsy,  including
severe progression of disease. One report of 121 treatment-naïve children aged 2–16
years indicated that inflammation on liver biopsy was minimal in approximately 42% of
children,  mild  in  17%,  moderate  in  38%,  and  severe  in  3%  (68).  Among  these  121
patients, five had bridging fibrosis and two had cirrhosis; degree of liver inflammation
correlated  with  duration  of  infection.  Another  study  of  60  HCV-infected  children,
including  13%  who  were  perinatally  infected,  found  that  71%  had  mild-to-minimal
inflammation on liver biopsy, and 88% had absent or minimal fibrosis (69). However, in
this study, three of eight children infected perinatally had cirrhosis, one of whom had
slow progression and two of whom required liver transplantation and subsequently died
from transplant complications. One study evaluated the progression of histologic liver
disease by comparing initial and repeat liver biopsies (mean of 5.8 years; SD: 3.5 years)
among  44  children  with  chronic  hepatitis  C,  57%  of  whom  were  infected  perinatally
(70).  Among  25  children  infected  perinatally,  12%  had  no  fibrosis,  76%  had  portal  or
periportal  fibrosis,  and  12%  had  bridging  fibrosis  or  cirrhosis.  Although  a  statistically
significant progression of histologic liver disease among the aggregate cohort was not
found,  a  statistically  significant  increase  in  the  severity  of  fibrosis  in  30%  of  children
was  observed.  Hepatitis  C  screening  with  an  anti-HCV  test  is  recommended  for  all
pregnant persons during each pregnancy (12,71). A nonreactive test (i.e., no detectable
antibody  or  negative  antibody)  indicates  no  HCV  antibody  detected  and  the  person
likely has never been infected. A nonreactive anti-HCV result also might represent an
acute infection during the window period (if exposure was recent) or, among rare cases,
a seronegative infection. A reactive HCV antibody (i.e., detectable antibody or positive
antibody) indicates current or past infection and should be followed with a NAT for HCV
RNA (i.e., reflex NAT for HCV RNA). An undetectable HCV RNA result by NAT indicates
no  current  HCV  infection.  A  detectable  HCV  RNA  result  is  indicative  of  current  HCV
infection, and the person should be linked to care and considered for treatment. Before
2018,  recommendations  for  hepatitis  C  testing  during  pregnancy  were  limited  to
persons  with  known  risk  factors  (12).  However,  this  strategy  left  multiple  infections
undiagnosed (72). In 2018, because of low testing rates and increases in HCV infections
among persons of reproductive age, the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
and  the  American  Association  for  the  Study  of  Liver  Diseases  (AASLD)  recommended
universal screening during pregnancy (48). In 2020, both the U.S. Preventive Services
Task  Force  (USPSTF)  and  CDC  recommended  universal  screening  during  pregnancy
(12,73).  This  universal  screening  during  pregnancy  recommendation  was  followed  by
similar  recommendations  from  two  obstetrical  organizations,  the  American  College  of
Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) and the Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine (SMFM)
in  2021  (49,74).  Because  recommendations  have  recently  shifted  from  risk-based  to
universal  screening,  uptake  of  HCV  screening  during  pregnancy  is  evolving,  as
demonstrated  by  two  studies  using  commercial  laboratory  data.  During  2011–2016,
analysis  of  laboratory  data  determined  HCV  testing  increased  from  5.7%  to  13.4%
among pregnant persons within the population eligible for inclusion in the study (75).
Another  analysis  of  5,048,428  pregnant  persons  using  laboratory  data  indicated  an
increase in the percentage of pregnant persons with an HCV screening test from 16.6%
in 2011 to 40.6% in the second quarter of 2021 (76). Systematic review of the literature
indicated  the  median  anti-HCV  prevalence  during  pregnancy  was  1.2%  (range:
0.1%–70.8%);  66.1%  (range:  61.3%–77.2%)  of  pregnant  persons  with  a  reactive
anti-HCV  test  also  had  detectable  HCV  RNA  (4,12).  All  professional  societies  with
perinatal hepatitis C testing guidelines recommend testing perinatally exposed infants
aged ≥18 months with an HCV antibody test (3,15,77,78). Anti-HCV tests should not be
performed  earlier  than  age  18  months  in  perinatally  exposed  children  because  of
passive transfer of maternal antibody. NAT for HCV RNA can be done as early as age 2
months in perinatally exposed infants, which might decrease loss to follow-up and help
alleviate  anxiety  among  families  wanting  to  know  an  infant’s  HCV  infection  status
(17–19,77).  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  cannot  be  used  before  age  2  months  for  diagnosis  of
perinatal  HCV  transmission  because  of  false-negative  results.  Furthermore,  the
presence of HCV RNA during the first weeks of life might indicate contamination with
maternal blood or passive transfer of maternal HCV RNA rather than newly established
HCV infection of the infant (37). Authors from a single center retrospectively reviewed
more than 10 years of laboratory and clinical data for all infants who had perinatal HCV
exposure (79) and found that nearly all those who had undetectable HCV RNA at age
2–6  months  were  HCV  seronegative  at  24  months  (223  of  226;  98.7%),  and  all  226
infants were clinically classified as true negatives for HCV infection. In this study, the
sensitivity  of  a  single  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  at  age  2–6  months  was  100%  (95%  CI  =
87.5%–100.0%), and the specificity was 100% (95% CI = 98.3%–100.0%). Furthermore,
using  the  perinatal  transmission  rate  of  3.6%  calculated  in  the  study,  the
positive-predictive  value  (PPV)  of  a  single  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  was  100%  (95%  CI  =
74.5.%–100.0%),  and  the  negative-predictive  value  (NPV)  was  100%  (95%  CI  =
99.6%–100.0%). Using a perinatal transmission rate of 5.8% from the literature, the PPV
of a single NAT for HCV RNA was 100% (95% CI = 82.8%–100.0%), and the NPV was
100%  (95%  CI  =  99.4%–100.0%).  More  recent  estimates  indicate  a  perinatal
transmission  rate  closer  to  7%  (14),  which  would  be  expected  to  increase  the  lower
bound of the PPV CI. Standalone NATs for HCV RNA detection are not FDA approved for
diagnosis  of  HCV  infection;  off-label  use  of  an  FDA-approved  diagnostic  test  requires
validation by the testing laboratory. Because spontaneous clearance occurs among up
to 65.9% of children by age 5 years (37,60–65), the American Association for the Study
of  Liver  Diseases  and  the  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America  (AASLD-IDSA)
guidelines recommend a NAT for HCV RNA to confirm current infection before initiation
of  DAA  therapy,  which  can  be  started  at  age  3  years.  Approximately  6%–7%  of
perinatally exposed children will acquire perinatal HCV infection. Curative DAA therapy
is FDA approved for children aged ≥3 years; however, more than one half of perinatally
infected children are not tested or linked to care. CDC assessed evidence in support of
recommending  perinatal  testing  for  hepatitis  C  among  infants  to  maximize  early
diagnosis and linkage to care and increase the number of children who receive curative
treatment  before  developing  clinical  manifestations  and  complications  from  chronic
hepatitis C. Standard practice for clinical management and treatment of perinatal HCV
infection is outside the scope of this CDC recommendation. AASLD-IDSA and the North
American
 Society
 for
 Pediatric
 Gastroenterology,
 Hepatology,
 and
 Nutrition
(NASPGHAN) have published guidelines for the clinical management and treatment of
perinatal  HCV  infection  (15,16,77).  Top  The  Recommendations  Steering  Committee,
composed of CDC staff with expertise in viral hepatitis, obstetrics, pediatrics, infectious
diseases,
 and
 policy
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 1,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/134020), met regularly to oversee the development of
the recommendations. The steering committee designed a comprehensive systematic
review of the literature to guide the decision for these recommendations. The purpose
of the review was to examine the benefits and harms of different testing strategies for
identifying  children  with  perinatally  acquired  HCV  infection.  The  following  research
question guided the development of the recommendations: This question was further
broken  down  into  five  questions  guiding  a  chain  of  indirect  evidence:  Key  questions
(KQs)  were  developed  for  each  of  the  five  questions  from  the  chain  (Supplementary
Table 1, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599): A systematic review of the literature
was  conducted  to  examine  available  evidence  on  HCV  infection  prevalence  among
pregnant persons and perinatally exposed children, loss of follow-up among perinatally
exposed children, and the benefits and harms of testing perinatally exposed children. A
search for English language, peer-reviewed journal articles published in Medline (Ovid),
Embase  (Ovid),  Cochrane  Library,  CINAHL  (EBSCO),  and  Scopus  was  performed
(Supplementary Table 2, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599). The search included
articles  published  during  January  1,  2001–June  8,  2021.  The  20-year  period  was
selected  because  of  the  expected  scarcity  of  data  among  this  population.  Duplicates
were  identified  using  EndNote  software  (version  20;  Clarivate),  which  automated  the
“find  duplicates”  function  with  preference  set  to  match  on  title,  author,  and  year.
Duplicates  were  removed  from  the  EndNote  library.  All  references  from  the  initial
search  were  uploaded  into  DistillerSR  software  (version  2.35;  Evidence  Partners)  for
further  review  by  the  Recommendations  Work  Group  (Supplementary  Appendix  1,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/134020). Two independent reviewers checked all titles
and  abstracts  for  relevance  to  the  research  question  (AS,  JB,  or  NN  and  LP).  Titles
determined  to  be  non-English  language  articles  or  not  relevant  to  the  study  question
were not included in the abstract review. All articles determined to be relevant in the
title review and articles with conflicting results in the title review were included in the
abstract  review.  Similarly,  all  abstracts  determined  to  be  relevant  to  the  research
question  and  articles  with  conflicting  inclusion  results  in  the  abstract  review  were
included for full text review. Included articles were separated into three categories for
the full text review: 1) U.S. articles only discussing HCV in pregnancy (without data on
perinatal HCV), 2) U.S. articles that included data regarding perinatal HCV testing, and
3) international articles that potentially included harms of perinatal HCV testing. All full
text articles were independently reviewed by two reviewers (AS, EC, JB, LC, or MF and
LP).  Relevant  data  were  abstracted  independently  and  compared.  All  differences  in
abstracted  data  were  discussed  by  the  two  reviewers  until  they  reached  agreement.
Articles  were  excluded  if  an  English  language  version  could  not  be  found,  were  not
related to HCV infection, treatment, or testing; were international articles not specific to
perinatal HCV transmission and testing; were case reports, case series, opinion articles,
editorials, review articles, or conference abstracts; contained only modeled data or only
animal data; included adults aged ≥18 years (unless also included perinatally infected
or pregnant persons); reported HCV infection among children not acquired perinatally;
or  only  reported  on  medications  not  recommended  for  use  among  children.  Data  on
testing  rates  and  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  during  pregnancy  that  had  been
considered in the development of the 2020 report on CDC recommendations for HCV
screening  among  adults  were  also  included  in  this  literature  summary  (12).  On
completion of the formal literature review, reference lists from all U.S. and international
review  articles  were  reviewed  to  identify  additional  articles  for  full  text  review.  After
data  abstraction,  all  included  articles  related  to  pregnancy  and  perinatal  HCV  testing
rates, incidence, linkage to care, and outcomes underwent review to assess the quality
of the evidence using the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Study Quality Assessment
Tools,  which  were  developed  specific  to  certain  study  designs  and  focus  on  concepts
key
 to
 a
 study’s
 internal
 validity
 (Supplementary
 Table
 3,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  Articles  were  first  categorized  by  study
design,  and  each  criterion  and  overall  rating  was  independently  scored  by  two
reviewers
 (AS
 or
 EC
 and
 LP)
 using
 the
 descriptions
 available
 at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/study-quality-assessment-tools.
 The
 two
reviewers discussed and reached agreement on giving the articles an overall rating of
good, fair, or poor. All articles, regardless of their rating, were included in the overall
analysis.  Because  articles  describing  harms  of  perinatal  HCV  screening  varied  in  the
relation  between  the  study  design  and  the  harm  mentioned,  the  quality  of  U.S.  and
international articles on the harms of perinatal HCV testing was scored based on two
standardized  measures  developed  by  the  Recommendations  Steering  Committee:  1)
level  of  confidence  (high,  moderate,  or  low),  indicating  how  the  specific  harm  was
measured  in  the  study,  and  2)  outcome  prioritization  (critical,  important,  not
important),  indicating  the  relevance  of  the  harm  as  it  related  to  the  study  question.
Although  these  determinations  were  based  on  expert  opinion  and  judgment,  two
reviewers  (AS,  EC,  or  MF  and  LP)  independently  scored  each  study  with  a  harm;
discrepancies in the level of confidence or the outcome prioritization were discussed by
the  two  reviewers  until  they  reached  agreement.  The  quality  assessment  of  the
cost-effectiveness study was evaluated by two independent reviewers (TA and LP) using
the Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS) checklist
(80).  To  identify  recently  published  studies  through  December  31,  2022,  a
supplemental  literature  search  was  conducted  on  January  17,  2023,  using  a  search
strategy
 identical
 to
 the
 original
 search
 (Supplementary
 Table
 4,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  Titles  and  abstracts  were  independently
reviewed  by  NN  or  MW  and  LP.  All  studies  with  conflicting  agreement  on  inclusion
proceeded for full text reviews, which were independently reviewed by AS or EC and LP.
Evidence  quality  reviews  for  all  included  articles  were  conducted  using  the  same
methods as for the original reviews by AS or EC and LP. Abstracted data and evidence
assessments  from  full  text  reviews  were  added  to  the  original  review.  In  developing
recommendations, the Recommendations Steering Committee considered the results of
the  literature  review  and  findings  from  the  effectiveness  and  cost-effectiveness
modeling  study  (see  Evidence  Summary).  Furthermore,  the  steering  committee  had
biweekly meetings to discuss implementation feasibility, public health implications, and
equitable  access  to  testing.  CDC  determined  that  these  recommendations  included
influential scientific information with a clear and substantial impact on important public
policies and private sector decisions. As required by the Information Quality Act (81),
peer  review  by  external  specialists  not  involved  in  the  development  of  the
recommendations  was  conducted.  CDC  solicited  nominations  for  peer  reviewers  from
the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), NASPGHAN, AASLD, the American Academy
of Family Physicians (AAFP), and ACOG. Six peer reviewers from the listed organizations
with  expertise  in  pediatrics,  infectious  diseases,  hepatology,  and  obstetrics  reviewed
the recommendations and provided structured peer reviews (Supplementary Appendix
1, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/134020). Representatives from professional societies,
providers,  advocacy  groups,  and  public  health  professionals  have  communicated  the
need for clear recommendations through conferences, journal commentary, and other
types  of  communications.  Buy-in  from  relevant  parties  was  obtained  at  inception  of
recommendation  development  in  April  2021,  and  methods  for  developing  the
recommendations  were  summarized  in  a  presentation  only  (i.e.,  no  vote  was
conducted)  at  the  April  2022  meeting  of  the  CDC/Health  Resources  and  Services
Administration  Advisory  Committee  on  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis  and  STD  Prevention  and
Treatment.  Opportunity  for  reaction  and  feedback  to  the  draft  recommendation  was
provided through a public comment period (November 22, 2022–January 27, 2023) and
an informational webinar open to the public, academia, advocacy groups, and partner
organizations.  CDC  received  22  public  comments  on  the  draft  document  from  the
public,  providers,  advocacy  groups,  industry,  medical  professional  associations,  think
tanks,  and  one  public  health  department.  Peer  reviewer  and  public  comments  were
considered  by  the  work  group,  and  edits  made  in  response  were  documented
(Supplementary
 Appendix
 2
 and
 Supplementary
 Appendix
 3,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/134020).  The  initial  literature  search  yielded  3,802
articles.  All  titles  were  screened,  1,241  (32.6%)  abstracts  were  reviewed,  and  201
(5.3%) full texts were reviewed for possible inclusion. A total of 35 articles (0.9%) from
the initial literature review had data available to abstract. An additional six articles were
identified  from  references  and  were  included  for  data  abstraction.  After  review,  41
articles were included. The supplementary literature search yielded an additional 459
articles. All titles were screened, 160 abstracts (34.9%) were reviewed, and 23 (5.0%)
full  texts  were  reviewed  for  possible  inclusion.  A  total  of  11  articles  (2.4%)  from  the
supplementary literature review had data to abstract. An additional four articles were
identified from references and were included for abstraction. The supplementary review
added 15 articles to the original 41 for a total of 56 articles included. Sixteen articles
included  data  related  to  HCV  testing  rates  during  pregnancy,  12  of  which  were
reviewed  in  the  2020  CDC  adult  HCV  screening  recommendations  (Supplementary
Table  5,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  The  median  percentage  of  pregnant
persons tested for HCV infection was 47.6% (range: 0.7%–98.4%) (Table 1). Thirty-five
articles  included  data  regarding  anti-HCV  positivity  or  hepatitis  C  diagnoses  during
pregnancy,  26  of  which  were  reviewed  in  the  2020  CDC  adult  HCV  screening
recommendations. The median prevalence of anti-HCV positivity or diagnosis was 1.1%
(range:  0.1%–70.8%).  Eleven  articles  included  data  regarding  HCV  RNA  positivity  in
pregnancy among those who were anti-HCV positive, of which four were reviewed in the
2020 CDC adult HCV screening recommendations. The median prevalence of HCV RNA
positivity  was  68.2%  (range:  29.6%–81.3%).  Two  articles  presented  data  on  the
proportion  of  perinatally  exposed  children  who  were  referred  for  HCV  testing
(Supplementary
 Table
 6,
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).
 The
 median
percentage of children referred for testing was 16.7% (range: 1.9%–31.4%) (Table 1).
Twelve articles presented data related to the proportion of perinatally exposed children
tested for HCV infection, either with an anti-HCV test or NAT for HCV RNA. The median
percentage tested for HCV infection was 30.1% (range: 8.6%–53.1%). Thirteen articles
presented data regarding the rate of perinatal transmission. The median rate was 4.7%
(range:  0.0%–11.1%).  One  article  presented  information  regarding  linkages  to  care
among perinatally infected children and indicated that five of five (100%) were linked to
care.  Seven  studies  included  data  related  to  DAA  treatment  among  perinatally  HCV
infected
 children
 aged
 3–17
 years
 (Supplementary
 Table
 7,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  In  these  studies,  the  median  percentage  of
children  with  chronic  HCV  infection  who  achieved  sustained  virologic  response  12
weeks  posttreatment  was  98.1%  (range:  96%–100%).  Assessment  of  the  quality  of
evidence was performed for each of the included articles using the NIH Study Quality
Assessment  tool,  and  the  results  ranged  from  fair  to  good  (Supplementary  Table  8,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  Both  U.S.  and  international  articles  were
evaluated  for  harms  associated  with  testing  perinatally  exposed  children  for  HCV
infection;  six  U.S.  articles  and  24  international  articles  were  included  (Supplementary
Table  9,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  Among  30  studies  that  described
potential harms, the most commonly reported harms were related to interpretation of
test  results,  including  intermittent  or  transient  viremia  (13  studies),  false-positive
antibody  results  (one  study),  and  false-negative  antibody  results  (two  studies).  Other
harms included the cost of testing (four studies); stigma (four studies); guilt, stress, and
concern about a child’s health, school, employment, and future marriage (one study);
wait  time  for  screening  at  18  months  (one  study);  misclassification  of  vertical
transmission (one study); parental refusal of testing (one study); absence of approved
treatment (one study); involvement of social services (one study); distance to follow up
for families living far away (one study); time to go to the laboratory and wait for the test
(one  study);  lack  of  testing  and  transportation  availability  (one  study);  pressure  on
clinic staff members to order and explain test results (one study); and delay in infection
status or uncertain prognosis clarification contributing to parental confusion and poor
clinic  attendance  (one  study).  All  studies  with  harms  were  evaluated  for  the  level  of
confidence
 and
 outcome
 prioritization
 (Supplementary
 Table
 9,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  After  careful  evaluation  and  review,  the
Recommendations  Steering  Committee  concluded  that  the  benefits  of  testing
outweighed the identified and potential harms of testing. The data from the literature
review are subject to at least four limitations. First, although data were abstracted in a
consistent  method,  there  was  heterogeneity  in  the  studies  included  (e.g.,  certain
studies did not differentiate between the type of diagnostic test used [i.e., anti-HCV or
NAT for RNA] or the age of the infant or child at the time the test was performed). In
addition,  studies  might  have  defined  maternal  HCV  infection  as  a  single  positive
anti-HCV test, which might not represent current infection. Second, approximately 20
years  of  data  and  knowledge  about  perinatal  HCV  infection  from  2001  to  2022  were
included, including exposure and transmission, diagnosis, HCV RNA test performance,
treatment,  and  outcomes.  However,  the  data  and  knowledge  about  perinatal  HCV
infection have progressed substantially over this time. As a result, certain studies might
have  included  previous  definitions  of  HCV  infection  or  less  sensitive  testing  methods.
However,  because  of  the  scarcity  of  data  on  perinatal  HCV  infection,  including  more
rather than less data was essential. Third, with the exception of articles that described
potential harms, articles with no U.S. data were excluded for all reviews to make the
recommendations  generalizable  to  the  U.S.  population  on  the  basis  of  similar
populations,  medical  care,  treatment  guidelines,  and  outcomes.  However,  this  step
might  have  excluded  certain  potentially  relevant  international  studies.  Finally,  data
from  the  systematic  review  of  the  literature  were  limited  by  the  designs  of  the
individual studies and the quality of the evidence. For this reason, standardized quality
assessment  tools  created  by  NIH  for  observational  cohort  and  cross-sectional  studies
and
 for
 before-after
 (prepost)
 studies
 with
 no
 control
 group
(https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/study-quality-assessment-tools)  were  used  to
assess
 the
 quality
 of
 the
 evidence
 from
 included
 studies.
 Evaluating
 the
cost-effectiveness
 of
 public
 health
 interventions
 is
 critical
 to
 developing
recommendations.  No  cost-effectiveness  studies  comparing  testing  approaches  for
perinatal
 HCV
 infections
 were
 identified
 during
 the
 development
 of
 these
recommendations.  Therefore,  a  CDC-conducted  novel  analysis  evaluating  the  optimal
testing strategy for perinatally exposed children guided these recommendations (82).
Through  CDC’s  National  Center  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention’s
Epidemiologic and Economic Modeling Agreement, a mathematic modeling study was
conducted using an economic analysis framework to compare the current strategy of
anti-HCV  testing  with  reflex  to  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  starting  at  age  18  months  with  a
proposed strategy of a single NAT for HCV RNA at age 2–6 months. Also included were
considerations  for  universal  testing  strategies  for  both  options  (i.e.,  all  infants
regardless of maternal HCV status). Inputs and estimates for the study were guided by
published  literature.  For  rate  of  hepatitis  C  screening  during  pregnancy,  a  mean
estimate of 44.7% was used with sensitivity analyses to account for expected increases
in  screening  during  pregnancy  because  universal  screening  recommendations  are
becoming  more  widely  implemented.  In  addition,  decreased  loss  to  follow-up  was
accounted for with the proposed strategy because more infants are expected to attend
2–6-month  well-child  visits  than  18-month  well-child  visits  (83).  Costs  and  health
outcomes  of  the  various  strategies  were  modeled  and  incorporated  rates  of
spontaneous clearance of infection. Outcomes included diagnosed infections, treated or
cured  infections,  HCC,  liver  transplants,  and  liver-related  deaths.  The  modeling  study
found that, compared with the baseline strategy of testing exposed children aged 18
months with an anti-HCV test and reflex to NAT for HCV RNA, an increased number of
infants received diagnoses and had improved health outcomes when NAT for HCV RNA
was performed at age 2–6 months among exposed children. Universal screening with
both anti-HCV testing with reflex to NAT for HCV RNA at 18 months and NAT for HCV
RNA at age 2–6 months also improved infant diagnoses and health outcomes. However,
testing  known  exposed  infants  at  age  2–6  months  was  the  only  strategy  that  was
cost-saving compared with the baseline strategy, with a population level cost savings of
$469,671 per year, assuming 3.6 million births with 0.64% of births occurring among
persons  with  HCV  infection.  Although  the  universal  testing  strategies  resulted  in  an
increase in quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) compared with the baseline strategy, the
strategies  resulted  in  increased  total  costs  ranging  from  $38  million  for  the  universal
anti-HCV test with reflex to NAT for the HCV RNA strategy at 18 months to $129 million
for the universal NAT for HCV RNA at age 2–6 months (incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios [ICERs] of 26,105 and 35,887 per QALY gained, respectively). Compared with NAT
for HCV RNA among exposed children at age 2–6 months, universal NAT for HCV RNA
screening  becomes  decreasingly  cost-effective  as  the  proportion  of  pregnant  persons
screened for HCV increases (i.e., because universal screening allows the HCV infection
status of every pregnant person to be known, universal testing of infants would result in
diminishing  return).  The  strategy  of  testing  known  perinatally  exposed  infants  with  a
NAT for HCV RNA at age 2–6 months was the only perinatal hepatitis C testing strategy
that  was  both  cost-saving  and  resulted  in  better  health  outcomes.  Limitations  of  the
study included a paucity of data on testing strategies for infants and children exposed
to perinatal HCV, attributing the cost and benefits of testing only to the exposed child,
assuming  perinatal  HCV  not  diagnosed  in  childhood  would  not  be  diagnosed  and
treated later in life and assuming that there was no difference in linkage to treatment
or  costs  before  age  3  years  with  the  different  testing  strategies.  A  health  economist
determined  the  study  met  the  overall  standards  for  quality  of  the  CHEERS  checklist
(Supplementary  Table  10,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/133599).  The  steering
committee determined that any minor deviations from the checklist were appropriate
and  did  not  compromise  the  quality  of  the  evidence.  Rates  of  HCV  infections  during
pregnancy  have  been  increasing  (6,7),  corresponding  with  the  ongoing  opioid  crisis
(11).  Although  perinatal  HCV  transmission  occurs  in  up  to  7%  of  perinatally  exposed
children (13,14), approximately 70% of children aged ≥18 months are not being tested
with the current strategy of anti-HCV testing, leading to loss to follow-up (Table 1). With
the availability of highly sensitive and specific NATs for HCV RNA detection starting at
age  2  months  (79)  and  more  children  attending  well-child  visits  at  age  2–6  months
compared with those aged ≥18 months (17,84), a NAT for HCV RNA at age 2–6 months
is both cost-effective and cost-saving and will identify more children with perinatal HCV
transmission who are eligible for curative treatment beginning at age 3 years (82). HCV
testing of children exposed perinatally identifies children who are at risk for developing
complications from chronic HCV infection. Standard clinical practice for testing with a
NAT for HCV RNA is done at or after age 2 months, and testing with anti-HCV is done at
or  after  age  18  months  because  of  the  persistence  of  antibody  passively  transferred
from the infected birthing parent to the infant (37,85–87). The older, less sensitive NAT
for HCV RNA used in certain studies of perinatally exposed infants was associated with
potential  false-negative  results  indicating  intermittent  viremia  (37,88,89);  however,
currently used tests are highly sensitive with a lower limit of detection of 15.0 IU/mL or
less  for  genotype  1a  (90).  One  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  at  age  2–6  months  is  sufficient  to
determine perinatal infection. On the basis of data related to the sensitivity, specificity,
and PPVs and NPVs, a detectable HCV RNA result confirms perinatal HCV transmission
and  an  undetectable  HCV  RNA  rules  out  perinatal  HCV  transmission  (79,85,88,91).  If
anti-HCV testing is done at or after age 18 months, a NAT for HCV RNA on all reactive
specimens will identify current HCV infection. Children with nonreactive anti-HCV tests
at  age  ≥18  months  and  children  with  undetectable  HCV  RNA  test  results  after  a
reactive  anti-HCV  test  at  age  ≥18  months  do  not  need  further  follow-up.  Top  CDC
recommends  HCV  testing  for  all  infants  and  children  born  to  pregnant  persons  with
current or probable HCV infection (Box). A pregnant person with a current HCV infection
has detectable HCV RNA. A pregnant person is considered to have a probable infection
if anti-HCV testing is reactive and HCV RNA results are not available. Rates of hepatitis
C  among  reproductive-aged  persons  have  been  increasing  (4),  resulting  in  increasing
rates  of  hepatitis  C  during  pregnancy  (6,7),  but  systematic  review  of  data  from  12
studies illustrate that only 30.1% of perinatally exposed infants and children are tested
for  HCV  infection  (Table  1).  With  perinatal  transmission  rates  of  up  to  7%  among
exposed  infants  (13,14),  the  majority  of  children  with  current  infection  remain
undiagnosed  and  are  lost  to  follow  up.  One  surveillance  study  indicated  only  16%  of
exposed infants were tested for HCV infection, leaving most children with current HCV
infection unidentified (20). The most common harms related to testing for perinatal HCV
infection  relate  to  interpretation  of  test  results,  including  intermittent  or  transient
viremia,  false-positive  antibody  results,  false-negative  antibody  results,  the  cost  of
testing,  and  stigma.  However,  currently  used  NATs  for  HCV  RNA  tests  are  highly
sensitive  and  specific  for  diagnosing  perinatal  HCV  transmission  (79).  Furthermore,
more children attend well-child visits and receive perinatal HCV testing during the first
6  months  of  life  compared  with  well-child  visits  at  18  months  (17,84).  Finally,  early
diagnosis  of  perinatal  HCV  transmission  at  age  2–6  months  was  determined  to  be
cost-effective  and  cost-saving  in  preventing  morbidity  and  mortality  from  chronic
hepatitis C complications (82); curative treatment is available starting at age 3 years.
As  a  result,  the  benefits  of  testing  were  determined  to  outweigh  any  potential  and
identified harms. The risks for and benefits of testing children born to pregnant persons
with  unknown  hepatitis  C  status  were  not  directly  assessed.  Evidence  indicates  that
siblings of children with perinatal hepatitis C exposure born to the same birth parent
would benefit from being tested for HCV infection unless the birth parent was known to
be HCV negative (i.e., HCV RNA not detected) during the previous pregnancy (15,16).
Testing can be performed starting at age 2 months with a NAT for HCV RNA, or at age
≥18 months with an anti-HCV test with reflex to NAT for HCV RNA. In addition, children
whose birth parent’s hepatitis C status is unknown because the child and birth parent
are separated (e.g., children in foster care or infants safely surrendered after birth) or
other situations where the birth parent cannot be tested also would benefit from being
tested starting at age 2 months with a NAT for HCV RNA or at age ≥18 months with an
anti-HCV test with reflex to NAT for HCV RNA (84,92–94). If a pregnant person was at
risk for having an acute infection during pregnancy (e.g., IDU) and was not tested close
to  the  time  of  delivery,  the  infant  also  would  benefit  from  being  tested.  Standard
practice  calls  for  infants  and  children  with  perinatally  acquired  HCV  infection
(detectable HCV RNA at or after age 2 months) to be managed in consultation with a
provider  with  expertise  in  pediatric  hepatitis  C  management  to  receive  related
screenings, preventive services, interventions, and regular follow-up. To confirm chronic
hepatitis  C,  children  who  test  positive  should  be  retested  with  a  NAT  for  HCV  RNA
before  beginning  treatment,  which  can  be  started  as  early  as  age  3  years.  Detailed
management
 guidelines
 from
 AASLD-IDSA
 are
 available
 at
https://www.hcvguidelines.org/unique-populations/children. Cases of perinatal hepatitis
C should be reported to the appropriate state or local health department in accordance
with requirements for reporting perinatal HCV infections. Case definitions for reportable
cases have been published by the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (23).
CDC testing recommendations differ in certain ways from those of other organizations,
particularly  on  the  ages  at  which  testing  should  occur  (Table  2).  CDC  testing
recommendations  focus  on  an  earlier  infant  age  range  of  2–6  months  because  of
increasing rates of pediatric hepatitis C, high rates of loss to follow-up among exposed
infants and children, and the increased effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of earlier
hepatitis C diagnosis with a NAT for HCV RNA in young infants. As of 2023, AASLD-IDSA
(15), NASPGHAN (16), and AAP (78) recommend anti-HCV testing at age ≥18 months
with  reflex  to  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  among  perinatally  exposed  children.  These
organizations  also  recommend  considering  a  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  at  age  ≥2  months  in
certain circumstances. AAFP recommends two separate NATs for HCV RNA at age 2–6
months or an anti-HCV test at age ≥15 months (3). AASLD-IDSA and AAP recommend
an anti-HCV test ≥18 months, regardless of the exposed child’s HCV RNA result during
infancy. AASLD-IDSA also recommends a NAT for HCV RNA at age 3 years for those with
perinatal  HCV  transmission  to  confirm  chronic  infection.  AASLD-IDSA  and  NASPGHAN
recommend screening siblings of perinatally infected children. Top CDC will continue to
monitor  changes  in  epidemiology,  diagnosis,  and  treatment  of  hepatitis  C  during
pregnancy and among children, and future revisions to these recommendations might
be indicated if new and substantial evidence becomes available. If DAA treatments are
approved  for  pregnant  persons  and  widely  used,  the  resulting  clearance  of  maternal
viremia during pregnancy will lead to fewer children becoming infected. Although these
recommendations included a systematic review of approximately 20 years of literature
during  2001–2022  on  hepatitis  C  in  pregnancy  and  children  exposed  perinatally,
multiple  gaps  in  the  literature  exist.  More  data  are  needed  to  understand  the
implications  of  universal  screening  during  pregnancy  and  the  true  prevalence  of
hepatitis C among pregnant persons. Furthermore, data on the prevalence and natural
history  of  perinatal  hepatitis  C  are  needed  because  limited  prospective  longitudinal
studies  following  a  cohort  of  children  infected  perinatally  and  evaluating  outcomes
exist.  Better  understanding  is  needed  regarding  how  to  improve  linkage  to  care  for
these infants, specifically barriers to testing and reasons why testing is not done and
identified children are not referred to appropriate providers for follow-up. Surveillance
for children infected perinatally before and after these recommendations also will guide
further  understanding  of  progress  toward  hepatitis  C  elimination,  specifically  whether
an  earlier  diagnosis  of  perinatal  hepatitis  C  is  associated  with  higher  treatment  and
cure  rates.  Jurisdictional  viral  hepatitis  programs  can  improve  surveillance,  diagnosis,
and  linkage  to  care  if  provided  with  additional  funding  and  resources  for  capacity
building  and  implementation  to  expand  existing  viral  hepatitis  infrastructure.  Finally,
resources  to  educate  pediatric  providers  on  the  importance  of  testing  and  treating
children  for  hepatitis  C,  including  financial  reimbursement,  awareness  of  stigma,
approaches  to  counseling  patients  regarding  the  implications  of  a  positive  test,  and
information on the safety of breastfeeding, will be needed as more pregnant persons
and  exposed  children  are  identified  through  testing.  Top  Using  a  testing  strategy  of
highly  sensitive  and  specific  NATs  for  RNA  detection  among  infants  and  children
perinatally exposed to HCV increases the identification of children with HCV infection in
whom substantial morbidity and mortality might develop. HCV infection will develop in
approximately  6%–7%  of  all  perinatally  exposed  infants  and  children  (13,14),  and
curative  DAA  therapy  can  be  administered  starting  at  age  3  years  (15,16).  However,
most perinatally exposed children are not tested for HCV infection and are not referred
for  hepatitis  C  care  (17–20).  Reasons  for  this  might  include  lack  of  awareness  of
perinatal exposure by pediatric providers, lack of regular pediatric care among exposed
children, and changes in health care providers before the time of HCV testing (currently
recommended at age 18 months). Testing perinatally exposed infants beginning at age
2 months with a NAT for HCV RNA is cost-effective and allows for earlier linkage to care,
appropriate evaluation, and the opportunity to provide curative, life-saving therapy. The
identification  of  and  linkage  to  curative  treatment  for  all  persons  with  HCV  infection
(including infants and children) is essential to ensuring that no population is left behind
in the pursuit of national hepatitis C elimination goals. Because more pregnant persons
with HCV infection are identified through universal screening, more infants and children
with identified exposure will seek care at various stages. Regardless of when a child is
seen by a provider, opportunities exist for education, testing and evaluation, curative
treatment, and progress toward the goal of hepatitis C elimination (95). Top Laura A.
Cooley,  Susan  Ingber,  Saleem  Kamili,  Pamela  Lemos,  Anne  Moorman,  Jessica  S.
Rogers-Brown,  Karina  Rapposelli,  Kari  Sapsis,  Mark  Weng,  Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,
National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB prevention, CDC; Taiwo Abimbola,
Office of the Director, National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB prevention,
CDC;  Joanna  Taliano,  Office  of  Library  Science,  CDC.  Elizabeth  Barnett,  Boston
University  Chobanian  &  Avedisian  School  of  Medicine;  Ravi  Jhaveri,  Ann  &  Robert  H.
Lurie  Children’s  Hospital  of  Chicago;  Gwen  Lazenby,  Medical  University  of  South
Carolina;  Christine  Lee,  Harvard  Medical  School;  Wael  Mourad,  University  of
Missouri–Kansas City School of Medicine; Adam Ratner, Hassenfeld Children’s Hospital.
Top  Corresponding  author:  Lakshmi  Panagiotakopoulos,  National  Center  for  HIV,  Viral
Hepatitis,
 STD,
 and
 TB
 Prevention.
 Telephone:
 404-498-0994;
 Email:
Lpanagiotakopoulos@cdc.gov. Top 1Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV,
Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  prevention,  CDC;  2Division  of  Global  Health  Protection,
Center  for  Global  Health,  CDC  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the
International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  The
comparator of infants aged 2–6 months was chosen because the period is the earliest
when a perinatally exposed infant can be tested and when children are more likely to
be
 engaged
 in
 routine
 care.
https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/142/5/e20174019/38551/Gaps-in-Well-Chil
d-Care-Attendance-Among-Primary?autologincheck=redirected  †  Off-label  use  of  an
FDA-approved  diagnostic  test  requires  validation  by  the  testing  laboratory.  Top  Top
Source:  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System,  CDC.  *  Rates  per  100,000
population.
 †
 Reported
 confirmed
 cases.
 For
 the
 case
 definition,
 see
https://ndc.services.cdc.gov/conditions/hepatitis-c-acute/.
 §
 The
 number
 of
 viral
hepatitis cases reported to CDC in 2020 and 2021 might be lower than in years before
the COVID-19 pandemic began. The decrease might be related to fewer people seeking
health  care  and  being  tested  for  viral  hepatitis  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  ¶
Changes in case definitions should be considered when examining temporal trends. For
more
 information
 regarding
 the
 case
 definitions
 used
 in
 2021,
 see
https://www.cdc.gov/nndss/index.html.
 Top
 Source:
 National
 Notifiable
 Diseases
Surveillance System, CDC. * During 2021, cases of chronic hepatitis C were either not
reportable  by  law,  statute,  or  regulation;  not  reported;  or  unavailable  to  CDC  from
Arizona, District of Columbia, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky, North Carolina, Rhode Island,
and Texas. † Only laboratory confirmed, newly diagnosed, chronic hepatitis C cases are
included.
 For
 the
 case
 definition,
 see
https://ndc.services.cdc.gov/conditions/hepatitis-c-chronic/.  §  The  number  of  viral
hepatitis cases reported to CDC in 2020 and 2021 might be lower than in years before
the COVID-19 pandemic began. The decrease might be related to fewer people seeking
health  care  and  being  tested  for  viral  hepatitis  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  ¶
Changes in case definitions should be considered when examining temporal trends. For
more
 information
 regarding
 the
 case
 definitions
 used
 in
 2021,
 see
https://www.cdc.gov/nndss/index.html. Top Abbreviations: anti-HCV = hepatitis C virus
antibody; CHC = chronic hepatitis C; DAA = direct-acting antiviral; HCV = hepatitis C
virus; IQR = interquartile range; NA = not available; NAT = nucleic acid test; SVR12 =
sustained virologic response 12 weeks posttreatment.
* All estimates among pregnant persons include studies reviewed in Source: Schillie S,
Wester C, Osborne M, Wesolowski L, Ryerson AB. CDC recommendations for hepatitis C
screening among adults—United States, 2020. MMWR Recomm Rep 2020;69:1–17.
† HCV RNA detected among those who are anti-HCV reactive.
§ No IQR available because only two studies.
¶ Perinatally exposed children tested with an anti-HCV test or a NAT for HCV RNA.
**  Children  who  received  a  diagnosis  of  perinatal  hepatitis  C  who  attended  an
HCV-related  appointment.  Top  Abbreviations:  anti-HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus  antibody;
FDA = Food and Drug Administration; HCV = hepatitis C virus; NAT = nucleic acid test.
* Because a pregnant person with a detectable HCV RNA test anytime during pregnancy
(even if followed by an undetectable HCV RNA test) can potentially transmit HCV during
the  infectious  period,  the  infant  should  be  tested  for  HCV  RNA.  If  no  HCV  test  is
available from pregnancy and the most recent NAT indicates detectable HCV RNA in the
absence of treatment, a pregnant person is considered to have current HCV infection.
Similarly, if no HCV test is available from pregnancy and the most recent anti-HCV test
is reactive in the absence of an undetectable HCV RNA or treatment, a pregnant person
is  considered  to  have  probable  HCV  infection.  †  Off-label  use  of  an  FDA-approved
diagnostic  test  requires  validation  by  the  testing  laboratory.  §  No  further  follow-up
needed unless clinically warranted (e.g., clinical symptoms, signs, or laboratory findings
consistent  with  hepatitis  C).  ¶  A  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  performed  on  specimens  that  are
anti-HCV  reactive.  Top  Abbreviations:  FDA  =  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  HCV  =
hepatitis  C  virus;  NAT  =  nucleic  acid  test.  *  Perinatally  exposed  children  are  children
born to pregnant persons with HCV infection. † Perinatally exposed children aged 7–17
months who have not previously been tested also should receive a NAT for HCV RNA. §
Off-label  use  of  an  FDA-approved  diagnostic  test  requires  validation  by  the  testing
laboratory. ¶ No further follow-up needed after a negative HCV RNA performed at age
2–6  months  unless  clinically  warranted  (i.e.,  clinical  symptoms  or  signs  or  laboratory
findings  consistent  with  hepatitis  C).  Top  Abbreviations:  anti-HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus
antibody;  HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus;  NAT  =  nucleic  acid  test.  *  Perinatally  exposed
children  are  children  born  to  pregnant  persons  with  HCV  infection.  †  Not  tested  for
perinatal  HCV  transmission  with  a  NAT  for  HCV  RNA  at  age  2–17  months.  Top
Abbreviations:  AAFP  =  American  Association  of  Family  Physicians;  AAP  =  American
Academy of Pediatrics; AASLD = American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases;
anti-HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus  antibody;  HCV  =  hepatitis  C  virus;  ISDA  =  Infectious
Diseases  Society  of  America;  NASPGHAN  =  North  American  Society  for  Pediatric
Gastroenterology,  Hepatology,  and  Nutrition;  NA  =  not  available;  NAT  =  nucleic  acid
test; NIH = National Institutes of Health.
* NAT for HCV RNA performed on specimens that are anti-HCV reactive.
† NAT for HCV RNA can be done at age ≤17 months; at age ≥18 months, recommend
anti-HCV testing with reflex to NAT for HCV RNA if not previously tested.
§  Source:  Kimberlin  DW,  Barnett  ED,  Lynfield  R,  Sawyer  MH,  editors.  Red  Book
2021–2024:  report  of  the  Committee  on  Infectious  Diseases,  32nd  edition.  Itasca,  IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021.
¶  Source:  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America.  HCV  in  children.  Arlington,  VA:
Infectious
 Diseases
 Society
 of
 America;
 2022.
 Accessed
 June
 2,
 2022.
https://www.hcvguidelines.org/unique-populations/children
** Consider at age 2–12 months.
†† Source: Leung DH, Squires JE, Jhaveri R, et al. Hepatitis C in 2020: a North American
Society  for  Pediatric  Gastroenterology,  Hepatology,  and  Nutrition  position  paper.  J
Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2020;71:407–17.
§§  Consider  at  age  2  months  if  requested  by  family;  recheck  at  age  12  months  to
confirm chronic hepatitis C.
¶¶  Source:  Wilkins  T,  Malcolm  JK,  Raina  D,  Schade  RR.  Hepatitis  C:  diagnosis  and
treatment. Am Fam Physician 2010;81:1351–7.
*** AAFP recommendations based on a NIH consensus statement (now retired). These
guidelines recommend a NAT for HCV RNA on two separate occasions between age 2–6
months or anti-HCV testing at age ≥15 months. Top Suggested citation for this article:
Panagiotakopoulos L, Sandul AL, et al. CDC Recommendations for Hepatitis C Testing
Among  Perinatally  Exposed  Infants  and  Children  —  United  States,  2023.  MMWR
Recomm Rep 2023;72(No. RR-4):1–19. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7204a1.
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/rr/rr7204a1.htm
