Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations are easier to follow and help protect those
most at risk For Immediate Release: Friday, March 1, 2024
Contact: Media Relations
(404)  639-3286  CDC  released  today  updated  recommendations  for  how  people  can
protect themselves and their communities from respiratory viruses, including COVID-19.
The  new  guidance  brings  a  unified  approach  to  addressing  risks  from  a  range  of
common  respiratory  viral  illnesses,  such  as  COVID-19,  flu,  and  RSV,  which  can  cause
significant  health  impacts  and  strain  on  hospitals  and  health  care  workers.  CDC  is
making  updates  to  the  recommendations  now  because  the  U.S.  is  seeing  far  fewer
hospitalizations and deaths associated with COVID-19 and because we have more tools
than ever to combat flu, COVID, and RSV. “Today’s announcement reflects the progress
we have made in protecting against severe illness from COVID-19,” said CDC Director
Dr.  Mandy  Cohen.  “However,  we  still  must  use  the  commonsense  solutions  we  know
work to protect ourselves and others from serious illness from respiratory viruses—this
includes vaccination, treatment, and staying home when we get sick.” As part of the
guidance,  CDC  provides  active  recommendations  on  core  prevention  steps  and
strategies:  When  people  get  sick  with  a  respiratory  virus,  the  updated  guidance
recommends that they stay home and away from others. For people with COVID-19 and
influenza, treatment is available and can lessen symptoms and lower the risk of severe
illness. The recommendations suggest returning to normal activities when, for at least
24 hours, symptoms are improving overall, and if a fever was present, it has been gone
without use of a fever-reducing medication. Once people resume normal activities, they
are  encouraged  to  take  additional  prevention  strategies  for  the  next  5  days  to  curb
disease spread, such as taking more steps for cleaner air, enhancing hygiene practices,
wearing a well-fitting mask, keeping a distance from others, and/or getting tested for
respiratory  viruses.  Enhanced  precautions  are  especially  important  to  protect  those
most  at  risk  for  severe  illness,  including  those  over  65  and  people  with  weakened
immune  systems.  CDC’s  updated  guidance  reflects  how  the  circumstances  around
COVID-19 in particular have changed. While it remains a threat, today it is far less likely
to cause severe illness because of widespread immunity and improved tools to prevent
and  treat  the  disease.   Importantly,  states  and  countries  that  have  already  adjusted
recommended  isolation  times  have  not  seen  increased  hospitalizations  or  deaths
related to COVID-19. While every respiratory virus does not act the same, adopting a
unified  approach  to  limiting  disease  spread  makes  recommendations  easier  to  follow
and thus more likely to be adopted and does not rely on individuals to test for illness, a
practice  that  data  indicates  is  uneven.  “The  bottom  line  is  that  when  people  follow
these actionable recommendations to avoid getting sick, and to protect themselves and
others if they do get sick, it will help limit the spread of respiratory viruses, and that will
mean fewer people who experience severe illness,” National Center for Immunization
and Respiratory Diseases Director Dr. Demetre Daskalakis said. “That includes taking
enhanced precautions that can help protect people who are at higher risk for getting
seriously  ill.”  The  updated  guidance  also  includes  specific  sections  with  additional
considerations  for  people  who  are  at  higher  risk  of  severe  illness  from  respiratory
viruses, including people who are immunocompromised, people with disabilities, people
who  are  or  were  recently  pregnant,  young  children,  and  older  adults.  Respiratory
viruses remain a public health threat. CDC will continue to focus efforts on ensuring the
public  has  the  information  and  tools  to  lower  their  risk  or  respiratory  illness  by
protecting  themselves,  families,  and  communities.  This  updated  guidance  is  intended
for  community  settings.  There  are  no  changes  to  respiratory  virus  guidance  for
healthcare settings. ###
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Whether diseases start at home
or  abroad,  are  curable  or  preventable,  chronic  or  acute,  or  from  human  activity  or
deliberate  attack,  CDC’s  world-leading  experts  protect  lives  and  livelihoods,  national
security  and  the  U.S.  economy  by  providing  timely,  commonsense  information,  and
rapidly identifying and responding to diseases, including outbreaks and illnesses. CDC
drives science, public health research, and data innovation in communities across the
country by investing in local initiatives to protect everyone’s health.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2024/p0301-respiratory-virus.html
