A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Core  Infection  Prevention  and  Control
Practices  for  Healthcare  Adherence  to  infection  prevention  and  control  practices  is
essential  to  providing  safe  and  high  quality  patient  care  across  all  settings  where
healthcare  is  delivered  This  document  concisely  describes  a  core  set  of  infection
prevention and control practices that are required in all healthcare settings, regardless
of  the  type  of  healthcare  provided.  The  practices  were  selected  from  among  existing
CDC  recommendations  and  are  the  subset  that  represent  fundamental  standards  of
care that are not expected to change based on emerging evidence or to be regularly
altered by changes in technology or practices, and are applicable across the continuum
of healthcare settings. The practices outlined in this document are intended to serve as
a  standard  reference  and  reduce  the  need  to  repeatedly  evaluate  practices  that  are
considered  basic  and  accepted  as  standards  of  medical  care.  Readers  should  consult
the full texts of CDC healthcare infection control guidelines for background, rationale,
and
 related
 infection
 prevention
 recommendations
 for
 more
 comprehensive
information. The core practices in this document should be implemented in all settings
where  healthcare  is  delivered.  These  venues  include  both  inpatient  settings  (e.g.,
acute,  long-term  care)  and  outpatient  settings  (e.g.,  clinics,  urgent  care,  ambulatory
surgical centers, imaging centers, dialysis centers, physical therapy and rehabilitation
centers,  alternative  medicine  clinics).  In  addition,  these  practices  apply  to  healthcare
delivered in settings other than traditional healthcare facilities, such as homes, assisted
living communities, pharmacies, and health fairs. Healthcare personnel (HCP) referred
to in this document include all paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare settings
who  have  the  potential  for  direct  or  indirect  exposure  to  patients  or  infectious
materials,  including  body  substances,  contaminated  medical  supplies,  devices,  and
equipment; contaminated environmental surfaces; or contaminated air. CDC healthcare
infection  control  guidelines  1-17  were  reviewed,  and  recommendations  included  in
more than one guideline were grouped into core infection prevention practice domains
(e.g., education and training of HCP on infection prevention, injection and medication
safety).  Additional  CDC  materials  aimed  at  providing  general  infection  prevention
guidance outside of the acute care setting 18-20 were also reviewed. HICPAC formed a
workgroup  led  by  HICPAC  members  and  including  representatives  of  professional
organizations  (see  Contributors  in  archives  for  full  list).  The  workgroup  reviewed  and
discussed all of the practices, further refined the selection and description of the core
practices and presented drafts to HICPAC at public meeting and recommendations were
approved by the full Committee in July 2014. In October 2022, the Core Practices were
reviewed  and  updated  by  subject  matter  experts  within  the  Division  of  Healthcare
Quality  Promotion  at  CDC.  The  addition  of  new  practices  followed  the  same
methodology  employed  by  the  Core  Practices  Workgroup  but  also  included  review  of
pathogen-specific  guidance  documents  21-22  that  were  created  or  updated  after  July
2014.  These  additions  were  presented  to  HICPAC  at  the  November  3,  2022  meeting.
Future  updates  to  the  Core  Practices  will  be  guided  by  the  publication  of  new  or
updated CDC infection prevention and control guidelines. Refer to “CDC Guideline for
Hand  Hygiene  in  Health-Care  Settings”  or  “Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:
Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare  Settings,  2007”  for
additional  details.  Refer  to  “CDC  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in
Health-Care  Facilities”  and  “CDC  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in
Healthcare  Facilities”  for  details.  Refer  to  “Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:
Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings, 2007” as well as
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requirements for details. During
periods of higher levels of community respiratory virus transmission*, facilities should
consider having everyone mask upon entry to the facility to ensure better adherence to
respiratory  hygiene  and  cough  etiquette  for  those  who  might  be  infectious.  Such  an
approach could be implemented facility-wide or targeted toward higher risk areas (e.g.,
emergency  departments,  urgent  care,  units  experiencing  an  outbreak)  based  on  a
facility risk assessment. *Examples of potential metrics include, but are not limited to,
increase in outbreaks of healthcare-onset respiratory infections, increase in emergency
department  or  outpatient  visits  related  to  respiratory  infections.  Refer  to  “CDC
Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities” for details Refer to
“Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in
Healthcare  Settings,  2007”  for  details.  Refer  to  “CDC  Guidelines  for  Environmental
Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities”  and  “CDC  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and
Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities”  for  details.  Refer  to  OSHA’s  website  for  specific
details  on  healthcare  standards:  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  –
Infectious  Diseases  (OSHA  Healthcare).  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control
and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,
patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/core-practices/index.html
