Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  How  to  Pronounce  Varicella  [MP3]  Chickenpox  is  a  highly
contagious  disease  caused  by  the  varicella-zoster  virus  (VZV).  It  causes  an  itchy,
blister-like rash. The rash appears first on the chest, back, and face, and then spreads
over the entire body. Chickenpox used to be very common in the United States. In the
early  1990s,  more  than  4  million  people  got  chickenpox,  10,500  to  13,000  were
hospitalized, and 100 to 150 died each year. Chickenpox vaccine became available in
the United States in 1995. During the first 25 years of the U.S. chickenpox vaccination
program,  the  vaccine  has  prevented  an  estimated  91  million  cases,  238,000
hospitalizations, and 2,000 deaths. CDC recommends two doses of chickenpox vaccine
for children, adolescents, and adults who have never had chickenpox and were never
vaccinated. Children are routinely recommended to receive the first dose at 12 through
15 months of age and the second dose at 4 through 6 years of age. Children under age
13 years should get two doses: The second dose may be given at an earlier age if it is
given at least 3 months after the first dose. People 13 years of age and older who have
never had chickenpox or received chickenpox vaccine should get two doses, at least 28
days  apart.  Chickenpox  vaccination  is  especially  important  for:  To  check  if  you  are
protected  from  chickenpox,  see Assessing  Immunity  to  Varicella.  Some people with  a
weakened  immune  system  who  do  not  have  immunity  against  chickenpox  may  be
considered for vaccination after talking with their doctor, including: You do not need to
get the chickenpox vaccine if you have evidence of immunity against the disease. Some
people should not get chickenpox vaccine or they should wait.  Top of Page There are
two  chickenpox  vaccines  that  are  licensed  in  the  United  States—Varivax®  and
ProQuad®. Getting vaccinated after you are exposed to someone with chickenpox can:
A healthcare provider can prescribe a medicine to make chickenpox less severe if you:
For more information, see Managing People at High Risk for Severe Varicella. Also, see
information about Who Should Not Get Chickenpox Vaccine.  Top of Page All 50 states
and  the  District  of  Columbia  (DC)  have  state  laws  that  require  children  entering
childcare  or  public  schools  to  have  certain  vaccinations.  There  is  no  federal  law  that
requires this. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that all
states  require  children  entering  childcare  and  students  starting  school,  college,  and
other postsecondary educational institutions to have: Students in school settings have a
higher likelihood of spreading chickenpox because they are constantly in close contact
with each other. Chickenpox vaccine prevents the disease and outbreaks in childcare
settings  and  schools.  This  leads  to:  Most  health  insurance  plans  cover  the  cost  of
vaccines. However, you may want to check with your insurance provider before going
to  the  doctor.  If  you  don’t  have  health  insurance  or  if  your  insurance  does  not  cover
vaccines for your child, the Vaccines for Children (VFC) Program may be able to help.
This program helps families of eligible children who might not otherwise have access to
vaccines. To find out if your child is eligible, visit the VFC website or ask your child’s
doctor. You can also contact your state VFC coordinator.  Top of Page
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/public/index.html
