A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 The  best  way  to  protect  against  chickenpox  is  to  get  the  chickenpox  vaccine.  The
chickenpox vaccine prevents almost all cases of severe illness. Instead of MMRV, some
children might receive separate vaccines for MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) and
varicella (chickenpox). If a vaccinated person does get chickenpox, called breakthrough
chickenpox, the symptoms are usually mild. Vaccinated people often experience fewer
to no blisters and low or no fever, but red spots may occur. There are two chickenpox
vaccines  licensed  in  the  United  States.  The  chickenpox  vaccine  may  be  given  at  the
same time as other vaccines. Your healthcare provider can give you more information.
Children under 13 years old should get 2 doses.  People 13 years and older who have
never had chickenpox or received chickenpox vaccine should get 2 doses. The doses
should be at least 28 days apart. People should also get a second dose if they have had
only  one  chickenpox  dose.  Instead  of  MMRV,  some  children  might  receive  separate
vaccines for MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) and varicella. Getting vaccinated after
you are exposed to someone with chickenpox can: A healthcare provider can prescribe
a medicine to make chickenpox less severe if you: Chickenpox is usually mild. However,
it can be serious during pregnancy, in infants under 12 months old, adolescents, adults,
and people with weakened immune systems. Some people get so sick that they need to
be  hospitalized.  It  doesn’t  happen  often,  but  people  can  die  from  chickenpox.  Most
people who are vaccinated with 2 doses of chickenpox vaccine will be protected for life.
Chickenpox is a mild disease for many children, but not for all. There's no way to know
who  will  have  a  serious  case.  With  vaccination,  your  children  get  immunity  from
chickenpox  without  the  risk  of  serious  complications  caused  by  the  disease  itself.
Everyone should get 2 doses of chickenpox vaccine if they have never had chickenpox
or  were  never  vaccinated.   Chickenpox  vaccination  is  especially  important  for:  Some
people should not get chickenpox vaccine, or they should wait.  People should check
with your healthcare provider if they:
 The  chickenpox  vaccine  is  safe,  and  it  is  effective  at  protecting  against  chickenpox.
Vaccines, like a medicine, can have side effects. These are usually mild and go away on
their own.  Two doses of the vaccine are about 90% effective at preventing chickenpox.
When  you  get  vaccinated,  you  protect  yourself  and  others  in  your  community,
especially  people  who  cannot  get  vaccinated.  Since  the  chickenpox  vaccination
program began in the United States, there has been over 97% decrease in chickenpox
cases. Hospitalizations and deaths have become rare. Most people don't have any side
effects  from  the  vaccine.  The  side  effects  that  do  occur  are  usually  mild,  and  may
include:  Your  or  your  child’s  doctor’s  office  is  usually  the  best  place  to  receive
recommended  vaccines.  Vaccines  may  also  be  available  at  pharmacies,  workplaces,
community health clinics, health departments, schools, or religious centers.  There are
a few ways to cover the cost of vaccines: Most health insurance plans cover the cost of
vaccines. However, you may want to check with your insurance provider before going
to a healthcare provider. Check for cost information and for a list of in-network vaccine
providers. Your children may be able to get no-cost vaccines through the Vaccines for
Children (VFC) Program. This program helps families of eligible children who may not be
able  to  afford  or  have  access  to  vaccines.  All  50  states  and  DC  have  state  laws  that
require  children  entering  childcare  or  students  starting  schools  to  have  certain
vaccinations. There is no federal law that requires this. The ACIP recommends that all
states require these groups to be up to date on chickenpox vaccine. Students in school
settings have a higher likelihood of spreading chickenpox because they are constantly
in  close  contact  with  each  other.  Chickenpox  vaccine  prevents  outbreaks  in  these
setting,  which  means:  Chickenpox  is  a  highly  contagious  disease  caused  by  the
varicella-zoster  virus  (VZV).  Protect  your  child  from  severe  symptoms  with  the
chickenpox vaccine. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/vaccines/index.html
