A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Parasitic infection or infestation can occur
in children of all ages. Parasitic infection or infestation can occur in children of all ages.
Infants,  toddlers,  and  very  young  children  in  day  care  settings  are  at  risk  for  the
parasitic  disease  called  giardiasis  that  causes  diarrhea  and  is  spread  through
contaminated feces. Pinworm infection (enterobiasis) also occurs among preschool and
young  school-age  children.  Both  preschool  and  school-age  children  can  become
infested  with  head  lice  (pediculosis)  or  scabies,  both  of  which  are  spread  by  close
person-to-person contact as is common during childhood play. Children of all ages can
develop  parasitic  diseases  such  as  giardiasis  and  cryptosporidiosis  from  swallowing
contaminated  water  during  swimming,  playing,  and  other  activities  in  contaminated
recreational water (e.g. pools, fountains, lakes, rivers and streams, etc.). Pets and other
animals can be a potential source of parasites that can affect children. Toxoplasmosis is
spread  by  ingesting  soil  or  litter-box  contents  with  infectious  cat  feces.  Children  can
also be born with this infection if their mother was infected during pregnancy. Several
parasitic  diseases  occur  occasionally  in  the  United  States  and  more  frequently  in
developing  countries,  but  their  prevalence  has  not  been  well  studied.  They  include
strongyloidiasis,  caused  by  a  worm  infection  that  is  of  particular  danger  for  children
with an impaired immune system. It is acquired when larvae (immature worms) in soil
contaminated with infected human feces come into contact with and penetrate the skin.
They also include visceral toxocariasis, spread when children ingest soil contaminated
with  dog  or  cat  feces  containing  the  eggs  of  cat  or  dog  roundworms,  and  cutaneous
larva migrans, transmitted when children walk barefoot on soil contaminated with cat or
dog hookworm larvae that penetrate their skin. Other parasitic diseases are rare among
children  in  the  United  States,  but  are  widespread  and  account  for  a  major  disease
burden among children in developing countries. The most important of these is malaria.
Children  in  malaria-endemic  countries  are  at  high  risk  of  the  ill  effects  of  malaria
infection.  The  majority  of  the  world's  malaria  deaths  are  in  African  children  under  5
years  of  age.  Children  in  the  United  States  are  also  at  high  risk  for  malaria  infection
when  traveling  to  a  malaria-endemic  country.  Children  should  be  sure  to  take
antimalarial  drugs  before,  during,  and  after  the  trip,  use  repellant,  sleep  under  an
insecticide-treated bed net or in an air-conditioned room, and wear protective clothing.
Soil-transmitted  helminth  (STH)  diseases  ("helminth"  means  parasitic  worm)  are  of
major  importance  in  developing  countries.  They  are  caused  by  infection  with
roundworm,  hookworm  or  whipworm,  and  can  include  diarrhea,  abdominal  pain,
intestinal  obstruction,  anemia,  and  retarded  growth  and  cognitive  development.
Children  become  infected  by  ingesting  roundworm  and  whipworm  eggs  that  have
matured in soil contaminated by human feces, or by walking barefoot in contaminated
soil where human hookworm eggs have hatched, producing larvae that penetrate the
skin.  Schistosomiasis,  another  major  parasitic  disease  among  children  in  some
developing countries, can also cause impaired growth and development and can lead to
severe health problems later in life. It is caused by a helminth that spends part of its life
cycle  in  certain  types  of  snail  and  penetrates  the  skin  of  people  when  they  stand  or
swim  in  water  where  the  snails  live.  The  helminth  causing  onchocerciasis  ("river
blindness")  is  transmitted  by  the  bite  of  a  type  of  blackfly  that  breeds  near  flowing
water.  It  can  cause  itching  and  impaired  vision  in  children,  and  lead  to  blindness  in
adulthood. Children are infected with the helminth causing lymphatic filariasis though
mosquito bites. Damage to the lymphatic system in children is mostly asymptomatic,
but  can  become  symptomatic  by  puberty  and  lead  to  swollen  arms  and  legs  and  an
enlarged, fluid-filled scrotum in adulthood. The above diseases (STHs, onchocerciasis,
schistosomiasis,  and  lymphatic  filariasis)  are  considered  Neglected  Tropical  Diseases
(NTDs)  because  they  disproportionately  affect  impoverished  people.  More  on:
Neglected  Tropical  Diseases  One  of  the  most  important  ways  to  help  prevent  these
parasitic diseases is to teach children the importance of washing hands correctly with
soap and running warm water, particularly after using the toilet and before eating. In
many  developing  countries,  it  is  also  important  to  ensure  feces  are  disposed  of
properly,  to  avoid  walking  barefoot  outdoors,  to  sleep  under  an  insecticide-treated
bednet,  and  to  avoid  exposure  to  water  that  may  be  infected  with  the  parasite  that
causes  schistosomiasis.  Periodic  mass  drug  administrations  for  soil-transmitted
helminth  infections,  schistosomiasis,  onchocerciasis,  and  lymphatic  filariasis  can  also
greatly  reduce  these  infection  and  the  diseases  they  cause  and  can  even  lead  to
elimination of onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis. In mass drug administrations, all
members of selected age groups at risk are treated. A parasite is an organism that lives
on or in a host organism and gets its food from or at the expense of its host. Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/children/index.html
