A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Best practices for cleaning supplies and equipment in global healthcare settings.  The
selection  and  appropriate  use  of  supplies  and  equipment  is  critical  for  effective
environmental  cleaning.  This  chapter  provides  overall  best  practices  for  selection,
preparation,  and  care  of  environmental  cleaning  supplies  and  cleaning  equipment,
including:  These  are  the  best  practices  for  environmental  cleaning  products  (e.g.,
detergents,  disinfectants):  Cleaning  products  include  liquid  soap,  enzymatic  cleaners,
and  detergents.  They  remove  organic  material  (e.g.,  dirt,  body  fluids)  and  suspend
grease  or  oil.  This  is  done  by  combining  the  cleaning  product  with  water  and  using
mechanical  action  (i.e.,  scrubbing  and  friction).  For  most  environmental  cleaning
procedures, select neutral detergents (pH between 6 and 8) that are easily soluble (in
warm and cold water). There are also specialized cleaning products, which may provide
advantages  for  specific  areas  or  materials  within  the  healthcare  facility  (e.g.,
bathroom/toilet cleaners, floor polishers, glass cleaners). However, consider specialized
products  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  weighing  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  (e.g.,
additional cost) and ability of the facility to ensure the correct storage, preparation, and
use.  Disinfectants  are  only  for  disinfecting  after  cleaning  and  are  not  substitutes  for
cleaning,  unless  they  are  a  combined  detergent-disinfectant  product.  See  3.1.3.
Combined  detergent-disinfectants.  Before  disinfecting,  use  a  cleaning  product  to
remove  all  organic  material  and  soil.  Low-level  disinfection  is  generally  adequate  for
environmental
 cleaning
 procedures,
 but
 there
 are
 specific
 cases
 where
intermediate-level  disinfection  with  sporicidal  properties  (e.g.,  C.  difficile)  is  required.
See
 4.6.8
 Transmission-based
 precaution/Isolation
 wards.
 Common
 low-
 and
intermediate-level  disinfectants  that  can  be  used  for  environmental  surfaces  in
healthcare  settings  include:  Table  4  (below)  shows  the  main  advantages  and
disadvantages  of  each  of  these  disinfectants.  In  practice,  the  advantages  and
disadvantages  of  each  product  will  have  to  be  weighed  with  other  factors,  including
availability  and  cost.  Do  not  use  these  products  for  disinfection  of  environmental
surfaces  and  noncritical  patient  care  equipment:  Quaternary  ammonium  compounds
such as:  Wide material compatibility: Detergent properties, with good cleaning ability
Low cost Narrow microbiocidal spectrum: Affected by environmental factors:  Alcohols
(60-80%)  such  as:   Rapid  action  Nontoxic  Non-staining,  no  residue  Noncorrosive  Low
cost Good for disinfecting small equipment or devices that can be immersed Does not
remain  wet.  Affected  by  environmental  factors:  Material  compatibility:  Flammable   
Chlorine  releasing  agents  such  as:   Rapid  action  Nonflammable  Low  cost  Widely
available  Can  reduce  biofilms  High  toxicity:  Material  compatibility:  Leaves  residue,
requires  rinsing  or  neutralization.  Offensive  odors  Poor  stability:   Improved  hydrogen
peroxide  such  as:   Nontoxic  Detergent  properties,  with  good  cleaning  ability  Not
affected by environmental factors Safe for environment Can reduce biofilms High cost
Combined (one-step) detergent-disinfectant products can generally be used in place of
a two-step (separate detergent and disinfectant product) process when disinfection is
indicated  for  specific  environmental  cleaning  procedures.  See  4.  Environmental
Cleaning Procedures. Do not use a combined (one-step) detergent-disinfectant product
(instead  use  a  two-step  process)  when  performing  environmental  cleaning  for:  When
using a combined product for environmental cleaning, it is recommended to periodically
(i.e.,  on  a  scheduled  basis)  use  a  rinse  step  to  remove  residues  from  surfaces.
Additionally, care should be taken to ensure that the combined product stays wetted on
the surface for the required contact time (to complete the disinfection process). Consult
the product label to get the correct contact time. Environmental cleaning products are
often  sold  as  concentrated  formulas  that  are  diluted  (i.e.,  combined  with  water)  to
make a solution. If feasible, it is highly recommended to: Solutions are generally batch
prepared in large containers, which are then transferred to smaller, portable containers
(e.g., bottles, buckets) for daily cleaning procedures. See 3.3 Supplies and equipment
for  environmental  cleaning.  Solutions  can  also  be  prepared  directly  into  buckets  for
environmental cleaning of floors if a standard-sized bucket is available. All containers
used for storing solutions of environmental cleaning products should: Do not use these
cleaning  supplies  and  equipment  for  disinfection  of  environmental  surfaces  and
noncritical patient care equipment: In general, all the essential environmental cleaning
supplies and equipment are reusable, but facilities can also choose to use disposable
supplies  (e.g.,  cloths)  for  certain  cleaning  tasks  or  where  resources  allow.  Cleaning
equipment should be: Consider purchasing supplemental supplies and equipment such
as toilet brushes or abrasive pads for cleaning certain surfaces or areas. Some facilities
might  also  have  access  to  more  sophisticated  equipment  such  as  floor  scrubbers  or
vacuum  cleaners  with  high-efficiency  particulate  air  (HEPA)  filters.  If  the  use  of  HEPA
filters  is  part  of  the  facility  policy,  provide  an  SOP  on  its  cleaning  and  maintenance.
Portable containers for environmental cleaning products (or solutions) should be clean,
dry, appropriately-sized, labelled, and dated. Surface cleaning cloths should be cotton
or  microfiber  (disposable  wipes  can  be  used  if  resources  allow).  Have  a  supply  of
different colored cloths to allow color-coding: for example, one color for cleaning and a
second color for disinfecting. Color-coding also prevents cross-contamination between
areas, like from toilets to patient areas, or isolation areas to general patient areas. For
example, red cloths could be used specifically for toilet areas, blue for general patient
areas,  and  yellow  for  isolation  areas.  Mop  heads  or  floor  cloths  should  be  cotton  or
microfiber. Microfiber cloths are often preferred over cotton for both cleaning cloths and
mop  heads  because  microfiber  absorb  more  dirt  and  microorganisms  than  cotton.
However,  microfiber  cloths  can  be  damaged  by  high  pH  and  therefore  are  not
compatible with all disinfectant products (especially chlorine-based). They need to be
laundered  separately  from  cotton  cloths/linens,  which  could  be  expensive.  Prepared
(ready-to-use)  wipes  that  are  saturated  with  an  appropriate  disinfectant  or
detergent-disinfectant  product  can  be  used  as  an  alternative  to  cotton  or  microfiber
cleaning cloths. Take care to evaluate the appropriateness of the product, considering
the  recommended  properties.  It  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  they  are  stored
appropriately with the lid closed so the wipes remain wet. Discard wipes if they are no
longer saturated. Follow manufacturer's instructions for storing wipes and reprocessing
containers,  as  well  as  instructions  for  use  (e.g.,  recommended  contact  times).  Daily
preparation  of  supplies  and  equipment  for  a  given  cleaning  staff  member  or  location
will depend on local factors, including the size of patient care areas and number and
type  of  patient  zones  to  be  cleaned.  Portable  containers  of  environmental  cleaning
products (or solutions) and cleaning cloths can be carried directly on the cleaning cart
or on a caddie kit, if a full cleaning cart is not available. The cart should have enough
cleaning cloths to complete the required cleaning session, with a clean cloth for each
patient  zone  to  prevent  cross-contamination.  Keep  clean  and  soiled  cloths  separate.
Place  clean  clothes  in  one  container  or  section  of  the  caddie  and  soiled  cloths  in
another. It is best practice to use a two- or three-bucket system for mopping. This can
be facilitated on the cleaning cart or on a separate trolley if a full cleaning cart is not
available. The rinse water bucket allows the mop to be rinsed and wrung out before it is
re-dipped  into  the  prepared  solution.  This  extends  the  life  of  the  solution  (i.e.,  fewer
changes are required), which saves both time and material costs. Appropriate PPE for
the cleaning staff for all environmental cleaning procedures should always be available
and  used  appropriately  to  reduce  risk  to  both  patients  and  staff.  PPE  is  required  to
prevent:  The  PPE  required  should  be  visibly  marked  or  verbally  communicated  to
cleaning  staff  by  IPC  staff  by  cleaning  supervisors  before  starting  every  cleaning
session.  IPC staff should  either visibly  mark or verbally  communicate required  PPE  to
staff
 or
 cleaning
 supervisors
 before
 starting
 every
 cleaning
 session.
 Use
chemical-resistant  gloves  (e.g.,  nitrile,  latex)  for  preparation  of  cleaning  chemicals.
Reusable rubber gloves Face mask with either goggles or face shield (if splash risk or
large  spill)  Reusable  rubber  gloves  Face  mask  with  either  goggles  or  face  shield  (if
splash  risk  or  large  spill)  Reusable  rubber  gloves  Reusable  rubber  gloves  If  SDS  not
available,  then:  Environmental  cleaning  supplies  and  equipment  quickly  become
contaminated during their use. Regularly reprocess all reusable items (i.e., thoroughly
clean,  disinfect,  and  dry).  If  manufacturer's  instructions  are  not  available,  use  this
general process to manually reprocess reusable supplies, equipment, and PPE: Do not
use chlorine-based disinfectants to disinfect microfiber cloths. Use laundry services with
hot water (70–80°C x 10 min) [158–176°F] to reprocess cloths and mop heads if they
are available. Similarly, a commercial dryer can be used for these items if available (if
not, these items are reprocessed as above). Always launder mop heads and cleaning
cloths  separately  from  other  soiled  hospital  textiles.  All  reusable  supplies  and
equipment should be well maintained, clean, and in good repair. Regularly inspect and
replace  or  repair  all  reusable  equipment  when  needed.  Develop  a  facility  monitoring
and  maintenance  schedule  that  clearly  documents  reusable  supplies  and  equipment,
frequency  of  inspection,  and  responsible  staff.  Certain  equipment,  such  as  floor
polishers,  might  require  maintenance  checks  by  qualified  people  according  to  the
manufacturer's instructions. Keep a service record and make it available for inspection
by  the  cleaning  program  manager  and  the  IPC  Team.  Designate  at  least  one
environmental  cleaning  services  area  within  the  facility  for  preparation,  storage,  and
reprocessing of reusable cleaning equipment and supplies. This area should not be used
for any other purposes. For multistory facilities, it is best practice to have one of these
areas on each floor. The designated environmental cleaning services area should: HAIs
are  associated  with  medical  devices,  complications  following  surgery,  transmission
between  patients  and  healthcare  workers,  antibiotic  overuse,  and  more.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/hcp/cleaning-global/supplies-and-equipment.html
