Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  To  prevent  the  spread  to  others  when  staying  at  home
(isolating), people with mpox should follow the guidance in this section until your mpox
rash has healed and a new layer of skin has formed. Isolating Alone at Home During
isolation  at home,  people with  mpox  should  clean  and  disinfect their living  spaces to
minimize the risk of infection to others. If you have rash on your hands, wear gloves
when cleaning and disinfecting items. Throw away the gloves after use and wash hands
with soap and water. Isolating with Others at Home The isolation and infection control
guidance  should  be  followed  if  the  person  with  mpox  shares  living  space  with  others
during  isolation.  Ways  to  prevent  the  spread  to  others  include:  People  who  have
recovered from mpox and can end their isolation should clean and disinfect their entire
living space, including frequently touched surfaces, shared items or items that may be
used by others in the home, and any objects or fabrics that were used during isolation.
Protect yourself by following these steps for safe and effective cleaning practices and
disinfectant  use:  Do  not  dry  dust  or  sweep,  which  may  spread  dust  particles  that
contain virus into the air. Wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds after
cleaning.  Be  sure  to  wash  your  hands  immediately  after  removing  gloves.  Clean  and
disinfect  in  the  following  order  to  minimize  spreading  the  virus  in  the  household:  For
more  safety  considerations  visit:  When  and  How  to  Clean  and  Disinfect  Your  Home.
Options when in-home laundering is not available While using laundry services outside
of the home by a person isolating for mpox is not ideal, in-home laundry may not be
available  for  all  people.  If  possible,  the  person  with  mpox  should  wait  until  isolation
ends and then wash and dry their clothes. If it is necessary to clean laundry outside of
the  home  before  isolation  ends,  the  following  may  be  considered:  The  person  with
mpox  should  use  a  dedicated,  lined  trash  can  in  the  room  where  they  are  isolating.
Collect any soiled waste, such as bandages, paper towels, food packaging, and other
general  trash  items  and  make  sure  it’s  put  in  a  sealed  bag.  If  employers,
administrators,  or  operators  are  notified  that  a  person  with  suspected  or  confirmed
mpox was in your facility, clean and disinfect the space. Focus on items and surfaces
that were in direct contact with the skin of the person with mpox. If you use contract
cleaning  services  or  commercial  laundry  facilities,  talk  with  the  contractor  about  the
risks  so  that  cleaning  staff  can  take  the  proper  precautions.  Restaurants,  bars,  and
other  establishments  with  special  cleaning  and  sanitation  requirements  should  also
follow  rules  according  to  state  and  local  requirements.  Workers  cleaning  and
disinfecting areas or performing laundry for a person with suspected or confirmed mpox
should  wear  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE).  PPE  can  help  protect  workers  from
exposure  to  mpox  virus  and  harmful  levels  of  chemicals  used  for  cleaning  and
disinfection.  Provide  the  recommended  PPE  for  protection  from  mpox  virus,  which
includes Do not dry dust or sweep, which may spread dust particles that contain virus
into the air. Workers should wash their hands with soap and water for 20 seconds after
cleaning. Be sure to wash hands immediately after removing gloves. Treat or get rid of
waste  in  accordance  with  applicable  waste  management  laws.  For  more  information,
the Department of Transportation has mpox-specific information in Appendix F-2 of the
federal interagency guidance for managing solid waste contaminated with a Category A
infectious substance. Develop policies for worker protection and train all cleaning staff
on site before providing cleaning tasks. Employers must follow applicable Occupational
Safety and Health Administration standards, including:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/if-sick/cleaning-disinfecting.html
