Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (42 USC 263a)
Source:  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO)  Federal  Digital  System.  The  Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 statute is an amendment to the Public
Health Services Act in which Congress revised the federal program for certification and
oversight of clinical laboratory testing. Two subsequent amendments were made after
1988. The law continues to be cited as CLIA ’88 as named in legislation. Standards and
Certification: Laboratory Requirements (42 CFR 493)
Source:  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO)  Federal  Digital  System.  The  section  of  the
federal  regulations  titled  “Standards  and  Certification:  Laboratory  Requirements”  is
issued  by  the  Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  to  enact  the  CLIA  law
passed by Congress (see below). In general terms, the CLIA regulations establish quality
standards for laboratory testing performed on specimens from humans, such as blood,
body fluid and tissue, for the purpose of diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease,
or assessment of health.  The final CLIA regulations were published in 1992, phased in
through 1994, and amended in 1993, 1995, and 2003.  Visit the CLIA Documents page
to  search  and  view  the  Federal  Register  Notices  and  former  editions  of  the  Code  of
Federal  Regulations  (published  annually  in  October).”  CMS  Survey  Procedures  and
Interpretive Guidelines for Laboratories and Laboratory Services (Appendix C)
The  interpretive  guidelines  to  the  CLIA  regulations  are  published  in  the  CMS  State
Operations  Manual  (SOM).  The  SOM  is  used  by  state  offices  to  administer  various
federal  programs,  such  as  clinical  laboratory  certification  under  the  CLIA  regulations,
and enforced by CMS. It is also a source of guidance to laboratories for interpreting the
CLIA regulations. 1 See 1997 changes to CLIA ’88
2 See 2012 changes to CLIA ’88  
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/clia/law-regulations.html
