A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 CDC considers methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) a "serious threat."1
In  healthcare  facilities,  such  as  hospitals  or  nursing  homes,  MRSA  can  cause  severe
problems  including:   CDC  encourages  clinicians  to  consider  MRSA  in  the  diagnosis  of
skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs) compatible with S. aureus infections, especially
those  that  are  purulent  (e.g.,  fluctuant  or  palpable  fluid-filled  cavity,  yellow  or  white
center, central point or "head," draining pus, or possible to aspirate pus with needle or
syringe). People are at higher risk for MRSA infection when they: In healthcare settings,
MRSA  usually  spreads  through  direct  contact  with  an  infected  wound  or  from
contaminated  hands.  People  who  carry  MRSA  but  do  not  have  signs  of  infection  (i.e.,
people who are colonized) can spread the bacteria to others. Studies show that about
one  in  three  people  (33%)  carry  S.  aureus  bacteria  in  their  nose  (the  main  site  of
colonization),  usually  without  any  illness.  About  two  in  every  100  people  (2%)  carry
MRSA, although this may be higher in certain populations. Although many people carry
MRSA  bacteria  in  their  nose,  most  do  not  develop  serious  MRSA  infections.   Skin
infections caused by MRSA are common in the general community. Most S. aureus skin
infections, including MRSA, appear as a bump or infected area on the skin that might
be:  A  patient  presenting  with  a  "spider  bite"  should  raise  suspicion  of  an  S.  aureus
infection,  including  MRSA.  SSTIs,  carbuncles  and  abscesses  are  the  most  reported
clinical  manifestations.  The  role  of  MRSA  in  cellulitis  without  abscess  or  purulent
drainage is less clear since cultures are rarely obtained. Numerous studies show that
MRSA prevention efforts can reduce infections.   Successful MRSA prevention requires
action at the healthcare facility level, among both healthcare providers and leadership.
See  CDC's  strategies  to  prevent  S.  aureus  in  acute  care  facilities  and  Society  for
Healthcare  Epidemiology  of  America  (SHEA)/Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America
(IDSA)/Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control  and  Epidemiology  (APIC)
Practice Recommendation. Providers can test some patients to see if they carry MRSA
in  their  nose  or  on  their  skin.  This  test  involves  rubbing  a  cotton-tipped  swab  in  the
patient's  nostrils  or  on  the  skin.    The  only  way  to  know  if  MRSA  is  the  cause  of  an
infection is to test for the bacteria in a laboratory. The main treatment for MRSA skin
infections is incisions and drainage. Antibiotics may also be required. Providers can also
apply  topical  medicines  and  antiseptics  to  decrease  the  amount  of  S.  aureus  on  a
person's  body.  Culture  and  susceptibility  testing  should  guide  therapy  and  antibiotic
decisions  for  patients  with  severe  infections  that  do  not  respond  to  initial  treatment
attempts. MRSA skin infections can develop into more serious infections. It is important
to  discuss  a  follow-up  plan  with  your  patients  in  case  they  develop  symptoms,  or  if
symptoms do not improve within 48 hours. MRSA is a germ that is resistant to some
antibiotics. It can spread in hospitals, other healthcare facilities, and in the community.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/hcp/clinical-overview/index.html
