Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Long COVID, also known as “Post-COVID Conditions (PCC)”, is
an infection-associated chronic condition that can occur after SARS-CoV-2 infection, the
virus  that  causes  COVID-19,  and  is  present  for  at  least  3  months  as  a  continuous,
relapsing  and  remitting,  or  progressive  disease  state  that  affects  one  or  more  organ
systems.  The  definition  for  Long  COVID  will  continue  to  be  evaluated  as  data  are
collected,  analyzed,  and  reported  and  our  understanding  of  the  chronic  condition
improves.  Most  patients  appear  to  recover  from  their  initial  acute  COVID-19  illness
within  4  weeks,  even  though  many  patients  continue  to  recover  between  4  and  12
weeks.  Long  COVID  is  associated  with:  It  can  be  difficult  to  distinguish  symptoms
caused by Long COVID from symptoms that occur for alternative reasons. Long COVID
is  heterogeneous  and  may  be  attributed  to  different  underlying  pathophysiologic
processes.  Possible  etiologies  include:  Researchers  are  actively  studying  the
prevalence,  mechanism,  duration,  and  severity  of  symptoms  following  acute
SARS-CoV-2  infection,  as  well  as  risk  factors  associated  with  developing  Long  COVID.
Research  shows  certain  groups  of  people  are  more  likely  to  develop  Long  COVID,
including:  A  wide  range  of  symptoms  and  clinical  findings  can  occur  in  people  with
varying degrees of illness from acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. These effects can overlap
with multiorgan complications, or with effects of treatment or hospitalization and can
persist after the acute COVID-19 illness has resolved. While more than 200 Long COVID
symptoms
 have
 been
 identified,
 commonly
 reported
 symptoms
 include:
*Post-exertional  malaise  (PEM)  is  the  worsening  of  symptoms  following  even  minor
physical  or  mental  exertion,  with  symptoms  typically  worsening  12  to  48  hours  after
activity and lasting for days or even weeks. Some patients may feel embarrassed about
their symptoms, have experienced stigma or experienced difficulty in being believed. It
is important for healthcare providers to: Different onset patterns for Long COVID have
been identified, including symptoms and conditions that can: Documenting SARS-CoV-2
infection  and  Long  COVID,  also  referred  to  as  “Post-COVID  Conditions,”  is  critical  for
accurate  public  health  surveillance.  Post-COVID  Condition  was  incorporated  into  the
International  Classification  of  Diseases,  ICD-10-CM  as  of  October  1,  2021.  U09.9  Post
COVID-19 Condition, unspecified– to establish a link with COVID-19; not to be used in
cases  that  still  are  presenting  with  acute  COVID-19.  The  code  should  be  used  for
patients  with  a  history  of  probable  or  confirmed  SARS-CoV-2  infection  and  who  are
identified  with  a  Post-COVID  Condition.  Keep  reading:  Additional  assign  codes  for
specific  conditions  and  symptoms  can  be  found  at  2022  ICD-10-CM  Guidelines.
Preventing  severe  outcomes  of  COVID-19  illness  reduces  people’s  risk  of  developing
Long COVID. These severe outcomes include hospitalization, admission to the intensive
care  unit,  or  intubation.  Healthcare  providers  can  advise  their  patients  on  protecting
themselves  against  severe  COVID-19  by:  Research  shows  COVID-19  vaccination  is  an
effective tool in helping to prevent Long COVID. Healthcare providers should encourage
their  patients  to  get  an  updated  COVID-19  vaccine.  Clinicians  may  clinically  evaluate
and  diagnose  Long  COVID  based  on  patient  history  and  findings  from  a  physical
examination,  while  others  might  require  directed  diagnostic  testing.  Currently,  no
laboratory test can be used to definitively diagnose Long COVID or to distinguish Long
COVID  from  conditions  with  different  etiologies.  A  positive  SARS-CoV-2  viral  test  or
serologic (antibody) test are not required to establish a diagnosis of Long COVID, but
can help assess for current or previous infection. For most patients, the goal of medical
management  of  Long  COVID  is  to  optimize  function  and  quality  of  life  through
established symptom management approaches, which may include: Patients with Long
COVID  may  experience  some  of  the  symptoms  that  occur  in  other  disorders.  These
patients  may  benefit  from  symptom  management  approaches  used  to  manage
symptoms  of:  Treatment  of  Long  COVID  should  be  tailored  to  a  patient’s  specific
symptoms  or  conditions,  including  FDA-approved  or  over-the-counter  medications.
Holistic  support  for  the  patient  throughout  their  illness  can  also  be  beneficial.
Healthcare providers play a significant role in supporting their patients and can further
help  patients  with  Long  COVID  by:  General  Diagnosis  and  management  Symptom
inventory  and  condition  assessment   Echo  Program  Federal  reports  Support  for
Caregivers To receive email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-care/post-covid-conditions.html
