A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 The TB skin test is a test used to determine if a person is infected with TB bacteria. In
this test, a standardized solution made with purified protein derivative (PPD), which is
derived  from  tuberculin,  is  injected  under  the  skin.   Typically,  PPD  produces  a  T-cell
mediated delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction if the person has been infected with TB
bacteria. In most people who have TB infection, the immune system will recognize the
PPD because it is derived from proteins that are excreted by M. tuberculosis growing in
specialized  media  under  standardized  conditions.  PPD  is  diluted  to  standard
concentration  and  potency  in  FDA-approved  testing  solutions.  It  takes  2  to  8  weeks
after initial infection with TB bacteria for the immune system to be able to react to PPD
and  for  the  infection  to  be  detected  by  the  TB  skin  test.  The  TB  skin  test  should  be
placed (administered) and read by a designated, trained health care provider. Consult
with  your  state  and  local  public  health  authorities  to  determine  who  is  authorized  to
place and read TB skin tests in your state. Training is essential for health care providers
to gain proficiency in the administration and interpretation of the TB skin test.  CDC has
free training materials on reading and administering the TB skin test, including a fact
sheet, wall chart, and video. Materials are available for download or to order (within the
United States).  CDC has resources to help health care providers talk to patients about
TB testing and treatment. CDC guidelines recommend using TB blood tests to test for
TB  infection  in  most  cases.  However,  TB  skin  tests  are  an  acceptable  alternative  in
situations where a TB blood test is not available, is too costly, or is too burdensome.
Most people can receive a TB skin test. TB skin tests are contraindicated only for people
who  have  had  a  severe  reaction  (e.g.  necrosis,  blistering,  anaphylactic  shock,  or
ulcerations  to  a  previous  TB  skin  test).  TB  skin  tests  are  not  contraindicated  for  any
other persons, including infants, children, pregnant people, or people with HIV. TB skin
tests should not be performed on people who have written documentation of a previous
positive TB test result (TB blood test or TB skin test) or treatment for TB disease. Most
people who have a positive TB test result will continue to have a positive test result.
Additional TB skin tests will probably not contribute to medical care, regardless of the
result.  Health  care  providers  should  take  into  account  the  following  factors  when
considering the TB skin test for a patient: Current CDC guidelines recommend the TB
skin test as the method of testing for children younger than 5 years of age, while noting
that some experts use TB blood tests in younger children. Health care providers may
choose to consult the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidance on the use of TB
blood  tests  in  children.  The  BCG  vaccine  may  cause  a  false-positive  TB  skin  test
reaction. There is no reliable way to distinguish a positive TB skin test reaction caused
by BCG vaccination from a reaction caused by true TB infection.  When using the TB
skin  test,  people  who  have  been  vaccinated  with  BCG  should  always  be  further
evaluated for latent TB infection or TB disease as if they were not vaccinated with BCG.
TB  skin  test  reactivity  caused  by  BCG  vaccine  generally  wanes  with  the  passage  of
time, but periodic skin testing may prolong (boost) reactivity in vaccinated people. TB
skin test reactions should be interpreted based on risk stratification regardless of BCG
vaccination history. Health care providers treating children who have been vaccinated
with BCG should also know that tuberculin reactivity is likely during the first two years
after  BCG  administration  to  the  newborn.   Multiple  BCG  doses  (as  practiced  in  some
countries)  increases  a  person's  sensitivity  to  the  TB  skin  test  and  the  duration  of
positive TB skin test results after BCG administration.   BCG vaccination does not induce
positive results when TB blood tests are used. TB blood tests are the preferred test for
people who have received the BCG vaccine, including children. A boosted reaction can
occur in previously infected, older adults whose sensitivity to tuberculin has decreased
over time. It also can occur in persons of any age who have been vaccinated with BCG
or infected with mycobacteria besides M. tuberculosis complex. When given a TB skin
test  years  after  infection,  these  persons  may  have  little  or  no  reaction,  giving  a
negative skin test result. However, the TB skin test may stimulate the immune system,
causing a boosted reaction with a positive result after subsequent tests. The TB blood
test  does  not  boost  subsequent  test  results.  Two-step  testing  is  a  strategy  used  to
reduce  the  likelihood  that  a  boosted  reaction  will  be  misinterpreted  as  a  recent
infection if the person has to be tested again. Two-step testing should be used for the
initial (baseline) skin testing of persons who will be retested periodically.  If the TB skin
test  is  used  for  baseline  testing  of  U.S.  health  care  personnel,  use  two-step  testing.
Vaccination  with  live  viruses,  including  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  oral  polio,  varicella,
and  yellow  fever  may  interfere  with  TB  skin  test  reactions.  For  persons  scheduled  to
receive  a  TB  skin  test,  testing  should  be  done:   Vaccination  with  inactivated  viruses
doesn't  interfere  with  TB  skin  test  reactions.  COVID-19  vaccination  should  not  be
delayed because of testing for TB infection. TB skin tests are not expected to affect the
safety or the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines. Testing for TB infection with a TB skin
test can be done before, during, or after a COVID-19 vaccination visit.  The TB skin test
is performed by injecting 0.1 ml of tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) into the
inner surface of the forearm. The injection should be made with a disposable 27-gauge
tuberculin  syringe,  with  the  needle  bevel  facing  upward.   The  TB  skin  test  is  an
intradermal  injection.  When  placed  correctly,  the  injection  should  produce  a  pale
elevation of the skin (a wheal) 6 to 10 mm in diameter. If an incorrect dose (more or
less than 0.1 ml) of PPD tuberculin solution is administered during a TB skin test, or if
the  injection  is  too  deep  and  does  not  form  a  wheal,  the  person  administering  the
tuberculin should report the incident following the established policies and procedures
of the facility or institution in which the incorrect dosage occurred. An incorrect dose or
administration  of  tuberculin  invalidates  the  TB  skin  test.  The  test  must  be  repeated,
with the new site being at least 2 inches from the previous site. The skin test reaction
should be read between 48 and 72 hours after administration by a health care worker
trained to read TB skin results. If a patient has symptoms of TB disease, health care
providers should not wait for TB skin test results before starting other diagnostic tests.
A patient who does not return within 72 hours will need to be rescheduled for another
skin test. There is no risk associated with repeated TB skin test placements. There is no
contraindication  to  repeating  the  TB  skin  test  unless  a  previous  TB  skin  test  was
associated with a severe reaction. However, repeated skin test placements can cause
boosting.  The  reaction  should  be  measured  in  millimeters  of  the  induration  (firm
swelling).  The  reader  should  not  measure  erythema  (redness).  The  diameter  of  the
indurated area should be measured across the forearm (perpendicular to the long axis).
Skin  test  interpretation  depends  on  two  factors:  Some  persons  may  have  a  positive
result  from  a  TB  skin  test  even  though  they  are  not  infected  with  TB  bacteria.  The
causes of these false-positive results may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Some  persons  may  have  a  negative  result  from  a  TB  skin  test  even  though  they  are
infected with TB bacteria. The reasons for these false-negative results may include, but
are  not  limited  to,  the  following:   Many  life-threatening  illnesses  are  associated  with
false-negative  TB  skin  test  results,  such  as  protein-calorie  malnutrition,  advanced
cancer, and TB disease itself, notably miliary TB and TB meningitis. If a false-negative
TB  skin  test  result  is  possible  and  TB  is  a  concern  in  one  of  these  situations,  consult
with a TB expert. A person with a positive result from a TB skin test or symptoms of TB
disease  should  be  evaluated  for  TB  disease.  This  includes  performing:  If  latent  TB
infection  is  diagnosed,  short  and  convenient  treatment  regimens  are  available.  
Treatment for latent TB infection is 90% effective for preventing the development of TB
disease. It is important to note that a negative TB skin test results does not exclude the
diagnosis of TB disease, especially for patients with severe TB illness or infection with
HIV. All persons with clinically active or presumed TB disease should be reported to the
local or state health department. Latent TB infection is reportable in some states and
localities.  For  information  on  reporting  requirements  in  your  jurisdiction,  consult  your
state  TB  program.  Tuberculosis  is  caused  by  bacteria  called  Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. The bacteria usually attack the lungs but can attack any part of the body.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/tb/hcp/testing-diagnosis/tuberculin-skin-test.html
