A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 More  than  half  of  people  with  hepatitis  B  are  unaware  of  their  infection  status,  and
approximately 50%–70% of people with acute hepatitis B are asymptomatic1. Without
testing, people with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection can unknowingly transmit the virus
to others. Chronic HBV infection can lead to substantial morbidity and mortality but is
detectable  before  the  development  of  severe  liver  disease  using  reliable  and
inexpensive  screening  tests.  Routine  monitoring  and  treatment  for  chronic  HBV
infection  can  reduce  morbidity  and  mortality,  supporting  the  importance  of  early
detection  of  HBV  infection.   In  addition,  although  not  quantifiable,  management  of
chronic infection through prevention efforts can prevent further transmission to others. 
 Read more on the rationale for the new recommendations.  Screening generally refers
to  serologic  testing  of  asymptomatic  people  not  known  to  be  at  increased  risk  for
exposure to HBV.  Testing generally refers to serologic testing of people with symptoms
or  those  who  are  at  increased  risk  for  exposure  to  HBV.   Adults   CDC  recommends
screening all adults aged 18 and older for hepatitis B at least once in their lifetime using
a triple  panel  test.  To  ensure  increased  access  to  testing,  anyone  who  requests  HBV
testing should receive it regardless of disclosure of risk. Many people might be reluctant
to  disclose  stigmatizing  risks.   Infants   CDC  recommends  testing  all  infants  born  to
HBsAg-positive people for HBsAg and antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs)
seromarkers.   Pregnant  people   CDC  recommends  HBV  screening  for  HBsAg  for  all
pregnant people during each pregnancy, preferably in the first trimester, regardless of
vaccination status or history of testing. Pregnant people with a history of appropriately
timed triple panel screening without subsequent risk for exposure to HBV (no new HBV
exposures  since  triple  panel  screening)  only  need  HBsAg  screening.   People  at
increased risk  CDC recommends testing susceptible people periodically, regardless of
age, with ongoing risk for exposures while risk for exposures persists. This includes: 
Susceptible people include those who have never been infected with HBV and either did
not complete a hepatitis B vaccine (HepB) series per ACIP recommendations or who are
known  to  be  vaccine  nonresponders.   CDC  now*  recommends  use  of  the  triple  panel
test,  which  includes  testing  for:   Any  periodic  follow-up  testing  can  use  tests  as
appropriate based on the results of the triple panel.  *Prior guidance recommended a
single test of HBsAg. Different serologic markers or combinations of markers are used
to  identify  different  phases  of  HBV  infection.  They  determine  whether  a  patient  has
acute  or  chronic  HBV  infection,  is  immune  to  HBV  as  a  result  of  prior  infection  or
vaccination, or is susceptible to infection. Markers include:  The presence of the total
anti-HBc  antigen  is  needed  to  diagnose  a  patient  with  a  hepatitis  B  infection.  The
results  of  the  HBsAg,  anti-HBs,  and  IgM  anti-HBc  tests  indicate  a  patient’s  type  of
hepatitis  B  and  if  they  have  developed  immunity.  CDC  recommends  that  people  who
are  diagnosed  with  hepatitis  B  be  provided  with:   For  more  CDC  information  on
recommendations for testing, management, and treatment of hepatitis B, see Hepatitis
B  Clinical  Care  &  Treatment.   The  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System
(NNDSS)  lists  acute,  chronic,  and  perinatal  hepatitis  B  as  nationally  notifiable
conditions.  You should report cases of suspected health care-associated HBV infection
to  state  and  local  public  health  authorities  for  prompt  investigation  and  response.  
When you report a case, you will need an event code corresponding to the hepatitis B
condition.  You  can  reclassify  cases  if  needed,  as  long  as  the  changes  occur  before
surveillance data are finalized each year.  National event codes: In 2024, The Council of
State and Territorial Epidemiologists updated the surveillance case definitions for acute
and chronic hepatitis B (HBV). These definitions are used to determine how to classify
and  report  cases  to  the  CDC.  Surveillance  data  is  in  turn  used  to  monitor  trends  in
disease incidence, understand the burden of hepatitis B in the community, determine
risk  behaviors  or  exposures,  identify  outbreaks,  and  assess  opportunities  for
prevention. For the most current guidance, see: Viral Hepatitis Surveillance and Case
Management Guidance for State, Territorial, and Local Health Departments Learn more
about  hepatitis  B,  a  liver  disease  caused  by  the  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV).  Find  HBV
information  for  the  public  and  health  professionals.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis-b/hcp/diagnosis-testing/index.html
