A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Measles  is  an  acute  viral  respiratory  illness.  It  is  characterized  by:  The  rash  usually
appears about 14 days after a person is exposed. The rash spreads from the head to
the  trunk  to  the  lower  extremities.   Patients  are  considered  to  be  contagious  from  4
days before to 4 days after the rash appears. Sometimes immunocompromised patients
do not develop the rash. To receive continuing education (CE) for this course, Clinical
Overview of Measles: Diagnosis, Laboratory Testing, and Outbreak Response (Web on
Demand)  -  WB4728,  please  visit  CDC  TRAIN  and  search  for  the  course  in  the  Course
Catalog.  Then,  follow  the  steps  below.  Measles  is  caused  by  a  single-stranded,
enveloped  RNA  virus  with  1  serotype.  It  is  classified  as  a  member  of  the  genus
Morbillivirus  in  the  Paramyxoviridae  family.  Humans  are  the  only  natural  hosts  of
measles virus. Measles is one of the most contagious of all infectious diseases. Up to 9
out  of  10  susceptible  people  with  close  contact  to  a  measles  patient  will  develop
measles.  The virus is transmitted by: Measles virus can remain infectious in the air for
up to 2 hours after an infected person leaves an area. Prior to vaccine introduction: The
live measles vaccine was licensed in 1963. In the decade before, an average of 549,000
measles  cases  and  495  measles  deaths  were  reported  annually  in  the  United  States.
However, it is likely that 3 to 4 million people on average were infected with measles
annually;  most  cases  were  not  reported.  Of  the  reported  cases,  approximately:
Post-vaccine  era:  In  2000,  measles  was  declared  eliminated  from  the  United  States.
However,  cases  and  outbreaks  still  occur  every  year  in  the  United  States.  This  is
because measles is still commonly transmitted in other countries in Europe, the Middle
East,  Asia,  the  Americas,  and  Africa.   Since  2000,  the  annual  number  of  cases  has
ranged from a low of 37 in 2004; to a high of 1,282 in 2019. The majority of cases in the
United  States  have  been  among  people  who  are  not  vaccinated  against  measles.  
Measles can be prevented with measles-containing vaccine. Measles vaccine is usually
administered  as  the  combination  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  (MMR)  vaccine.  The
combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella  (MMRV)  vaccine  can  be  used  for
children aged 12 months through 12 years.  CDC recommends children get 2 doses of
MMR  vaccine.  Teens  and  adults  should  also  be  up  to  date  on  their  MMR  vaccination.
Almost everyone who does not respond to the measles component of the first dose of
MMR vaccine at age 12 months or older will respond to the second dose. Therefore, the
second  dose  of  MMR  is  administered  to  address  primary  vaccine  failure.1  While  the
most  important  measure  to  prevent  measles  transmission  in  all  settings  is  ensuring
community  immunization,  core  measles  prevention  in  healthcare  settings  requires  a
multi-faceted  approach.   Consider  measles  in  patients  presenting  with  febrile  rash
illness and clinically compatible measles symptoms, especially if they recently traveled
internationally;  or  were  exposed  to  a  person  with  febrile  rash  illness.  Healthcare
providers  are  required  to  report  suspected  measles  cases  to  their  local  health
department.  Laboratory confirmation is essential for all sporadic measles cases and all
outbreaks.  The  most  common  methods  for  confirming  measles  infection  are:   Obtain
both  a  serum  sample  and  a  throat  swab  (or  nasopharyngeal  swab)  from  patients
suspected to have measles at first contact with them. Urine samples may also contain
virus.  When  feasible  to  do  so,  collecting  both  respiratory  and  urine  samples  can
increase  the  likelihood  of  detecting  measles  virus.  Molecular  analysis  can  also  be
conducted to determine the genotype of the measles virus. Genotyping is used to map
the  transmission  pathways  of  measles  viruses.  The  genetic  data  can  help  to  link  or
unlink cases and can suggest a source for imported cases. Genotyping is the only way
to distinguish between wild-type measles virus infection and a rash caused by a recent
measles vaccination. There is no specific antiviral therapy for measles. Medical care is
supportive and to help relieve symptoms and address complications such as bacterial
infections. Severe measles cases among children, such as those who are hospitalized,
should  be  treated  with  vitamin  A.  Vitamin  A  should  be  administered  immediately  on
diagnosis and repeated the next day. The recommended age-specific daily doses are:
Infected  people  should  be  isolated  for  4  days  after  they  develop  a  rash;  airborne
precautions should be followed in healthcare settings. Because of the possibility (albeit
low)  of  MMR  vaccine  failure  in  healthcare  providers  exposed  to  infected  patients,
providers should observe airborne precautions in caring for patients with measles. The
preferred placement for patients who require airborne precautions is in a single-patient
airborne infection isolation room (AIIR). Regardless of presumptive immunity status, all
healthcare  staff  entering  the  room  should  use  respiratory  protection  consistent  with
airborne  infection  control  precautions.  This  includes  use  of  an  N95  respirator  or  a
respirator  with  similar  effectiveness  in  preventing  airborne  transmission.  Common
complications
 from
 measles
 include
 otitis
 media,
 bronchopneumonia,
laryngotracheobronchitis,  and  diarrhea.  Even  in  previously  healthy  children,  measles
can cause serious illness requiring hospitalization. People at high risk for complications
include: Measles cases occur as a result of importations by people who were infected
while in other countries; and from subsequent transmission that may occur from those
importations.  Measles  is  more  likely  to  spread  and  cause  outbreaks  in  communities
where groups of people are unvaccinated. Outbreaks in countries to which Americans
often travel can directly contribute to an increase in measles cases in the United States.
In recent years, measles importations have come from frequently visited countries and
countries  where  large  outbreaks  were  reported.  These  include  but  not  limited  to  the
Philippines,  Ukraine,  Israel,  Thailand,  Vietnam,  England,  France,  Germany,  and  India.
Measles is one of the most contagious diseases and can be dangerous in babies and
young  children.  The  best  protection  against  measles  is  the  MMR  vaccine.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/measles/hcp/clinical-overview/index.html
