A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 When a pregnant person has HBV infection, it can pose a serious risk to their infant at
birth. Infants with HBV infection have about a 90% chance of developing a chronic HBV
infection.  Testing pregnant people for hepatitis B and providing pregnant people and
infants with appropriate treatment and vaccination is the best way to prevent perinatal
HBV infection.  The most common cause of perinatal HBV infection is when a pregnant
person  with  HBV  infection  gives  birth  and  the  infant  does  not  receive  postexposure
immunoprophylaxis  (hepatitis  B  birth  dose  and  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin  [HBIG])
within 12 hours of birth1. An infant can also develop HBV infection through contact with
blood or other bodily fluids from a person with HBV infection.  HBV infection can occur
either  with  or  without  symptoms.  HBV  infection  can  be  identified  in  pregnant  people
and infants with a confirmed positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) test result. 
Acute  hepatitis  B  infection  that  does  not  resolve  progresses  to  chronic,  or  long-term,
HBV infection. The risk for chronic HBV infection varies according to the age at infection
and is greatest among young children. Approximately 90% of infants with HBV infection
and 30% of children between ages 1–5 years with HBV infection will develop a chronic
HBV  infection.  By  contrast,  approximately  95%  of  adults  with  HBV  infection  recover
completely  and  do  not  become  chronically  infected.   In  2021,  an  estimated  17,827
infants  were  born  to  HBsAg-positive  people  in  the  United  States,  representing  nearly
0.5% of all births. Births to US-born and non-US-born people comprised 79% and 20% of
all births, respectively, and 46% and 53% of estimated births to HBsAg-positive people,
respectively.2  CDC  collects,  analyzes,  and  reports  outcome  data  on  infants  born  to
people  with  HBV  infection.  This  intervention  is  called  the  Perinatal  Hepatitis  B
Prevention  Program  (PHBPP).3   Learn  more  about  PHBPP  outcome  data.   Infants  and
children younger than 5 are typically asymptomatic.  If symptoms develop, they usually
appear about 90 days after exposure (range: 60–150 days).  When present, signs and
symptoms of HBV infection can include:  Learn more about signs and symptoms of HBV
infection.  CDC's  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  recommends
that  all  infants  receive  hepatitis  B  vaccine  (HepB)  at  birth,  regardless  of  the  HBV
infection status of the birthing parent1. Infants born to HBsAg-positive people require
HepB  vaccine  and  HBIG  within  12  hours  of  birth  to  protect  them  from  infection.
However,  because  errors  or  delays  in  testing,  reporting,  and  documenting  perinatal
HBsAg status can and do occur, administering the first dose of HepB vaccine soon after
birth to all infants acts as a safety net, reducing the risk for perinatal transmission when
the HBsAg status of the parent is either unknown or incorrectly documented at delivery.
Also,  initiating  the  HepB  vaccine  series  at  birth  has  been  shown  to  increase  a  child's
likelihood  of  completing  the  vaccine  series  on  schedule.   Clinicians  should  screen  all
pregnant  people  for  HBsAg  during  each  pregnancy,  preferably  in  the  first  trimester,
regardless  of  vaccination  status,  chronic  disease,  or  testing  history.  A  confirmed
positive  HBsAg  test  result  indicates  current  HBV  infection.   Clinicians  should  test  all
infants born to an HBsAg-positive person that have completed the HepB vaccine series.
Clinicians should test the infants for HBsAg and antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen
(anti-HBs) at 9–12 months of age, or 1–2 months after vaccine series completion if the
series is delayed.  To learn more about perinatal screening and testing, see perinatal
testing guidelines. Once a clinician has confirmed test results, they can make treatment
and management decisions. All infants born to people who are HBsAg-positive should
receive  HepB  vaccine  and  HBIG  within  12  hours  of  birth,  administered  at  different
injection sites (e.g., separate limbs). Only single-antigen HepB vaccine should be used
for  the  birth  dose.   *  Administer  the  final  dose  no  earlier  than  6  months  of  age
(minimum  age  of  164  days  includes  4-day  grace  period).  Complete  PVST  at  9–12
months of age (or 1–2 months after final dose if series is delayed) by testing for ONLY
HBsAg  and  anti-HBs.  Do  NOT  test  for  anti-HBc.  The  HepB  vaccine  series  should  be
completed  according  to  the  recommended  schedule  above  for  infants  born  to  an
HBsAg-positive parent. The final dose in the series should not be administered before
the age of 24 weeks (164 days). Download a printable version of this vaccination series
here.  Other important things to keep in mind:  For more information on management of
infants, see Tip Sheet — Hepatitis B Screening, Testing, and Management of Pregnant
Persons  for  Obstetricians.   Clinicians  should  provide  all  pregnant  persons  who  test
HBsAg-positive  with:   HBV  infection  in  a  pregnant  person  poses  a  serious  risk  to  an
infant at birth. Without timely postexposure immunoprophylaxis, approximately 90% of
infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  people  in  the  US  will  acquire  chronic  HBV  infection,
approximately one-fourth of whom will eventually die from chronic liver disease.  CDC,
in collaboration with the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, has developed
case definitions to provide uniform clinical and laboratory-testing criteria of identifying
and  reporting  nationally  notifiable  infections  diseases.   To  learn  more  about
classification  of  perinatal  hepatitis  B  cases,  visit  the:  National  Notifiable  Diseases
Surveillance System (NNDSS).  HBV infection in a pregnant person poses a serious risk
to  an  infant  at  birth.  Without  timely  postexposure  immunoprophylaxis,  approximately
90%  of  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  people  in  the  US  will  acquire  chronic  HBV
infection,  approximately  one-fourth  of  whom  will  eventually  die  from  chronic  liver
disease.  Since 1990, CDC has funded public health jurisdictions (regions managed by
state or local public health agencies) to identify pregnant people with HBV infection and
case manage their infants to prevent parent-to-child transmission of HBV infection. The
national PHBPP aims to ensure infants born to people with HBV infection receive timely
postexposure immunoprophylaxis, complete a full series of HepB vaccine, and receive
PVST  after  a  complete  series  to  confirm  immunity,  identify  infants  needing
revaccination, and identify infants who are infected. PHBPP-funded jurisdictions follow
these  infants  for  up  to  24  months  to  monitor  completion  of  these  recommended
interventions.3 Learn more about PHBPP outcome data.  When a Pregnant Woman Has
Hepatitis B: These one-page resource covers the preventative measures a parent with
hepatitis  B  can  take  to  protect  their  baby.  Hepatitis  B  and  Your  Baby:  This  one-page
resource covers the benefits of Hep B vaccine for parents and their infants. Learn more
about  hepatitis  B,  a  liver  disease  caused  by  the  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV).  Find  HBV
information  for  the  public  and  health  professionals.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis-b/hcp/perinatal-provider-overview/index.html
