A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 B.  pertussis  is  a  fastidious,  gram-negative  bacterium  requiring  special  media  for
isolation.  B.  pertussis  produces  multiple  antigenic  and  biologically  active  products
including:  These  products  are  responsible  for  the  clinical  features  of  pertussis.  An
immune response to one or more of them produces immunity following infection. Some
observational studies suggest that pertussis infection can provide immunity for 4 to 20
years, but that it's not lifelong. Pertussis symptoms usually develop within 5 to 10 days
after  exposure,  but  sometimes  not  for  as  long  as  21  days.  Transmission  is  usually
person  to  person  through  respiratory  droplets  or  contact  with  airborne  droplets.
Pertussis  has  an  insidious  onset  with  catarrhal  symptoms  that  are  indistinguishable
from  those  of  minor  respiratory  tract  infections.   Next  is  the  paroxysmal  stage
characterized by numerous, rapid coughs.  The final stage is the convalescent stage,
which can take from weeks to months to resolve.  CDC recommends vaccination and
postexposure  antimicrobial  prophylaxis   to  prevent  pertussis.   CDC  recommends
pertussis  vaccination  for  people  of  all  ages.  CDC  supports  providing  postexposure
antimicrobial  prophylaxis   especially  to  CDC  recommends  practicing  good  hygiene  to
prevent  the  spread  of  respiratory  illnesses.  Healthcare  providers  can  encourage
patients  to  cover  their  cough  or  sneeze  and  wash  their  hands  often  with  soap  and
water. Determining who has pertussis can be difficult. Whenever possible, healthcare
providers  should  obtain  a  nasopharyngeal  swab  or  aspirate  from  everyone  with
suspected pertussis for laboratory testing. Ideally, treat pertussis during the first 1 to 2
weeks before coughing paroxysms occur. Treatment is ineffective if started later in the
course  of  illness.  Anyone,  but  especially  infants  and  young  children,  may  experience
serious and potentially life-threatening complications from pertussis. Complications are
usually less severe in those who received pertussis vaccines. Pertussis is common and a
reportable condition in the United States.  Healthcare providers should report pertussis
cases  to  the  local  public  health  department  as  soon  as  possible.  This  prompt
information helps public health authorities with preventing additional cases. Pink Book's
Chapter  on  PertussisEpidemiology  &  Prevention  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases
textbook Pertussis, also known as whooping cough, can cause serious illness in people
of  all  ages  but  is  most  dangerous  for  babies.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/hcp/clinical-overview/index.html
