A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Mumps  is  a  viral  illness  caused  by  a
paramyxovirus,  a  member  of  the  Rubulavirus  family.   Mumps  usually  involves  pain,
tenderness, and swelling in one or both parotid salivary glands (cheek and jaw area).
Swelling  usually  peaks  in  1  to  3  days  and  then  subsides  during  the  next  week.  The
swollen tissue pushes the angle of the ear up and out. Often, the jawbone cannot be felt
because  of  swelling  of  the  parotid.  Severe  complications  caused  by  the  virus  include
cerebellar  ataxia,  encephalitis,  viral  pneumonia,  and  hemorrhagic  conditions.  The
average incubation period for mumps is 16 to 18 days, with a range of 12 to 25 days.
The mumps virus replicates in the upper respiratory tract and is transmitted person to
person  through  direct  contact  with  saliva  or  respiratory  droplets  of  a  person  infected
with mumps. The risk of spreading the virus increases the longer and closer the contact
a person has with someone who has mumps.  The infectious period is considered from 2
days before to 5 days after parotitis onset, although virus has been isolated from saliva
as early as 7 days prior to and up to 9 days after parotitis onset. Mumps virus has also
been isolated up to 14 days in urine and semen. Prior to vaccinae introduction: Before
the  U.S.  mumps  vaccination  program  started  in  1967,  about  186,000  cases  were
reported  each  year,  and  many  more  unreported  cases  occurred.  The  disease  caused
complications, such as permanent deafness in children, and occasionally, encephalitis,
which could rarely result in death.  Post-vaccine era: Following the implementation of
the  routine  two-dose  MMR  vaccination  policy,  there  was  a  99%  decrease  in  mumps
cases  in  the  United  States,  with  just  a  few  hundred  cases  reported  each  year  by  the
early  2000s.  However,  starting  in  2006  there  has  been  an  increase  in  mumps  cases
with  several  peak  years.  From  year  to  year,  the  number  of  mumps  cases  can  range
from  roughly  a  couple  hundred  to  several  thousand.   The  majority  of  cases  and
outbreaks  occur  among  people  who  are  fully  vaccinated  and  in  close-contact  or
congregate settings. Mumps can be prevented with mumps-containing vaccine. Mumps
vaccine is usually administered in the combination measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
vaccine. The combination measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella (MMRV) vaccine can
be used for children aged 12 months through 12 years.  CDC recommends children get
2  doses  of  MMR  vaccine.  Teens  and  adults  should  also  be  up  to  date  on  their  MMR
vaccination. ACIP recommends a third dose of MMR vaccine for people at increased risk
of acquiring mumps in an outbreak.  Mumps transmission in healthcare settings is not
common. However, transmission has occurred in past outbreaks involving hospitals and
long-term care facilities housing adolescents and adults.  A visual tool that summarizes
what  test  types  are  typically  available  and  when  to  collect  specimens  for  testing
measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella. RT-PCR and viral culture are used to confirm
mumps infection. Buccal swabs are most commonly used for RT-PCR testing, but urine
and cerebrospinal fluid may also be used in specific situations.  IgM serology can also
be used to aid in diagnosing mumps infection. A patient's vaccination status and timing
of specimen collection are important for interpreting laboratory results. A negative test
result  does  not  rule  out  mumps  infection.  Mumps  that  occurs  in  pregnant  people  is
generally benign and not more severe than in people who are not pregnant. Like other
infections, there is a theoretical risk that mumps during the early months of pregnancy
may  cause  complications.   Most  studies  on  the  effects  of  gestational  mumps  on  the
fetus  were  conducted  in  the  1950s–60s  when  the  disease  was  more  common  before
mumps vaccine was available. One study from 1966 reported an association between
mumps infection during the first trimester of pregnancy and an increase in the rate of
spontaneous abortion or intrauterine fetal death,1 but this result has not been observed
in other studies.2 One study of low birth weight in relation to mumps during pregnancy
found  no  significant  association.1  While  there  are  case  reports  of  congenital
malformations in infants born to mothers who had mumps during pregnancy, the only
prospective,  controlled  study  found  rates  of  malformations  were  similar  between
mothers who had mumps and those who did not have mumps during pregnancy3. From
year to year, the number of U.S. mumps cases can range from a couple hundred to a
couple thousand. Some years have more cases than usual because of large outbreaks.
When mumps cases or an outbreak occur, state and local health departments have the
lead in investigating the outbreak. CDC helps and supports health departments in these
outbreak investigation by: Mumps is a nationally notifiable disease, and all cases should
be  reported  to  the  state  or  local  health  department.  Contact  your  state  health
department for more information on how to report mumps in your state. Mumps is a
contagious disease that can be serious to both children and adults. The best protection
against  measles  is  the  MMR  vaccine.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mumps/hcp/clinical-overview/index.html
