A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 When a pregnant person has HBV infection, it can pose a serious risk to their infant.
Infants  with  perinatal  HBV  infection  have  a  90%  chance  of  developing  chronic  HBV
infection. 1 Testing pregnant people for hepatitis B and providing pregnant people and
infants with appropriate treatment and vaccination is the best way to prevent perinatal
HBV infection.  Preventing perinatal HBV transmission is an integral part of the national
strategy to eliminate hepatitis B in the United States.  HBV infection can be identified in
pregnant  people  and  infants  by  a  confirmed  positive  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen
(HBsAg) test result.  All pregnant people who are HBsAg-positive should be referred to
their  jurisdiction's  Perinatal  Hepatitis  B  Prevention  Program  (PHBPP)2  for  case
management
 to
 ensure
 that
 their
 infants
 receive
 timely
 postexposure
immunoprophylaxis  and  follow-up.   Clinicians  should  provide  a  copy  of  the  original
laboratory report indicating the pregnant person's HBsAg-positive test result to the:  To
learn  more  about  post-vaccination  serologic  testing  (PVST)  for  infants,  see  Perinatal
Postvaccination  Testing  guidelines.   Clinicians  should  screen  all  pregnant  people  for
HBsAg  during  each  pregnancy,  preferably  in  the  first  trimester,  regardless  of:   A
confirmed positive HBsAg test result indicates current HBV infection.  Clinicians should
test all pregnant people who are HBsAg-positive for HBV DNA. This information will help
the  clinician  make  the  decision  to  prescribe  maternal  antiviral  therapy  to  prevent
perinatal HBV transmission.  CDC recommends PVST for infants born to a person with a
confirmed positive HBsAg test result. Serologic testing confirms whether the child has
developed  immunity  or  has  HBV  infection.   Clinicians  should  test  all  infants  born  to
pregnant  people  who  are  HBsAg-positive  or  have  other  evidence  of  HBV  infection  for
HBsAg and antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) at 9–12 months of age, or
1–2 months after vaccine series completion if the series is delayed.  For information on
how  to  interpret  PVST  results,  refer  to  CDC's  Management  of  Infants  Born  to  Women
with  HBV  Infection  for  Pediatricians.  If  a  pregnant  person  tests  HBsAg-negative,
clinicians should assess them to see if they're at a high risk for acquiring HBV infection. 
If  a  pregnant  person  tests  HBsAg-positive,  there  are  important  steps  to  take  to  help
inform care and prevent perinatal transmission to the infant. For more information on
management of pregnant people and infants born to people with HBV infection, see the
following  resources:   CDC  recommends  reporting  all  HBsAg-positive  test  results  of
pregnant people to the state PHBPP. 2 Coordinators can follow up and ensure infants
are  evaluated  appropriately.  In  2013  and  2014,  approximately  88%  of  commercially
insured  women  and  84%  of  Medicaid-enrolled  women  were  tested  for  HBsAg  during
pregnancy.3 Yet, fewer than half of the expected births to HBsAg-positive people were
identified.  CDC encourages all laboratories providing HBsAg testing services to capture
pregnancy status to identify pregnant people with HBV infection.  Clinicians and health
departments can play a critical role in laboratory reporting of pregnancy status. HBsAg
screening  tests  should  be  designated  as  "prenatal"  or  on  a  prenatal/obstetric  panel
when being ordered for a pregnant person. Additionally, health departments should be
aware  of  how  laboratories  reporting  to  their  jurisdiction  are  reporting  pregnancy
information (e.g., including the word "prenatal," providing International Classification of
Diseases,  10th  Revision  [ICD-10]  codes,  etc.).   Learn  more  about  hepatitis  B,  a  liver
disease caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV). Find HBV information for the public and
health professionals. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis-b/hcp/perinatal-provider-overview/clinical-testing-guidelines.html
