Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Recommendations  and  Reports  /  May  7,  2021  /  70(2);1–30
Agam  K.  Rao,  MD1;  Jeremy  Sobel,  MD1;  Kevin  Chatham-Stephens,  MD1;  Carolina
Luquez,  PhD1  (View  author  affiliations)  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads
Box 1 Box 2 Figure 1 Figure 2 Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Table 5 Table 6   Botulism
is  a  rare,  neurotoxin-mediated,  life-threatening  disease  characterized  by  flaccid
descending  paralysis  that  begins  with  cranial  nerve  palsies  and  might  progress  to
extremity  weakness  and  respiratory  failure.  Botulinum  neurotoxin,  which  inhibits
acetylcholine  release  at  the  neuromuscular  junction,  is  produced  by  the  anaerobic,
gram-positive  bacterium  Clostridium  botulinum  and,  rarely,  by  related  species  (C.
baratii and C. butyricum). Exposure to the neurotoxin occurs through ingestion of toxin
(foodborne  botulism),  bacterial  colonization  of  a  wound  (wound  botulism)  or  the
intestines
 (infant
 botulism
 and
 adult
 intestinal
 colonization
 botulism),
 and
high-concentration cosmetic or therapeutic injections of toxin (iatrogenic botulism). In
addition,  concerns  have  been  raised  about  the  possibility  of  a  bioterrorism  event
involving toxin exposure through intentional contamination of food or drink or through
aerosolization.  Neurologic  symptoms  are  similar  regardless  of  exposure  route.
Treatment  involves  supportive  care,  intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation  when
necessary,  and  administration  of  botulinum  antitoxin.  Certain  neurological  diseases
(e.g., myasthenia gravis and Guillain-Barré syndrome) have signs and symptoms that
overlap  with  botulism.  Before  the  publication  of  these  guidelines,  no  comprehensive
clinical care guidelines existed for treating botulism. These evidence-based guidelines
provide  health  care  providers  with  recommended  best  practices  for  diagnosing,
monitoring,  and  treating  single  cases  or  outbreaks  of  foodborne,  wound,  and
inhalational  botulism  and  were  developed  after  a  multiyear  process  involving  several
systematic  reviews  and  expert  input.  Top  These  evidence-based  guidelines  provide
health  care  personnel  with  recommended  best  practices  for  diagnosing,  monitoring,
and treating botulism in the settings of conventional, contingency, and crisis standards
of  care.  The  following  syndromes  are  described:  foodborne  botulism  (exposure  to
botulinum neurotoxin in food), wound botulism (exposure to botulinum neurotoxin from
a  wound  colonized  with  the  bacteria),  inhalational  botulism  (exposure  to  aerosolized
botulinum  neurotoxin,  which  could  be  caused  intentionally),  and  iatrogenic  botulism
(exposure  to  botulinum  neurotoxin  by  injection  of  high-concentration  botulinum  toxin
for cosmetic or therapeutic purposes). These guidelines do not address syndromes of
botulism  caused  by  intestinal  colonization  by  botulinum-toxin–producing  Clostridia
species  (i.e.,  infant  botulism  and  adult  colonization  botulism),  which  are  inherently
sporadic  and  have  not  occurred  in  outbreaks.  Therefore,  throughout  the  text,  terms
such  as  “botulism”  and  “patient  with  suspected  botulism”  refer  to  syndromes  other
than  intestinal  colonization.  Contamination  of  foods  with  botulinum  neurotoxin  can
occur  unintentionally  when  botulinum  spores  germinate  under  appropriate  conditions
and  produce  toxin,  or  intentionally,  when  toxin  is  added  directly  to  foods.  Foodborne
botulism outbreaks usually affect few persons. However, because large outbreaks are
possible  (“epidemic  potential”),  foodborne  botulism  is  a  public  health  emergency.
Contamination of wounds with Clostridium botulinum and subsequent in situ botulinum
toxin production is typically (in the United States) caused by unsanitary injection of a
particular  type  of  heroin  (black  tar  heroin)  subcutaneously  or  subdermally;  although
common-source  heroin  containing  clostridial  spores  might  affect  groups  of  injectors,
wound  botulism  does  not  have  the  epidemic  potential  of  foodborne  botulism  (1).
Purified  botulinum  toxin,  produced  and  weaponized  by  military  biological  warfare
programs of various countries, could be dispersed as an aerosol and cause inhalational
botulism. This form of botulism, which does not occur naturally and has been reported
once  in  a  laboratory  worker,  could  affect  many  persons  (2).  Diagnosis  of  botulism
depends  on  high  clinical  suspicion  and  a  thorough  neurologic  examination.  The
timeliness of diagnosis is crucial to successful treatment because botulinum antitoxin,
the only specific therapy for botulism, must be administered to patients as quickly as
possible. In the United States, botulinum antitoxin (to treat suspected botulism, other
than  infant  botulism)  is  available  emergently  and  free  of  charge  from  the  federal
government. Health departments and CDC provide emergency clinical consultations 24
hours  per  day  and  facilitate  rapid  antitoxin  delivery  for  treatment  of  suspected
botulism,  other  than  infant  botulism.  For  suspected  cases  of  infant  botulism,  the
California  Department  of  Public  Health  Infant  Botulism  Treatment  and  Prevention
Program provides clinical consultation and access to the specific antitoxin licensed for
treatment  of  infant  botulism.  The  recommendations  in  these  guidelines  address  the
conventional standard of care, in which medical resources are not limited, as well as
settings  of  contingency  and  crisis  standards  of  care,  with  limited  medical  resources.
These guidelines focus on clinical management in the acute phase of illness and do not
address  long-term  care,  epidemiologic  investigations,  antitoxin  for  postexposure
prophylaxis,  and  management  of  routine  medical  issues  that  are  not  specific  to
botulism.  Clinicians,  hospital  administrators,  state  and  local  health  officials,  and
planners can use the recommendations in these guidelines to assist in developing crisis
protocols for national preparedness for botulism events ranging from sporadic (single)
cases  to  large  outbreaks.  Botulism  is  caused  by  toxins  formed  by  the  anaerobic,
gram-positive bacterium C. botulinum and, rarely, by strains of closely related species
(C. baratii and C. butyricum) (3). These organisms form spores that are ubiquitous in
the  environment  and  capable  of  indefinitely  surviving  most  naturally  occurring
conditions as well as boiling and other routine cooking practices. Spores are routinely
ingested  by  humans  but  do  not  normally  germinate  in  the  intestine  (4).  Toxin  is
produced  only  when  the  spores  germinate;  this  occurs  under  a  rare  confluence  of
circumstances  that  include  anaerobic  conditions,  low  acidity  (pH  >4.5),  low  salt  and
sugar content, and temperatures of 37°F–99°F (3°C–37°C), depending on the serotype.
Botulinum toxins are the most potent biologic toxins known. Although the precise lethal
dose for humans is unknown, extrapolations have been made from primate studies. The
lethal doses for purified crystalline botulinum toxin type A for a 154-lb (70-kg) man are
estimated to be 70 μg when introduced orally and 0.80–0.90 μg when inhaled (2). Lower
doses  were  proposed  in  older  studies  (5–7).  Seven  antigenically  distinct  botulinum
toxins  have  been  identified  (A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  and  G),  all  during  1919–1970  (3);  most
strains of C. botulinum produce only a single toxin, although strains producing two toxin
types have been identified (8). In addition, two novel botulinum-toxin–like proteins have
been identified from gene sequences and assembled: one from a C. botulinum isolate
and one from an Enterococcus faecium isolate (9–11). All botulinum toxin types share a
similar structure, consisting of a zinc-endopeptidase protein formed by a heavy chain of
approximately  100,000  daltons  and  a  light  chain  of  approximately  50,000  daltons.
Botulinum  neurotoxin  enters  the  vascular  circulation  (through  ingestion,  absorption
from  colonized  wound  or  intestine,  inhalation,  or  injection)  and  is  transported  to
peripheral
 cholinergic
 nerve
 terminals,
 including
 neuromuscular
 junctions,
postganglionic  parasympathetic  nerve  endings,  and  peripheral  ganglia  (12).  All  toxin
types  produce  a  similar  clinical  syndrome  of  cranial  nerve  palsies  followed  by
descending symmetric flaccid paralysis of variable severity and extent through similar
pharmacological mechanisms at the neuromuscular junction (12–14). The sequence of
botulinum  neurotoxin  activity  at  the  neuromuscular  junction  includes  heavy-chain
binding  to  a  neuronal  cell  followed  by  internalization  by  means  of  receptor-mediated
endocytosis, translocation to the cytosol, and cleavage of the proteins (specific for each
serotype)  involved  in  the  release  of  the  neurotransmitter  acetylcholine  (4).  The
characteristic flaccid paralysis results from blocking acetylcholine transmission across
the neuromuscular junction by inhibition of acetylcholine release from the presynaptic
motor  neuron  terminal  (12).  The  large  molecular  size  of  the  botulinum  toxin  likely
precludes  its  crossing  the  blood-brain  barrier  to  the  central  nervous  system  (4).
Botulinum toxin might be transported to the central nervous system axonally, similar to
tetanus toxin, which it resembles, although direct effects on the central nervous system
have not been documented in humans (15). Recovery, which takes weeks to months,
occurs  after  sprouting  of  new  nerve  terminals.  Toxin  serotypes  A,  B,  E,  and  (more
rarely) F cause human disease. Toxin type A produces the most severe syndrome, with
the  highest  proportion  of  patients  requiring  mechanical  ventilation  (14,16,17).  Toxin
type B usually causes milder disease than type A (14,16,17). Only two cases of illness in
humans  from  toxin  type  C  and  one  outbreak  caused  by  toxin  type  D  have  been
reported,  all  in  the  1950s  (18,19).  Although  toxin  type  C  blocks  neuromuscular
transmission in human tissue in laboratory experiments, this toxin type might not be
absorbed in the human gastrointestinal tract (20,21). In studies of human tissue, toxin
type  D  has  been  reported  not  to  block  neuromuscular  transmission  (20).  No  cases  in
humans have been reported from toxin type G (3). Toxin type E, usually associated with
consumption of foods of aquatic origin, produces a syndrome of variable severity, which
frequently  includes  gastrointestinal  symptoms  (17,22,23).  Type  F  cases  are  rare  and
characterized by rapid progression, extensive paralysis, and respiratory failure but with
earlier recovery (24,25). All toxin types readily produce botulism in experimental animal
models. Top In 2015, CDC established a technical development group with experts in
the  clinical,  epidemiologic,  and  laboratory  aspects  of  botulism  and  related  fields.  To
oversee  and  guide  development  of  the  guidelines,  CDC  also  established  an  internal
agency guideline steering committee comprising clinical, preparedness, and response
experts.  Together,  the  technical  development  group  and  the  guidelines  steering
committee prioritized topic areas and determined the scope of the guidelines. Priorities
included  characterizing  the  clinical  features  of  botulism,  determining  optimal
monitoring of patients with suspected botulism, and establishing the efficacy and safety
of botulinum antitoxin (26). Children and pregnant women were considered specifically.
How botulism might uniquely affect these populations was considered throughout the
process,  including  through  systematic  reviews  on  pediatric  botulism  and  botulism  in
pregnant  women,  as  well  as  presentations  during  two  forums  and  a  workshop.  A
committee  comprising  representatives  from  federal  agencies,  including  the  Assistant
Secretary  for  Preparedness  and  Response,  the  Biomedical  Advanced  Research  and
Development Agency, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Department
of  Defense,  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA),  and  the  National  Institutes  of
Health,  was  briefed  throughout  the  process  of  developing  the  guidelines.  Physicians
from  CDC  and  academia  conducted  six  systematic  reviews  on  the  clinical  features  of
botulism,  pediatric  botulism,  botulism  in  pregnancy,  epidemiology  of  botulism
outbreaks,  botulinum  antitoxin  efficacy,  and  allergic  reactions  to  botulinum  antitoxin
(14,27–31). The systematic reviews were conducted  in accordance with the Preferred
Reporting  Items  for  Systematic  Reviews  and  Meta-Analyses  (PRISMA)  statement
(http://www.prisma-statement.org)  and  registered  with  the  International  Prospective
Register of Systematic Reviews (Table 1). CDC librarians developed the search strategy
for each review, using search terms selected in consultation with the review authors.
The  librarians  searched  the  following  databases  from  inception  through  May  or
November 2015: ClinicalTrials.gov (all trials indexed through May or November 2015),
Cochrane  Library  (1800–present),  Cumulative  Index  to  Nursing  and  Allied  Health
Literature
 EBSCO
 (1981–present),
 Embase
 Dialog
 (1947–1988),
 Embase
 Ovid
(1988–present), Global Health Ovid (1910–present), Medline Ovid (1946–present), and
Scopus  (1960–present).  For  the  clinical  features,  pediatric,  and  antitoxin  efficacy
systematic reviews, librarians also searched the National Technical Information Service,
Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC), and government documents via WorldCat
and DTIC documents via Google Scholar. Two authors of the clinical features systematic
review  also  manually  searched  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Reports  (MMWRs)
published before 1980. The allergy systematic review included unpublished data from
Cangene Corporation from two clinical trials involving 56 healthy adults and from CDC’s
botulism  consultation  service  for  249  patients  with  botulism  treated  with  botulinum
antitoxin  heptavalent  (BAT).  The  antitoxin  efficacy  systematic  review  included  animal
studies that reported controlled toxin exposure and antitoxin treatment. The pediatric
and  pregnancy  systematic  reviews  included  non–English-language  articles  that  were
professionally translated; the other systematic reviews included only English-language
articles. The six systematic reviews were published, along with nine other manuscripts
on  various  botulism  topics,  including  clinical  characteristics  and  ancillary  test  results
among patients with botulism and clinical criteria to trigger suspicion for botulism, that
also  informed  these  guidelines  (13,26,32–38).  In  addition,  an  analysis  of  detailed
abstractions of medical records from 99 hospitalized patients with laboratory-confirmed
botulism  provided  data  on  presence  and  progression  of  signs  and  symptoms  (CDC,
unpublished  data,  2016).  In  partnership  with  the  National  Association  of  County  and
City Health Officials, CDC organized two forums conducted during January–May 2016 to
elicit  the  individual  input  of  experts  in  botulism,  crisis  standards  of  care,  and  clinical
medicine.  One  forum  focused  on  the  diagnosis  and  management  of  botulism  (10
teleconferences  with  16  experts)  and  the  other  on  the  treatment  of  botulism  (11
teleconferences  with  21  experts).  Data  from  the  systematic  and  other  reviews,
individual  published  and  unpublished  studies,  CDC  investigations,  and  the  relevant
botulism,  pharmacologic,  respiratory,  neurologic,  and  critical  care  literature  were
presented  to  the  experts  in  each  of  the  forums.  Experts  represented  themselves  and
provided  their  own  input  on  various  topics,  including  botulism  pathophysiology,
infectious  diseases,  antitoxin  use,  emergency  and  critical  care  medicine,  crisis
standards of care, electrodiagnostic testing, public health, obstetrics and gynecology,
and  pediatrics.  CDC  used  input  from  the  two  forums  to  generate  preliminary
recommendations  for  a  2-day  botulism  workshop  in  June  2016.  A  total  of  72  experts,
including  the  technical  development  group,  steering  committee,  most  of  the  expert
forum participants, and other invited participants, provided their own input on targeted
questions posed by CDC about the diagnosis and management of botulism. Participants
included  physicians  who  have  treated  patients  with  botulism,  representatives  from
professional societies (e.g., the American College of Emergency Physicians), state and
federal  public  health  officials,  and  botulism  subject  matter  experts.  Participants
provided their own input in response to CDC solicitation throughout the process. CDC
staff  and  other  participants  presented  the  evidence  compiled  from  the  systematic
reviews and forums and gave presentations on various topics, including crisis standards
of  care,  pathophysiology  of  botulism,  caring  for  patients  with  botulism  during  an
outbreak,  ethical  considerations  in  the  management  of  botulism,  antitoxin  safety  and
effectiveness,
 and
 considerations
 for
 vulnerable
 populations.
 Of
 note,
 the
peer-reviewed scientific literature on clinical aspects of botulism consists largely of case
series  and  case  reports.  CDC  asked  participants  to  declare  any  potential  conflict  of
interest.  Two  experts  reported  such  potential  conflicts.  CDC  reviewed  these  potential
conflicts  of  interest  and  determined  that  they  did  not  preclude  these  persons  from
participating.  The  authors  of  the  guidelines  have  no  financial  interests  in  or  other
competing  interests  with  the  manufacturers  of  commercial  products  or  suppliers  of
commercial services related to botulism. After the workshop, the authors wrote a draft
of the guidelines based on the systematic reviews and forum and workshop discussions.
The draft was reviewed by selected members of the technical development group and
steering committee and then sent to workshop participants for their individual review.
The  recommendations  presented  in  this  report  reflect  the  synthesis  and  analysis  of
evidence obtained from systematic reviews conducted by CDC scientists and input from
subject  matter  experts.  These  guidelines  will  be  updated  when  substantive  new
evidence is available regarding the diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment of foodborne,
wound,  inhalational,  or  iatrogenic  botulism.  Top  The  acute  onset  of  neuromuscular
weakness  in  patients  with  botulism,  frequently  progressing  to  respiratory  failure,
typically requires high acuity emergency and inpatient care. Therefore, a sudden influx
of  severely  ill  patients  with  botulism  might  stress  the  ability  of  a  single  hospital  or  a
hospital  network  to  provide  appropriate  care.  To  prepare  for  potentially  catastrophic
events  such  as  botulism  outbreaks,  the  Institute  of  Medicine  (National  Academies  of
Medicine)  recommends  that  officials  from  state  and  local  governments  (e.g.,  public
health  and  emergency  management),  emergency  medical  services,  and  health  care
organizations  establish  disaster  response  plans  (39).  These  plans  should  incorporate
crisis  standards  of  care  to  optimize  medical  surge  capacity  and  guide  the  process  of
medical  care  during  a  catastrophic  event.  The  medical  surge  capacity  continuum  is
determined by the balance between health care supply and demand. The standards of
care within this continuum are categorized as conventional, contingency, or crisis (39).
Components of the health care supply are space (e.g., rooms or areas in which to care
for patients), staff (e.g., health care providers), supplies (e.g., medications and medical
supplies such as tongue blades), and equipment (e.g., ventilators and monitors). In the
conventional  (i.e.,  standard)  care  setting,  standard  clinical  care  spaces,  staff,  and
supplies  are  used,  resulting  in  a  usual  level  of  patient  care.  In  the  contingency  care
setting,  although  substitutions  of  space,  staff,  or  supplies  are  required  as  demand
increases, the level of patient care is not affected. In the crisis care setting, the demand
for  space,  staff,  or  supplies  exceeds  that  which  is  available,  affecting  the  level  of
patient  care  that  can  be  provided.  For  example,  in  a  hospital  that  is  providing  a
conventional  standard  of  care,  managing  an  increasing  number  of  patients  might
include adding beds to patient rooms to treat more patients. In contingency standard of
care settings, measures might include caring for patients in areas not typically used for
inpatient  care  (e.g.,  postanesthesia  care  unit  and  endoscopy  suite),  and  measures  in
crisis standard of care settings might include caring for patients in areas that are never
used  for  patient  care  (e.g.,  classrooms)  (40).  In  a  crisis  standard  of  care  setting,  the
focus transitions from actions that prioritize individual patient outcomes to actions that
prioritize  population-based  outcomes.  Implementation  of  crisis  standards  of  care  in  a
given facility should be as brief as possible, and every effort should be made to either
obtain appropriate resources or transfer patients to appropriately resourced facilities so
conventional  standards  of  care  can  be  resumed.  Disaster  response  plans  should
incorporate  indicators  to  measure  or  predict  demand  for  health  care  services  or
resources  (e.g.,  emergency  department  wait  time)  and  triggers  that  guide  decisions
about delivering those health care services or resources. For example, an emergency
department  wait  time  of  greater  than  a  specified  period  might  result  in  increased
staffing (41). These indicators can mark the transition from conventional to contingency
and from contingency to crisis, and the triggers describe which actions should be taken
in response to the indicators. Indicators and triggers during a botulism outbreak likely
will vary across hospitals (40). For example, in some hospitals, a conventional standard
of  care  might  be  appropriate  in  the  emergency  department  that  has  five  patients  in
respiratory distress with possible botulism; however, a contingency or crisis standard of
care might be needed for other hospitals. Event-specific criteria that might need to be
considered in a botulism outbreak include the number of patients affected, the severity
of  their  illness  (e.g.,  patients  requiring  intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation),  and
availability  of  botulinum  antitoxin  and  mechanical  ventilators.  Certain  aspects  of  a
botulism outbreak response, including diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment, might vary
across  the  medical  surge  capacity  continuum  (conventional,  contingency,  and  crisis
standards of care) (Table 2). Top Each of the following sections begins with a summary
of  evidence.  Following  the  evidence  are  the  CDC  recommendations  for  diagnosing,
monitoring, and treating suspected botulism as well as (in certain sections) key points
for  clinicians.  In  addition,  a  summary  of  the  recommendations  and  key  points  is
provided
 (Supplementary
 Box;
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/105129).
 Botulism
typically produces a distinctive syndrome of cranial nerve palsies that can be followed
by  bilateral,  symmetric,  descending  flaccid  paralysis,  affecting  proximal  before  distal
limb musculature, that might progress to respiratory failure and death. The extent and
severity  of  paralysis  is  proportional  to  the  dose  of  toxin.  Patients  with  botulism  are
described as alert and oriented, although ptosis, ocular muscle paralysis, voice changes
from vocal cord paralysis, and gait disturbance from skeletal muscle paralysis can be
mistaken as manifestations of drug or alcohol intoxication or mental status changes of
other  origin;  patients  rarely  have  sensory  deficits  and  rarely  report  pain  (3,42,43).
However, the diagnosis of botulism is frequently delayed or even missed. Although the
progression  of  paralysis  in  patients  with  botulism  is  described  as  unique  and
recognizable, in practice, when a patient is first seen by the health care provider, the
neurologic  symptoms  and  the  sequence  of  progression  both  are  sometimes
misdiagnosed (3,14). The reasons for initial failure to diagnose botulism in subsequently
confirmed cases has been investigated most productively in outbreaks, in which cases
initially  misdiagnosed  were  eventually  identified  by  outbreak  investigators.  Outbreak
investigations in which some botulism cases were only identified after the patients had
been  discharged  with  alternative  diagnoses  highlight  the  potential  for  delayed  or
missed diagnoses (35,38) (CDC, unpublished data, 2016). The critical initial treatment
and management decisions for patients with suspected botulism must be made based
on clinical findings. Botulinum antitoxin, the only specific therapy for botulism, should
be administered as quickly as possible. Laboratory confirmation can take several days,
and delaying administration of antitoxin to a patient with a high or medium likelihood of
botulism  while  awaiting  laboratory  results  can  worsen  the  patient’s  outcome
(3,35,44,45). The diagnostic challenges resulting from the variations in the spectrum of
signs and symptoms of botulism were highlighted in the delayed recognition of a large
foodborne  botulism  outbreak,  in  which  some  patients  initially  received  diagnoses  of
myasthenia gravis, stroke, or psychiatric disorders (46). Most of the affected patients
were reported to have had the classic signs and symptoms of botulism (46). In recent
literature  reviews  and  a  classical  case  series,  botulism  was  most  commonly
misdiagnosed  as  myasthenia  gravis  and  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  (13,14,16,30,31).  A
wide  variety  of  common  and  unusual  etiologies  have  been  included  in  differential
diagnoses of individual cases (e.g., cerebrovascular accident, Lambert-Eaton syndrome,
meningitis,  encephalitis,  and  tick  paralysis)  (13).  In  a  review  of  332  patients  with
possible  botulism  for  which  CDC  consulted  during  1980–2016,  the  treating  physician
provided  alternate  diagnostic  considerations  for  274  cases  (83%);  for  these,  treating
physicians  reported  a  range  of  zero  to  six  illnesses  other  than  botulism  as  possible
diagnoses  at  the  time  of  emergency  public  health  consultation.  The  most  common
differential diagnoses were Guillain-Barré syndrome (99 cases) and myasthenia gravis
(76 cases). For 160 botulism cases that occurred during 2009–2015, treating physicians
who consulted with the CDC botulism clinical consultation service listed botulism first
for  90%  (144)  of  cases,  second  for  6%  (10),  third  for  3%  (five),  and  fourth  for  <1%
(one).  In  children  and  adolescents,  a  differential  diagnosis  was  reported  in  79  (22%)
cases;  the  most  commonly  listed  alternate  diagnoses  were  myasthenia  gravis  (22
cases; 28%), poisonings and intoxications (20 cases; 25%), Guillain-Barré syndrome (11
cases;  14%),  and  poliomyelitis  (nine  cases;  11%)  (31).  Misdiagnosis  of  botulism,
including  in  outbreak  settings,  might  occur  because  botulism  is  much  less  common
than other diseases with similar signs and symptoms, such as myasthenia gravis and
Guillain-Barré  syndrome.  In  addition,  failure  to  perform  a  thorough  neurologic
examination and identify the typical neurologic findings might decrease the likelihood
of considering botulism (26). Although rarely reported, atypical findings or progression,
such  as  reported  asymmetry  of  deficits,  might  explain  diagnostic  difficulties
(33,34,38,47).  In  reviews  and  analyses  conducted  while  gathering  evidence  for  these
guidelines  (13,14,16,30,31,36),  the  most  commonly  reported  symptoms  among
patients  with  botulism  were  dysphagia;  blurred  vision;  slurred  speech,  difficulty
speaking, and hoarse voice; gastrointestinal symptoms; dry mouth; shortness of breath;
and  diplopia.  The  most  common  signs  were  descending  paralysis,  ptosis,  and
ophthalmoplegia. Signs and symptoms of botulism evolve over a period of hours to a
few  days.  Initially,  subjective  symptoms  of  minor  visual  changes  or  (in  patients  with
foodborne botulism) abdominal discomfort might occur, followed by progressive cranial
palsies,  which  might  then  be  followed  by  descending  flaccid  bilateral  paralysis.  In
different  patients,  the  maximum  extent  of  neurologic  signs  might  range  from  only
ptosis  or  mild  cranial  nerve  findings  to  descending  bilateral  flaccid  paralysis,
encompassing cranial nerve–innervated respiratory, extremity, and axial muscles. Early
gastrointestinal  symptoms  (e.g.,  nausea  and  vomiting)  are  more  common  among
persons  with  foodborne  botulism  than  with  other  types  of  botulism  (13,14,16).  For
example,  vomiting  was  reported  by  172  (50%)  patients  with  foodborne  botulism
compared  with  three  (5%)  with  wound  botulism  (14).  Whether  gastrointestinal  signs
and  symptoms  are  caused  by  botulinum  neurotoxin,  other  clostridial  products,  or
nonclostridial  substances  related  to  food  spoilage  is  unknown.  Whether  foodborne
botulism  from  intentional  contamination  of  food  with  purified  botulinum  toxin  would
cause  gastrointestinal  signs  and  symptoms  is  unknown  (14).  Constipation  is  often
reported as an early symptom among children (31). Infants and young children might
not be able to describe symptoms such as double vision; signs were more commonly
reported  than  symptoms  among  children  (31).  The  terminology  used  to  describe  the
neurologic manifestations of botulism in infants differs from that used for children and
adolescents; for example, in one analysis, hypotonia, weak cry, and poor feeding were
reported  among  the  three  infants  with  foodborne  botulism  but  not  in  other  children
(36). Botulism is typically described as producing symmetric neurologic deficits, and the
pathophysiological mechanism of the disease (i.e., circulatory distribution of the toxin
to  neuromuscular  junctions)  (12)  is  consistent  with  this  description.  Certain  detailed
case  studies  describe  individual  patients  with  asymmetric  neurologic  deficits  (47).
Larger  case  series  have  reported  asymmetry  or  unilateral  neurologic  deficits  in  the
range of 6%–15% of patients (13,16). These data are difficult to interpret because many
case series present the findings from clinical chart abstractions; data in charts might be
missing  or  incomplete  and  are  typically  reported  by  multiple  providers  with  varying
levels of expertise and charting habits. Unreactive pupils are expected in patients with
botulism but were reported in only 25% in a large series of confirmed cases (i.e., cases
with  a  positive  specimen  or  epidemiologic  association  of  a  clinically  compatible  case
with  a  case  with  a  positive  specimen)  (13).  Although  rare,  symptoms  such  as  fever,
nondescending  paralysis,  and  altered  mental  status  have  been  reported  (13,31).
Botulism  typically  affects  proximal  before  distal  muscles;  however,  equal  muscle
strengths or even distal muscles weaker than proximal have been reported (13). The
reasons for these rarely reported findings might include an inadequately performed or
recorded neurologic examination, a preexisting focal deficit, coincident processes such
as infection, or a rare variance from the classical syndrome. Respiratory failure without
preceding  neurologic  deficits  has  rarely  been  reported  as  the  presenting  symptom.
Such a presentation is highly improbable and likely represents an inability to perform a
timely, thorough neurologic examination, which would have revealed the cranial nerve
palsies  that  precede  pharyngeal  compromise  and  respiratory  muscle  paralysis.  In  a
series  of  72  patients  with  sporadic  (i.e.,  single)  cases  of  botulism,  most  had  a  chief
complaint  that  included  symptoms  reflecting  the  classical  neurologic  deficits  of
botulism (i.e., slurred speech, weakness, and difficulty swallowing). However, some of
the primary signs and symptoms were less indicative of botulism (e.g., gastrointestinal
symptoms only, back pain and difficulty using a walker, altered consciousness, and lip
and  tongue  numbness)  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016).  Patients  whose  primary  signs
and symptoms did not reflect classical neurologic deficits of botulism were more likely
to have a delayed diagnosis of botulism (CDC, unpublished data, 2016). Results from
routine laboratory tests, including complete blood counts, examination of cerebrospinal
fluid  (CSF),  and  radiologic  studies,  are  typically  normal  in  patients  with  botulism.  In
Guillain-Barré syndrome, CSF protein concentrations are often elevated, especially by
the second week of illness (48). In patients with botulism, mild increases in CSF protein
concentrations  are  not  reported  frequently  (13).  Brain  imaging  might  help  exclude
brainstem  strokes  that  can  produce  nonlateralizing  symptoms.  The  Tensilon
(edrophonium)  test,  historically  used  to  help  diagnose  myasthenia  gravis,  is  usually
negative  in  patients  with  botulism,  although  minimal  responses  have  been  reported
(36).
 Electrodiagnostic
 studies
 such
 as
 repetitive
 nerve
 stimulation
 (RNS),
electromyography (EMG), and nerve conduction studies (NCSs) can help elucidate the
etiology  of  muscle  weakness.  RNS  involves  electrically  stimulating  a  motor  nerve  at
either  low  (2–3  Hz  or  possibly  5  Hz)  or  high  frequency  (30–50  Hz)  and  recording  the
response in the distal muscle. EMG involves inserting a needle electrode into a muscle
and  recording  the  electrical  activity  at  rest  and  with  effort,  showing  motor  unit
potentials  or  motor  unit  action  potentials.  An  NCS  involves  providing  an  electrical
stimulus to a nerve and recording the electrical response from a sensory nerve (sensory
nerve  conduction  study)  or  muscle  (motor  nerve  conduction  study)  (49).  Distinctive
classical  findings  of  botulism  are  an  increment  in  the  compound  motor  nerve  action
potential amplitude, with RNS rates of 30–50 Hz (50); fibrillation; decreased recruitment
of muscle units; decreased duration of muscle unit potentials with EMG; and decreased
motor-evoked amplitude on an NCS with otherwise normal findings (49). However, early
in the disease course, electrodiagnostic studies might be normal or almost normal and
therefore  not  helpful.  EMG,  RNS,  and  NCSs  have  several  limitations.  They  are
operator-dependent  and  technically  challenging,  require  specialized  training  and
equipment,  are  not  available  at  all  hospitals,  and  can  take  2  hours  to  complete;  in
addition,  the  results  require  expert  interpretation.  Early  in  the  course  of  botulism,
electrodiagnostic  testing  results  are  likely  to  be  normal  (except  for  testing  by
single-fiber EMG) (51,52); late in the course, abnormalities are detected by these tests.
EMG  requires  cooperation  from  the  patient.  The  entire  examination  can  be  painful,
especially  RNS  and  particularly  at  30–50  Hz  (49).  Clinicians  must  remember  that
patients with botulism who are paralyzed and intubated are still conscious (unless they
are  sedated);  therefore,  they  should  explain  to  patients  who  are  not  sedated  why
electrodiagnostic  testing  is  being  conducted  and  what  they  should  expect.  The
sensitivity and specificity of EMG, RNS, and NCSs for diagnosing botulism are unknown.
Electrodiagnostic findings in patients with other neuromuscular diseases (e.g., the Miller
Fisher variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome) can be similar to those of botulism (50,51).
More focused EMG studies, such as single-fiber EMG with measurement jitter, might be
more sensitive (although it is nonspecific) than the general EMG but require even more
specialized training, more expensive equipment, and more cooperation from the patient
(52).  The  findings  of  electrodiagnostic  studies  should  always  be  considered  in  the
context  of  clinical,  epidemiologic,  and  laboratory  data.  Results  from  electrodiagnostic
studies might help with the diagnosis of suspected botulism in settings of conventional,
contingency,  and  crisis  standards  of  care,  depending  on  the  situation.  During  an
outbreak,  electrodiagnostic  studies  are  rarely  needed  for  a  cluster  of  patients  with  a
clear  history  of  bilateral,  symmetric  cranial  nerve  palsies  followed  by  descending
paralysis. However, for patients for whom the diagnosis is not clear, electrodiagnostic
studies  might  help  distinguish  botulism  from  other  neuromuscular  diseases  (e.g.,
myasthenia  gravis  or  Guillain–Barré  syndrome).  This  is  especially  true  for  sporadic
(single)  cases,  in  which  increasing  the  diagnostic  certainty  of  botulism  as  early  as
possible in the course of illness helps guide clinicians in making the critical decision to
treat
 with
 antitoxin
 for
 suspected
 botulism
 rather
 than
 plasmapheresis
 or
immunoglobulin therapy for suspected Guillain–Barré syndrome. Because findings from
electrodiagnostic  studies  might  remain  abnormal  for  weeks  after  illness  onset,  these
studies might be useful in the later stages of illness, when botulinum toxin is unlikely to
be detectable in the serum. Whereas the identification of multiple patients with cranial
nerve  palsies  and  descending  flaccid  paralysis  is  highly  suggestive  of  an  outbreak  of
botulism, the additional evidence from electrodiagnostic studies can provide support for
clinical and public health management decisions. Electrodiagnostic studies were helpful
in establishing the diagnosis of botulism in an outbreak with patients who demonstrated
atypical features (CDC, unpublished data, 2015). For public health events that require
contingency  or  crisis  standards  of  care,  the  likelihood  of  being  able  to  conduct
electrodiagnostic  studies  decreases.  A  known  risk  factor  for  botulism  in  a  patient’s
clinical history can help focus the clinician’s attention on the diagnosis. Risk factors for
wound  botulism  include  injection  drug  use  (especially  of  black  tar  heroin)  and  for
foodborne botulism include consumption of home-canned food (3). However, because
atypical and novel exposures also result in botulism, the absence of typical exposure
risk  factors  does  not  rule  out  the  disease.  The  occurrence  of  more  than  one  case  of
illness  that  is  suspected  to  be  botulism,  especially  among  persons  with  some
connection  to  one  another,  suggests  a  common-source  outbreak  and  substantially
increases the likelihood of the diagnosis (3). However, the occurrence of geographically
dispersed  cases  among  persons  with  no  obvious  connection  does  not  rule  out  the
possibility  of  a  botulism  outbreak  that  could  be  caused  by  a  widely  distributed,
seemingly innocuous product. Public health authorities should immediately investigate
all cases of suspected botulism and, when exposures are suspected, inform clinicians
about them promptly so that other patients with compatible signs and symptoms can
be interviewed and possibly linked to the outbreak. Because diagnosing botulism can
be challenging, a tool with evidence-based clinical criteria has been developed to aid
clinicians in early identification of botulism in settings of crisis or contingency standards
of care, when the probability of botulism increases above the level of extremely rare;
the tool may be used in conventional settings as well (Box 1) (36). Cases of botulism
from  several  sources  were  used  to  identify  signs  and  symptoms  of  acute  botulism
onset,  which  were  compared  and  ranked  by  frequency  to  identify  criteria  that  are
optimally  sensitive  for  a  case  of  botulism  (Tables  3  and  4).  The  tool  was  modified  to
account for reasons illnesses were not captured, and expert input from clinicians and
other  experts  was  applied  to  the  criteria  that  comprise  the  tool.  Ancillary  results,
including those from electrodiagnostic, neuroimaging, and Tensilon (edrophonium) tests
and  lumbar  puncture,  were  not  included  in  the  tool.  The  tool  was  designed  for
maximum  objectivity  and  reproducibility  when  used  among  health  care  workers;
therefore, signs that frequently occurred but were difficult to quantify (e.g., sluggishly
reactive pupils) were not included. Also omitted were epidemiologic risk factors that are
often  not  confirmed  early  in  the  course  of  an  investigation  when  most  severely  ill
patients  seek  care  for  symptoms.  The  tool  can  be  used  for  children  and  adults,
including  pregnant  women,  and  by  various  health  care  workers  without  supervision
after  brief,  focused  training  during  contingency  and  crisis  situations  such  as  large
outbreaks.  The  tool  is  not  intended  to  replace  a  thorough  physical  examination  and
ancillary  testing  or  to  diagnose  botulism;  rather,  the  purpose  is  to  help  clinicians
determine when to consider a diagnosis of botulism, without the distractions that can
result from atypical or incidental findings (36). In a setting of conventional standard of
care, the tool can be used to stimulate consideration of botulism, followed by a more
detailed evaluation. In a setting of crisis standard of care, meeting these criteria alone
might be sufficient to treat for presumed botulism. If only some of the criteria are met,
physicians  might  categorize  patients  as  having  a  medium  likelihood  of  botulism  and
monitor them (Figures 1 and 2). Fulfillment of these criteria should not be considered
diagnostic  of  botulism;  patients  with  illnesses  commonly  confused  with  botulism,
including  myasthenia  gravis  and  Guillain-Barré  syndrome,  might  meet  the  criteria.
During  outbreaks,  “worried  well”  persons  (i.e.,  persons  who  have  anxiety  about
becoming  ill  during  an  outbreak)  who  do  not  have  objective  signs  or  symptoms  of
botulism  often  seek  care  at  hospitals  for  subjective  symptoms  (53).  Because  triaging
these  patients  can  be  time  consuming  and  delay  treatment  of  other  patients,  a
response to a large botulism outbreak requires managing numerous persons who seek
hospital  care  but  do  not  need  treatment  and  educating  the  public  about  which  signs
and  symptoms  do  not  require  a  hospital  visit.  The  critical  initial  treatment  and
management  decisions  for  patients  with  suspected  botulism  must  be  made  based  on
clinical findings. Botulinum antitoxin, the only specific therapy for botulism, should be
administered as quickly as possible. Because laboratory confirmation can take several
days, delaying administration of antitoxin to a patient with a high or medium likelihood
of  botulism  while  awaiting  laboratory  results  can  worsen  the  patient’s  outcome
(3,35,44,45).  Laboratory  testing  is  performed  to  confirm  clinically  suspected  cases,
confirm that administered botulinum antitoxin contains neutralizing antibodies against
the  serotype  of  botulinum  neurotoxin  causing  illness,  and  demonstrate  (or  confirm
epidemiologic data) that botulinum neurotoxin is in the suspected food so the source
can  be  safely  removed  and  additional  illnesses  prevented.  Botulism  is  confirmed  in
symptomatic  persons  by  detecting  one  of  the  following:  1)  botulinum  neurotoxin  in
serum, stool, or gastric fluid; 2) botulinum neurotoxin–producing species of Clostridium
(i.e.,  C.  botulinum,  C.  baratii,  or  C.  butyricum)  in  a  stool  or  wound  culture;  or  3)
botulinum  neurotoxin  in  food  consumed  by  a  symptomatic  person  (3).  Environmental
testing  is  not  conducted  in  investigations  of  foodborne  botulism.  Laboratory
confirmation  can  only  be  performed  by  certain  municipal  and  state  public  health
laboratories  and  by  CDC’s  National  Botulism  Laboratory.  Public  health  laboratories
conduct  free  emergency  specimen  testing  for  possible  botulism  and  provide  detailed
instructions  on  collection  and  shipment  of  appropriate  specimens.  The  gold  standard
method  for  identifying  botulinum  neurotoxin,  used  in  specialized  public  health
laboratories, is the mouse bioassay (54). This method requires maintenance of mouse
colonies  and  expertise  in  recognizing  botulism  signs  in  mice.  Specimens  are  injected
intraperitoneally into the mice with and without antitoxin; the mice are then observed
for  up  to  96  hours  by  expert  technicians  for  signs  of  botulism.  Results  might  be
available within 24 hours of receipt of the specimen by the laboratory if the botulinum
neurotoxin level in the specimen is high; however, low levels of toxin that are sufficient
to produce human illness might not produce signs in mice. The mouse bioassay is the
only  FDA-approved  method  for  laboratory  confirmation  of  botulism;  however,  other
methods
 to
 detect
 and
 identify
 botulinum
 neurotoxin
 and
 botulinum
neurotoxin–producing  species  of  Clostridium  can  support  a  clinical  diagnosis  of
botulism. A real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, which is only available in
reference
 laboratories,
 detects
 bont
 genes
 A–G
 and
 identifies
 botulinum
neurotoxin–producing species of Clostridium in cultures. Because the PCR detects DNA
and not the actual proteinaceous toxin, confirming that a strain produces toxin depends
on using another method such as a mouse bioassay. The mass spectrometry method
for  detecting  botulinum  neurotoxin  (Endopep-MS)  is  highly  sensitive  and  specific  and
can differentiate among botulinum neurotoxin serotypes A, B, E, and F within several
hours (55). This method is only available at CDC and a limited number of other public
health  laboratories.  Laboratory  confirmation  of  botulism  is  usually  not  possible  in
nonreference laboratories (e.g., hospital and clinical laboratories) because biochemical
tests  and  mass  spectrometry  performed  in  most  of  these  laboratories  cannot  detect
botulinum neurotoxin or distinguish between botulinum neurotoxin–producing Clostridia
and  nontoxigenic  organisms.  Occasionally,  CDC  is  notified  that  a  nonreference
laboratory  has  identified  C.  sporogenes  or  C.  botulinum  in  a  clinical  specimen;
subsequent  testing  at  a  reference  laboratory  usually  identifies  the  organism  as  C.
sporogenes,  which  does  not  produce  botulinum  neurotoxin  (CDC,  unpublished  data,
2018).  Serum  specimens  must  be  collected  before  treatment  with  BAT  because  the
treatment  neutralizes  botulinum  toxin,  and  subsequent  testing  can  misleadingly
indicate the absence of toxin. Laboratory confirmation of botulism depends on astute
clinicians  recognizing  botulism  signs  and  symptoms  in  patients,  contacting  state  or
local public health departments for an emergency expert clinical consultation (including
discussion  of  laboratory  testing),  and  ordering  collection  and  rapid  transport  of
appropriate  specimens  (Table  5;  Box  2)  (2,3,28).  For  laboratory  confirmation  of
botulism, collecting clinical specimens as soon as botulism is suspected is essential to
ensure  that  botulinum  toxin,  if  present,  is  detected  before  it  irreversibly  binds  within
neurons and drops below the level that can be detected by the assay in serum, stool, or
gastric fluid. For adults, enough whole blood should be collected without anticoagulant
to yield 10–15 mL of serum (20–30 mL whole blood); a smaller volume for children is
acceptable,  although  4  mL  of  serum  is  the  minimum  volume  required  for  the  mouse
bioassay.  Although  10–20  g  of  stool  should  be  collected,  smaller  amounts  are
sometimes  sufficient;  rectal  swabs  from  infants  or  young  children  are  acceptable.  In
constipated  patients,  stool  specimens  can  be  collected  by  performing  an  enema  with
(preferably)  sterile  nonbacteriostatic  water  and  non–glycerin-containing  suppositories;
tap water can interfere with laboratory testing and is not recommended. Stool may be
collected after treatment with BAT because Clostridium organisms might still be present
in stool even if toxin has been neutralized in the serum (17); BAT treatment should not
be  delayed  to  collect  stool  specimens.  Suspect  foods  should  be  sent  for  laboratory
testing in their original containers so laboratory experts can determine which parts of
the food specimen should be tested. Even containers with dried or sparse amounts of
food  have  yielded  positive  test  results  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016).  If  necessary,
food  can  be  sent  in  sterile,  unbreakable  containers.  All  clinical  and  food  specimens
should be immediately refrigerated (36°F–46°F [2°C–8°C]) and kept at this temperature
while  transported;  specimens  should  not  be  frozen.  Specimens  from  exposed  but
asymptomatic persons are not routinely tested because the toxin in their specimens is
likely to be below the limit of detection of the mouse bioassay; rare exceptions include
known exposures to high toxin levels in a research laboratory setting, in which clinical
specimens  can  be  obtained  and  BAT  can  be  administered  before  illness  onset.
Confirmation of botulism in a sporadic (single) patient is valuable because it eliminates
alternative diagnoses and their treatments and provides a prognosis. In a substantial
proportion  of  cases,  test  results  are  negative  despite  near  certainty  of  the  clinical
diagnosis. This typically occurs because a delay in recognizing possible botulism leads
to  collection  of  clinical  specimens  later  in  illness,  when  levels  of  toxin  in  serum  have
fallen below the limit of detection of laboratory tests. In patients with wound botulism,
botulinum  neurotoxin–producing  species  of  Clostridium  are  not  always  detected  in
wound  specimens,  especially  after  administration  of  antibiotics.  Top  Botulism  causes
progressive  flaccid,  descending  paralysis  that  might  result  in  respiratory  compromise
from upper airway collapse or respiratory muscle impairment (3). Patients with botulism
should be monitored closely for neurologic, respiratory, and autonomic manifestations.
Because of the potential for rapid clinical deterioration, frequent examination and other
monitoring  measures  should  be  performed  to  allow  prompt  life-saving  interventions.
Botulism  signs  and  symptoms  occur  in  a  typical  order.  Some  patients  initially  have
nausea  and  vomiting,  then  nearly  all  patients  develop  cranial  nerve  palsies  (which
might include respiratory compromise from upper airway compromise); some develop
respiratory  failure  and  paralysis  of  the  extremities  (14).  A  systematic  review  of  375
patients  in  the  literature  documented  a  range  in  the  number  of  cranial  nerve  palsies
recorded  at  hospital  admission:  126  (34%)  patients  had  one  or  two  cranial  nerve
palsies, 119 (32%) patients had three or four, and 130 (35%) patients had five or more;
27  (7%)  had  no  cranial  nerve  palsies  noted  (14).  Paralysis  can  progress  rapidly  (14).
Neuromuscular  paralysis  in  patients  with  botulism  can  result  in  respiratory  failure  by
affecting the muscles that prevent aspiration and maintain a patent upper airway, as
well  as  those  involved  in  respiration  (e.g.,  the  diaphragm).  In  a  systematic  review  of
402  adults  with  botulism,  169  (42%)  patients  had  respiratory  compromise  when
admitted  to  the  hospital,  with  either  shortness  of  breath  or  dyspnea  (50  [12%])  or
respiratory distress or failure (119 [30%]) (14). Almost half (184 [46%]) later required
intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation.  Approximately  two  thirds  of  patients  who  had
respiratory  involvement  when  admitted  to  the  hospital  had  been  ill  for  <48  hours.
Among patients who required intubation (with data on hospital day of intubation), 87%
required intubation in the first 2 hospital days. In a review of medical charts from 99
patients with confirmed botulism, shortness of breath was reported in 67 (68%) patients
on  the  first  or  second  day  of  hospitalization  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016).  In  a
systematic  review  of  17  pregnant  patients  with  botulism,  11  (69%)  patients
experienced  respiratory  failure  requiring  intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation  (30).
Pregnant  patients  might  be  at  increased  risk  for  respiratory  failure  because  of
decreased  functional  residual  lung  capacity,  diaphragmatic  rise,  increased  oxygen
consumption,  and  increased  intra-abdominal  pressure  (56).  In  a  systematic  review  of
360  children  with  botulism,  91  (25%)  required  mechanical  ventilation  (31).  Adult,
nonpregnant  patients  with  botulism  might  require  mechanical  ventilation  more
frequently than children with botulism because of comorbid conditions such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and obesity. No data are available to indicate whether
certain  clinical  features  among  patients  with  botulism  are  associated  with  eventual
intubation and mechanical ventilation. An analysis of 20 patients with wound botulism
found  no  statistically  significant  differences  in  the  initial  signs  and  symptoms  of
patients  who  developed  respiratory  failure  and  patients  who  did  not  (57).  Nausea,
vomiting,  and  any  cranial  nerve  palsy  with  urinary  retention  or  dysphagia  were  the
signs and symptoms most predictive of respiratory failure in an analysis of 137 patients
from  a  foodborne  botulism  outbreak  in  Thailand  (58).  Because  of  the  paucity  of  data
regarding respiratory monitoring and clinical predictors of respiratory failure in patients
with  botulism,  clinical  practices  from  other  neuromuscular  disorders  that  can  cause
respiratory failure (e.g., myasthenia gravis and Guillain-Barré syndrome) might be used
for respiratory monitoring of patients with botulism. Spirometry is an objective measure
of respiratory muscle function that, along with physical examination, can help clinicians
determine whether a patient needs intubation. For example, forced vital capacity (FVC)
<20  mL/kg,  maximum  inspiratory  pressure  (i.e.,  negative  inspiratory  force)  <30  cm
H2O,  and  maximum  expiratory  pressure  <40  cm  H2O  were  each  associated  with  the
need  for  mechanical  ventilation  in  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  patients  (59).  Respiratory
function also might be monitored using sniff nasal inspiratory pressure and the single
breath count test. Sniff nasal inspiratory pressure testing, which evaluates diaphragm
strength  and  inspiratory  muscle  function,  involves  occluding  one  nostril  with  a
pressure-measuring
 device
 and
 inhaling
 sharply
 through
 the
 other
 nostril
(60,61).Values  greater  than  −70  cm  H2O  (males)  or  −60  cm  H2O  (females)  might
reflect  the  absence  of  clinically  significant  inspiratory  muscle  weakness;  severe  nasal
congestion might cause falsely low values (62,63).The single breath count test involves
taking a deep breath and then counting at a rate of two numbers per second for as long
as possible while exhaling. A study of 31 patients with myasthenia gravis documented
that the single breath count correlated with FVC, with each counted number equal to
116  mL  of  FVC;  counting  to  ≥25  was  proposed  to  correlate  with  normal  respiratory
muscle function (64). End-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) monitoring, which is noninvasive
and available in many hospitals, is an optional modality for monitoring early respiratory
failure. Rising partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2) or EtCO2 strongly predicts the need for
mechanical ventilation. Bulbar dysfunction is often a prominent feature of botulism and
has been associated with the need for intubation and mechanical ventilation in patients
with Guillain-Barré syndrome (59). Monitoring pulse oximetry and arterial blood gases
might  not  be  reliable  early  indicators  of  emerging  respiratory  failure  in  patients  with
botulism because hypoxia and hypercapnia might not develop until the later stages of
respiratory  failure,  as  documented  in  patients  with  other  neuromuscular  disorders  in
which gas diffusion is unimpaired, such as Guillain-Barré syndrome (65–67). Botulinum
neurotoxins
 can
 impair
 the
 postganglionic
 release
 of
 acetylcholine
 in
 the
parasympathetic  nervous  system,  causing  unopposed  stimulation  of  the  sympathetic
system (68,69). Case reports and series have noted features of dysautonomia (e.g., dry
mouth,  urinary  retention,  constipation,  and  orthostatic  hypotension)  in  patients  with
botulism,  usually  in  cases  caused  by  toxin  type  B  (70–73).  Similarly,  autonomic
dysfunction  is  commonly  reported  in  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  patients,  with  cardiac
manifestations  of  dysautonomia,  including  sinus  tachycardia  or  bradycardia,  cardiac
dysrhythmias,
 blood
 pressure
 lability,
 abnormal
 hemodynamic
 responses
 to
medications, and nonspecific electrocardiogram changes (74–76). These manifestations
have  prompted  some  experts  to  recommend  close  monitoring  of  pulse  and  blood
pressure  in  patients  with  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  (77).  Similar  monitoring  would
therefore be reasonable for patients with botulism. Top Treatment involves supportive
care,  intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation  when  necessary,  and  administration  of
equine-derived  botulinum  antitoxin.  Botulism  produces  a  protracted  flaccid  paralysis
that lasts for weeks to months. Death in the acute state is typically the result of early
respiratory  failure;  later  in  the  course  of  illness,  death  is  usually  caused  by
complications from protracted intensive care, such as ventilator-associated pneumonia
and  deep  vein  thrombosis  (DVT)  (3).  Timely  administration  of  botulinum  antitoxin
mitigates  the  extent  and  severity  of  paralysis,  including,  in  certain  instances,
prevention of progression to respiratory compromise, and in other instances, reduction
of  the  duration  of  mechanical  ventilation  and  intensive  care  (31,37,82,83).  Almost  all
patients  with  botulism  can  survive,  even  without  antitoxin,  if  they  receive  supportive
care, including mechanical ventilation, when required. This is reflected in the mortality
trend  for  botulism.  The  case-fatality  ratio  approached  70%  in  the  first  half  of  the
twentieth  century,  despite  the  availability  of  botulinum  antitoxin  then  (82).  Mortality
rates decreased beginning in the 1940s and 1950s to their current rate of <5%, with
improvement corresponding to the development of modern intensive care techniques,
particularly  mechanical  ventilation  (82).  However,  survival  and  recovery  require
prolonged use of intensive care resources, which might be limited in events with many
patients  with  botulism.  Top  The  only  specific  therapy  for  botulism  is  botulinum
antitoxin. When administered early in the course of illness (within 48 hours of symptom
onset  and  ideally  within  24  hours),  botulinum  antitoxin  can  stop  the  progression  of
paralysis and prevent respiratory compromise in certain patients. The antitoxin cannot
reverse existing paralysis. The antitoxin is an equine-derived preparation of antibodies
that bind and neutralize botulinum toxin in the bloodstream that has not yet irreversibly
bound  to  synaptic  receptors;  the  resulting  antitoxin-toxin  complex  is  cleared  from
circulation  (29,37).  Botulinum  antitoxin  is  toxin  type–specific  (e.g.,  antitoxin  to  toxin
type  A  neutralizes  only  toxin  type  A).  BAT,  the  only  botulinum  antitoxin  preparation
available  for  treatment  of  noninfant  botulism  in  the  United  States,  is  a  mixture  of
antibodies to botulinum toxin types A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, licensed for the treatment of
symptomatic  botulism  in  adults  and  children  (29,37,84).  Antitoxin  is  stocked  by  CDC,
and health care providers who identify an illness they suspect is botulism can contact
the  24-hour  CDC  botulism  consult  service  and  request  antitoxin  if  indicated
(https://www.cdc.gov/botulism/health-professional.html).  The  standard  adult  dose*  is
one vial, administered by intravenous infusion. The pediatric dose is based on weight.
The standard adult dose of BAT contains approximately 107 IU of antitoxins A, B, C, and
F; 106 IU of antitoxins D and E; and 600 units of antitoxin G (Table 6). These amounts
exceed by one to two orders of magnitude (i.e., tenfold to 100-fold greater) the amount
of toxin types A, B, or E documented in the serum of virtually every botulism patient in
whom  the  toxin  level  has  been  quantified.  A  theoretical  possibility  exists  that  the
neutralizing capacity of BAT could be exceeded by circulating toxin levels in a patient
exposed to an extremely high toxin load in naturally occurring disease; the circulating
toxin level that might be attained in an intentional contamination event is not known.
BAT contains purified antibodies from the serum of horses immunized with botulinum
toxoids  and  toxins.  As  concentrated  preparations  of  foreign  proteins,  they  can  elicit
immune reactions, including anaphylaxis, in human recipients. Despeciation and other
processes  used  in  producing  modern  equine  antitoxin  might  reduce  but  do  not
eliminate  the  risk  for  allergic  reactions.  Data  on  BAT  indicate  an  anaphylaxis  rate  of
<2%;
 a
 similar
 frequency
 was
 calculated
 for
 previously
 used
 formulations
(29,31,37,85). Among 249 patients treated with BAT in one analysis, the only serious
adverse event occurred in a child who experienced hemodynamic instability, including
asystole,  and  recovered;  other  allergic  reactions,  typically  rash,  were  noted  in  six
patients and were without sequelae (37). Skin testing before antitoxin administration,
once  universally  recommended,  is  no  longer  recommended.  Skin  testing  requires
specialized  training,  is  cumbersome  and  time  consuming,  and  is  likely  to  have  a  low
positive  predictive  value  (29,37).  Serum  sickness  has  been  reported  among  antitoxin
recipients;  the  frequency  is  not  well  established  (37).  Administration  of  botulinum
antitoxin early in the course of illness decreases mortality, duration of treatment in the
intensive  care  unit,  and  duration  of  hospitalization  (27,31,37,82,83).  A  systematic
review  and  meta-analysis  of  data  during  1923–2016  indicated  that  overall,  antitoxin
reduced mortality (odds ratio [OR] = 0.22; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.17–0.29),
with the greatest reduction associated with treatment of botulism type E (OR = 0.13;
95%  CI  =  0.06–0.30),  followed  by  botulism  type  A  (OR  =  0.57;  95%  CI  =  0.39–0.84).
Reduction in mortality was not statistically significant for type B botulism (OR = 0.74;
95%  CI  =  0.27–1.97),  possibly  because  this  toxin  type  causes  milder  disease.  These
findings  are  driven  by  data  from  patients  treated  with  anti-ABE  trivalent  antitoxin,
which,  when  administered  for  botulism  types  A,  B  or  E,  significantly  reduced  overall
mortality  (OR  =  0.13;  95%  CI  =  0.04–0.38)  (82).  A  systematic  review  of  botulism  in
children found that antitoxin administration (multiple formulations over many decades)
significantly  reduced  mortality  (relative  risk  [RR]  =  0.65;  95%  CI  =  0.53–0.80;
p<0.001). When evaluated by age group, patients aged 1 to <5 years (RR = 0.43; 95%
CI = 0.20–0.93; p = 0.007) and aged 5 to <9 years (RR = 0.52; 95% CI = 0.33–0.82;
p<0.001) who received antitoxin had significantly decreased relative risk for death. The
relative  risk  of  the  remaining  age  groups  followed  a  similar  trend  (31).  Although  a
systematic review of 17 cases of botulism in pregnant women did not find a significant
association  between  antitoxin  administration  or  early  antitoxin  administration  and
improved  outcome,  the  trend  observed  suggested  such  a  relation  (30).  Among  104
patients  with  confirmed  botulism  treated  with  BAT,  those  treated  within  2  days  after
illness onset spent fewer days in the hospital (median: 15 versus 25 days; p<0.01) and
in the intensive care unit (10 versus 17 days; p = 0.04) than those treated later (37). A
systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  reported  similar  findings  from  reports  published
over nearly a century and entailing the use of various antitoxin formulations (82). One
study from 1984 reported that among 132 patients with type A botulism, those who had
received  trivalent  anti-ABE  equine  antitoxin  had  a  lower  fatality  rate  and  a  shorter
course  of  illness  than  those  who  did  not  receive  antitoxin,  controlling  for  age  and
incubation period. Patients who received antitoxin within 24 hours after symptom onset
had a shorter course but similar fatality rate as those who received antitoxin later (83).
Another study from 2006 reported on a subset of 18 severely ill patients from a large
botulism type A outbreak in Thailand. In this subset, patients who received antitoxin on
day 4 of illness onset had significantly shorter duration of ventilator dependence than
those receiving it on day 6 (86). Neutralizing any circulating toxin should be beneficial.
Available  evidence  does  not  indicate  a  point  in  the  course  of  illness  beyond  which
antitoxin  administration  provides  no  benefit  (82).  One  study  found  that  for  309
foodborne  botulism  cases,  toxin  was  detected  in  approximately  20%  of  serum
specimens collected beyond the sixth day of illness (17). However, toxin was detected
in  the  circulation  of  one  foodborne  botulism  patient  12  days  after  and  in  another  25
days after symptom onset (44). Because paralysis that continues to progress indicates
that toxin is still circulating, such patients should receive antitoxin to protect unaffected
muscles, regardless of the number of days after illness onset. Because current tests to
identify  toxin  in  patient  serum  take  several  days,  treatment  decisions  should  not  be
delayed  in  anticipation  of  test  results.  Antitoxin  does  not  reverse  paralysis.  Recovery
from paralysis takes weeks to months, even after antitoxin administration. No available
evidence  indicates  that  any  particular  patient  characteristic  (e.g.,  age,  sex,  or
preexisting  health  conditions)  predicts  better  outcome  from  antitoxin  administration
(82). One report found that among 132 patients with botulism type A, the reduction in
fatality  rate  and  duration  of  illness  associated  with  antitoxin  administration  persisted
after  controlling  for  age  (83).  General  principles  of  respiratory  care  suggest  that
patients  with  preexisting  respiratory  conditions  (e.g.,  obstructive  or  restrictive  lung
disease) or physiologic or anatomic conditions (e.g., pregnancy, obesity, and chest wall
malformation)  might  have  a  higher  risk  for  respiratory  compromise  than  the  general
population. Earlier administration of antitoxin to such patients theoretically might have
more  impact  in  preventing  respiratory  failure.  Retreatment  for  a  single  exposure  to
botulinum  toxin,  which  would  imply  circulating  toxin  levels  exceeding  the  antitoxin’s
neutralizing  capacity,  is  not  described  in  the  modern  published  literature.  Toxin
circulation has been reported in untreated patients 12 days and 25 days after exposure
(44). Such persistent presence of toxin from a single exposure suggests an extremely
high exposure dose and initial circulating level, very slow absorption of ingested toxin,
or development of a botulinum toxin–producing colony of C. botulinum in the patient’s
intestine after ingestion of a food contaminated both with spores and toxin. Cases such
as  this  are  exceedingly  rare.  Antitoxin  prevents  progression  of  paralysis;  antitoxin
administration is not followed immediately by reversal of paralysis already present at
the  time  of  administration.  In  an  outbreak  or  another  situation  in  which  the  clinical
diagnosis  of  botulism  is  certain,  progressive  neurologic  illness  >24  hours  after
treatment  suggests  a  circulating  toxin  level  exceeding  the  neutralization  capacity  of
administered antitoxin. In a person with a suspected sporadic (single) case, especially
with  atypical  features  or  other  circumstances  associated  with  less  diagnostic
confidence,  progression  of  paralysis  despite  antitoxin  treatment  should  increase
consideration  of  alternative  diagnoses.  Under  unusual  circumstances,  such  as
documented exposure to high levels of toxin (e.g., unusually high toxin content in food
or  atypically  high  toxin  levels  in  patients’  circulation),  public  health  officials  could
recommend  increasing  or  repeating  the  antitoxin  treatment.  However,  because  toxin
quantification  is  not  routinely  performed,  such  information  is  unlikely  to  be  available.
The half-life (t1/2) in patients’ circulation of the seven antitoxin types in one vial ranges
from  7.5  to  34  hours  (84).  Theoretically,  a  shorter  half-life  might  result  in  reduced
neutralization of toxin that is being absorbed from the gut into the circulation over time.
In the highly rare instance in which it is clinically indicated, a second dose of BAT given
within 2 weeks is unlikely to result in a hypersensitivity reaction related to sensitization
caused  by  the  first  dose  because  it  usually  takes  longer  for  the  immune  system  to
respond to a new antigen (29). Older formulations of botulinum antitoxins had longer
half-lives than BAT (84,87). The syndrome known as infant botulism is an exceedingly
rare and sporadic disease caused by colonization of the intestine by Clostridia and in
situ  toxin  production.  A  single  case  of  suspected  botulism  in  an  infant  is  usually
presumed  to  be  infant  botulism.  These  guidelines  do  not  address  the  syndrome  of
infant  botulism,  for  which  the  indicated  treatment  is  human-origin  anti-A,  anti-B
botulinum  antitoxin  (BabyBIG),  available  after  consultation  from  the  California
Department of Public Health Infant Botulism Treatment and Prevention Program. Infant
botulism  syndrome  caused  by  other  toxin  types  may  be  treated  with  BAT  (88).
However, infants can be affected by toxin that they ingest. If an infant is affected as
part of a group of botulism cases, the infant has likely been exposed to a toxin from
food or the environment, and the illness is likely to be botulism in an infant rather than
the syndrome of infant botulism. In such circumstances, the infant should receive BAT
and be treated using these guidelines. The FDA-approved BAT dose for infants (persons
aged <1 year) is 10% of the adult dose, regardless of weight. The BAT dose for children
(persons  aged  1–16  years)  is  20%–100%  of  the  adult  dose,  according  to  10
weight-based categories (84). These doses were derived using the Salisbury rule, which
is a method of calculating weight-based brackets for dosing in children (89): for children
who weigh <66 lb (30 kg), double the body weight to determine the percentage of the
adult dose to use; for children who weigh >66 lb (30 kg), add 66 lb (30 kg) to the body
weight to determine the percentage of the adult dose to use. However, weight-based
dosing might not provide a dose of sufficient neutralizing capacity in a child. Botulinum
antitoxin acts by neutralizing toxin in the circulation not yet bound to synaptic nerve
endings. Therefore, the amount of toxin in circulation is not proportional to the patient’s
weight and instead reflects the dose of toxin ingested. The dose ingested might not be
proportional to the volume of food consumed because the distribution of toxin in a food
can  vary  widely.  The  absolute  amount  of  botulinum  toxin  in  a  child  might  be  no
different from, but could also be greater than, the amount in an adult who ate the same
contaminated food. Therefore, the amount of neutralizing antitoxin required needs to
be proportional to the amount of toxin present and could result in the same (or greater)
dose than for an adult. Treatment of pediatric botulism without regard to body weight
has  been  reported  in  one  publication,  which  documented  that  12  patients  aged  4–61
years  in  Sichuan  Province,  China,  all  received  100,000  units  of  antitoxin,  with  no
adjustment of dose for age or weight. Although no data were reported on severity of
morbidity  or  outcome  by  age,  the  length  of  stay  in  the  hospital  ranged  from  5  to  19
days  (median:  8  days),  with  no  deaths  (90).  Several  other  case  reports  involving
children have been published but without specific data on dosing regimen. As noted in
the  sections  pertaining  to  botulinum  antitoxin  treatment  of  adults,  if  a  child  needs  a
second  dose  of  BAT  (a  situation  that  is  highly  unusual  and  is  clinically  indicated  by
progression of paralysis >24 hours after administration of a first dose of antitoxin, with
high  confidence  in  the  diagnosis  of  botulism),  the  dose  is  unlikely  to  result  in  a
hypersensitivity reaction because of sensitization caused by the first dose. The immune
system  takes  weeks  to  complete  the  humoral  immune  response  after  introduction  of
antigen;  therefore,  an  allergic  reaction  to  a  second  dose  within  a  period  of  up  to  2
weeks  would  be  unlikely  (29).  A  systematic  review  assessed  17  cases  of  botulism
among pregnant women treated with antitoxin. No antitoxin-related complications were
reported in the patients or their fetuses. Although statistical testing of the therapeutic
effects of antitoxin administration was not performed because of the small number of
cases,  descriptive  findings  suggested  that,  as  in  nonpregnant  patients,  antitoxin
improved  outcomes  when  administered  early  (30).  General  principles  of  respiratory
care suggest that preexisting respiratory diseases (e.g., obstructive or restrictive lung
disease) or physiologic or anatomic conditions (e.g., pregnancy, obesity, and chest wall
malformation)  might  increase  the  risk  for  respiratory  compromise  in  patients  with
botulism compared with those in the general population. Earlier antitoxin administration
might  help  prevent  respiratory  failure  in  these  patients.  The  U.S.  government  has  a
large  stock  of  BAT.  Vials  are  stored  in  facilities  of  the  Strategic  National  Stockpile  in
readiness for immediate shipment (3). A temporary shortage might occur at a clinical
facility  treating  patients  because  of  the  time  required  for  shipment  and  distribution.
Theoretically,  a  shortage  could  occur  during  a  very  large  outbreak  in  which  cases
exceed  the  doses  in  the  national  stockpile.  Depending  on  the  severity  of  shortage,
contingency  or  crisis  standards  of  care  might  apply  to  the  antitoxin  supply.  Under
conditions without resource restrictions, BAT is typically administered to patients with
progressing  signs  of  botulism;  the  risks  from  BAT  administration  in  a  carefully
monitored setting with readily available intensive care are quite low, and the benefits of
preventing  progression  of  paralysis  are  substantial  (29,37).  Antitoxin  should  not  be
administered  to  asymptomatic  patients.  In  settings  requiring  contingency  or  crisis
standards of care because of a BAT shortage, increasingly restrictive criteria are applied
to  identify  the  patients  more  likely  to  benefit  from  antitoxin  administration.  Available
data do not provide unequivocal clinical characteristics or features that identify patients
more likely to benefit from antitoxin treatment. However, certain considerations might
assist  physicians  in  making  antitoxin  administration  decisions  during  an  antitoxin
shortage.  The  overarching  objective  of  antitoxin  treatment  is  to  prevent  respiratory
failure, the principal cause of death in the early stages of botulism. Treating respiratory
failure  requires  intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation,  with  its  attendant  risks  and
complications,  as  well  as  resources  for  protracted  intensive  care  and  hospitalization.
These  steps  might  in  turn  create  or  exacerbate  shortages  of  ventilators  and  other
resources. Thus, when there is a shortage of ventilators, antitoxin should be used in a
way that minimizes the occurrence of respiratory failure (i.e., administration of antitoxin
to  patients  who  do  not  yet  require  intubation  but  whose  illness  might  still  be
progressing).  Early  administration  of  botulinum  antitoxin  (≤2  days  from  symptom
onset) reduces overall death and duration of hospitalization. Among patients who have
not experienced respiratory failure, data are insufficient to indicate with certainty those
who will benefit most from antitoxin treatment. Some patients with mild symptoms will
not  progress  to  experiencing  respiratory  compromise  even  without  treatment,  and
some patients with rapidly progressing botulism, even when treated with antitoxin on
the first day of symptoms, nevertheless require intubation and mechanical ventilation
(38).  Staff  should  conduct  frequent,  focused  neurologic  examinations  of  patients  who
do  not  need  intubation  to  identify  those  whose  signs  and  symptoms  are  progressing
and who are at greater risk for respiratory failure (see Monitoring Illness Progression in
Patients  with  Botulism).  Patients  whose  signs  and  symptoms  progress  rapidly  (over
hours)  are  likely  at  highest  risk.  However,  factors  associated  with  respiratory  failure
among  patients  who  received  prompt  treatment  with  antitoxin  are  not  known,  nor  is
which  patients  would  have  required  intubation  had  they  not  received  antitoxin.  Also
unknown  is  whether  antitoxin  administered  to  patients  whose  neurologic  findings  are
progressing decreases the duration of mechanical ventilation. The standard adult dose
of  BAT  (one  vial)  contains  sufficient  amounts  of  antitoxin  types  A,  B,  C,  E,  and  F  to
neutralize  approximately  100-fold  the  measured  serum  toxin  level  for  virtually  all
patients with botulism type A, B, or E in whom circulating botulinum toxin levels have
been quantified and sufficient antitoxin of types D and G to neutralize approximately
tenfold the measured serum toxin level. These figures suggest that the standard adult
dose of BAT could reasonably be divided among two or more patients during a shortage
while maintaining an acceptable excess of neutralization capacity. However, there is no
known limit to the dose of botulinum toxin that can be ingested, nor is there a known
maximum  serum  level  that  can  be  attained  in  persons  who  have  botulism  from
unintentional
 exposure
 or
 from
 a
 deliberate
 contamination
 event.
 Ethical
decision-making on the allocation of scarce resources during a shortage is not limited to
using  resources  in  the  manner  that  is  most  clinically  appropriate.  This  type  of
decision-making requires incorporating principles of fairness and equity, meaning that
all  persons  equally  likely  to  benefit  from  therapy  have  a  similar  chance  of  receiving
treatment.  Allocation  schemes  should  take  into  account  community  preferences.  For
example,  in  some  communities  or  cultures,  children  are  considered  a  privileged,  or
priority, group. During a shortage emergency, new procedures that incorporate clinical
criteria,  standards  of  fairness,  equity,  and  community  preferences  for  allocation  of
antitoxin cannot be satisfactorily established. Allocation approaches and criteria should
be developed as part of emergency planning, using a deliberate, transparent process
that incorporates the full range of stakeholders, including those who can articulate the
preferences of the community. Top A meta-analysis found no evidence for effectiveness
of  any  specific  treatment  other  than  botulinum  antitoxin  to  date  (82).  Research  is
ongoing  for  certain  modalities  addressed  in  this  section.  No  data  exist  on  the
effectiveness of activated charcoal in the treatment of humans with botulism. A study in
mice
 showed
 that
 adding
 activated
 charcoal
 to
 botulinum
 toxin
 injected
intraperitoneally  provided  full  protection  from  signs  and  death  (91).  However,  oral
administration of activated charcoal in humans might be associated with complications.
For  example,  aspiration  and  resultant  pneumonitis  could  occur  among  patients  with
decreased  gag  or  swallow  reflexes  (92),  and  activated  charcoal  in  the  gut  might
complicate the management of ileus. Although polyethylene glycol preparations have
been proposed to speed efflux of toxin from the gut, no evidence of benefit exists (93).
Cholinergic  agonists  such  as  guanidine  and  3,4-diaminopuridine  have  been  used  in
attempts  to  stimulate  acetylcholine  release  because  they  have  been  used  in  the
treatment of other neuromuscular illnesses, with apparently transient effects (94–101).
Patients  have  also  been  treated  with  plasmapheresis,  with  no  clear  benefit  (102).
Antimicrobials  do  not  provide  any  benefit  in  treatment  of  botulism  (82).  Theoretical
concerns  have  been  raised  concerning  increased  botulinum  toxin  release  from  lysed
Clostridia organisms after antimicrobial treatment (103). Wound botulism is caused by
clostridial colonization of an anaerobic wound, treatment of which is generally centered
on  debridement  (3);  treatment  should  address  each  patient’s  clinical  situation.
Aminoglycosides act in vitro as neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) and aggravate
botulism  anecdotally  in  several  animal  species  and  in  humans  with  infant  botulism
(104–106).  In  addition,  aminoglycosides  have  been  reported  as  an  aid  for  diagnosing
botulism in mouse models (104). The neuromuscular blocking potency is highest with
neomycin  and  decreases  sequentially  with  gentamicin,  streptomycin,  kanamycin,
amikacin,  and  tobramycin  (107).  The  effect  is  more  likely  to  occur  with  serosal
administration  (e.g.,  intraperitoneal)  but  has  been  reported  by  all  routes  and  with  a
higher  incidence  in  patients  also  receiving  anesthetics,  NMBAs,  or  both,  and  with
massive transfusions of citrated blood (108). The suggested mechanism of action is a
reduction  in  presynaptic  calcium  uptake  and  acetylcholine  release  similar  to  that
caused by magnesium, as well as postsynaptic binding. This has been postulated to be
reversible with calcium salts, although possible calcium toxicity from such treatment is
a concern (108). Most of the following agents are thought to pose theoretical risks to
patients  with  botulism.  (Substantive  evidence  exists  for  the  risk  associated  with
aminoglycosides.) Concerns exist about the ability of clindamycin to block acetylcholine
release,  and  its  action  might  work  together  with  that  of  aminoglycosides  (103,109).
Theoretical concerns exist regarding penicillins increasing toxin load through cell lysis
and with tetracycline through chelation of calcium (109). However, avoiding the use of
these  agents  in  a  patient  with  a  comorbid  infection  must  be  weighed  against  the
benefits  of  treating  the  comorbid  condition.  Patients  with  botulism  who  are  being
treated  with  antimicrobial  agents  should  be  observed  for  clinical  deterioration  that
could  be  related  to  receiving  the  antibiotic.  Magnesium,  a  competitive  inhibitor  of
presynaptic  calcium-dependent  acetylcholine  release,  produces  dose-dependent
skeletal  muscle  paralysis  and  prolongs  paralysis  from  NMBAs  and  diseases  such  as
myasthenia gravis (110). In a cattle study, calcium infusions were reported to increase
paralysis  and  dissemination  of  botulinum  toxin  (111).  Calcium-channel  blockers  (e.g.,
verapamil,  nifedipine,  and  diltiazem)  can  interact  with  aminoglycosides  to  produce
complete  neuromuscular  blockade  among  patients  who  do  not  have  botulism  and
theoretically  should  be  avoided  on  the  basis  of  this  interaction  (112,113).  A  single
report  has  been  published  of  pretreatment  of  mice  with  the  monoamine  oxidase
inhibitor pargyline resulting in rapid botulism-induced death (114). Any agent that can
cause  paralysis,  including  NMBAs,  should  either  be  avoided  or  be  used  after  careful
consideration  and  with  appropriate  monitoring.  The  NMBA  succinylcholine  induces
sustained  depolarization  of  motor  endplate  at  the  myoneuronal  junction.  The
nondepolarizing  NMBAs,  such  as  rocuronium,  vecuronium,  and  pancuronium,  block
acetylcholine from binding to motor endplate receptors. Top Three botulism cases have
been  reported  in  breastfeeding  women,  prompting  questions  about  whether  such
breast milk can be safely fed to infants. Whether botulinum toxin enters breast milk is
not known; this issue has not been systematically researched. Many factors influence
whether a compound is transferred from serum to breast milk (e.g., molecular weight
and lipid solubility) (115). Medications with a molecular weight >800 daltons are less
likely to achieve clinically relevant levels in breast milk than smaller compounds (115).
The molecular weight of botulinum toxin (150,000 daltons) might prevent its passage
into  breast  milk  (116).  The  three  breastfeeding  women  who  breastfed  their  children
while  ill  with  botulism  are  briefly  described  in  the  literature.  One  mother  with  severe
type  A  foodborne  botulism  breastfed  her  infant  aged  8  months  while  acutely  ill  with
cranial nerve palsies, weakness, and shortness of breath that required intubation and
respiratory  support  for  2  weeks  (117,118).  Neither  C.  botulinum  nor  botulinum  toxin
were identified in her breastmilk, which was obtained for testing on the third day of her
illness,  4  hours  after  she  received  trivalent  ABE  botulinum  antitoxin.  The  infant  was
reportedly  breastfed  throughout  the  mother’s  illness,  including  before  the  mother
received antitoxin, and did not develop any signs or symptoms of botulism. The infant
did  not  receive  antitoxin,  C.  botulinum  was  not  identified  in  the  infant’s  stool,  and
botulinum toxin was not identified in the infant’s stool or serum collected on the third
day  of  the  mother’s  illness.  Another  study  involved  an  infant  aged  2  months  who
breastfed  while  the  mother  was  acutely  ill  with  botulism  (119).  The  mother  was
reported  to  have  died  from  type  A  botulism;  however,  the  signs  and  symptoms  she
experienced were not specified. The infant did not develop any signs or symptoms of
botulism. The study did not specify whether the infant received testing. Another infant
aged 2 months breastfed without becoming symptomatic while the mother was acutely
ill  with  type  B  botulism  (120).  The  mother  had  cranial  nerve  palsies  and  generalized
weakness  and  required  a  tracheostomy.  The  infant  received  antitoxin  (timing  of
antitoxin not specified) and remained asymptomatic. The study did not specify whether
the infant received testing. The BAT package insert states that no data are available to
assess the presence or absence of BAT in human milk, the effects on breastfed children,
or  the  effects  on  milk  production  or  excretion  (84).  BAT’s  molecular  weight  (150,000
daltons) might prevent BAT from entering breast milk (84). Few infants have received
BAT. One study found that an infant aged 10 days was treated with BAT without any
known adverse events, and another study found that a neonate developed a low-grade
fever within 1 hour of receiving BAT that continued intermittently for 72 hours (37,121).
Top With adequate critical care, especially intubation and mechanical ventilation when
needed,  almost  all  patients  with  botulism  survive  and  eventually  fully  recover,  even
without receiving antitoxin. Clinicians should proactively manage and prioritize critical
care to avoid shortages. Thorough planning can be used to anticipate several measures
that,  when  implemented  promptly  during  an  outbreak,  can  help  prevent  or  reduce
critical  care  shortages.  When  a  botulism  outbreak  is  recognized,  the  extent  of  the
outbreak should guide the mobilization of local, regional, and federal assets as quickly
as possible on an appropriate scale. This might include early transfer of supplies and
equipment  (e.g.,  intubation  supplies,  bag-mask  combinations,  ventilators,  sedatives,
anesthesia machines, and transport ventilators) from regional or federal sources to the
treating medical facilities. Because botulism is not contagious and patients are usually
hemodynamically stable, moving patients to facilities with adequate resources might be
critical  during  a  large  outbreak;  proactive  mobilization  of  transportation  resources  in
such circumstances is important. Because generalized paralysis can require prolonged
intubation  and  mechanical  ventilation,  many  patients  are  hospitalized  for  weeks  to
months  and  might  be  at  risk  for  adverse  events  that  complicate  their  care.  Various
recommendations  and  guidelines  are  available  to  help  prevent  serious  complications
such  as  catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infections,  pressure  ulcers,  DVT,  and
ventilator-associated  pneumonias  (122–124).  Because  of  the  similarities  between
Guillain-Barré  syndrome  and  botulism,  experience  with  caring  for  patients  who  have
this more common disease might be helpful. Several reports highlight major issues that
can  complicate  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  and  multidisciplinary  approaches  to  prevent
them  (77).  Because  the  complications  of  prolonged  paralysis  are  well  known  to
clinicians  and  general  guidelines  are  available  to  help  prevent  complications,  these
guidelines focus on issues that might be unique to patients with botulism or that require
additional attention. Because botulinum toxin is unlikely to cross the blood-brain barrier
in  humans,  the  toxin  does  not  exert  any  direct  effect  on  the  central  nervous  system
(116).  Patients  with  botulism  are  typically  alert  and  have  no  cognitive  deficits  unless
they are hypoxic, are intoxicated from alcohol or illicit drugs (e.g., black tar heroin), are
receiving  sedatives,  or  have  a  secondary  process  resulting  in  decreased  cognition.
Facial paralysis, ophthalmoplegia, slurred speech, and inability to respond to requests
because of muscle weakness might lead persons to think the patient has altered mental
status  or  is  comatose,  although  they  actually  are  alert,  aware,  and  listening  and
comprehending.  The  importance  of  understanding  that  patients  with  botulism  are
typically  awake  and  alert  despite  their  appearance  is  highlighted  by  one  patient’s
description of being unable to communicate with her health care providers initially and
undergoing painful procedures (e.g., EMG and NCS) with no explanation from clinicians
(125).  One  study  systematically  reviewed  communication  methods  among  conscious,
critically  ill  patients  who  were  receiving  mechanical  ventilation  and  provided  an
algorithm that might be used to optimize communication (126). Patients with botulism
and their families experience emotional distress because of the life-threatening nature
of botulism, the unpredictable prognosis of the condition, the need for multiple medical
procedures,  and  communication  difficulties  (127).  Psychosocial  support  services  have
been  associated  with  a  reduction  in  feelings  of  helplessness  and  anxiety  among
patients  and  family  members  by  the  second  week  of  hospitalization.  Clinicians  who
have cared for patients with botulism have reported that music, massage therapy, and
reading  aloud  were  often  beneficial  to  their  patients  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016).
Patients with botulism often have autonomic dysfunction because of impairments in the
parasympathetic  nervous  system,  resulting  in  dry  eyes,  dry  mouth,  urinary  retention,
and  ileus  (70,72).  However,  anecdotal  reports  from  a  2015  Ohio  botulism  outbreak
linked to potato salad indicated that patients reported copious oral secretions, perhaps
because  of  dysphagia  and  the  decreased  ability  to  swallow  oral  secretions  (CDC,
unpublished  data,  2016).  Top  The  systematic  reviews  and  discussions  during  the
forums  and  workshop  identified  evidence  gaps  in  the  diagnosis,  monitoring,  and
treatment  of  patients  with  botulism.  For  clinical  diagnosis,  identification  of  clinical
features that increase the sensitivity and specificity of clinical diagnosis could facilitate
treatment decisions and clinical management. For laboratory diagnosis, the number of
days  that  botulinum  neurotoxin  persists  in  the  serum  of  the  average  patient  with
botulism is not well established. Better data on the persistence of toxin in serum would
help  ensure  laboratory  testing  is  conducted  when  warranted.  Regarding  monitoring
neurologic  and  respiratory  status,  the  optimal  methods  and  frequency  of  assessment
also  are  unclear.  Identifying  the  optimal  methods  and  frequency  would  ensure
resources are used appropriately, which is especially important in contingency or crisis
standards of care. From the treatment standpoint, the point in the course of illness at
which  botulinum  antitoxin  offers  no  further  benefit  has  not  yet  been  identified.
Identifying this point might help determine a process for administering antitoxin during
an  antitoxin  shortage.  These  evidence  gaps  remain  because  of  the  rarity  of  botulism
and  a  lack  of  evidence  that  is  more  robust  than  case  reports  and  case  series.
Prospective studies of patients with botulism might help address these gaps, providing
clinicians and public health professionals with additional data on how to treat patients
and  prepare  for  and  respond  to  botulism  outbreaks.  Top  Lead:  Agam  Rao,  MD.
Members: Dana Meaney-Delman, MD, Paula Rosenberg, Jeremy Sobel, MD, Viggy Parr,
Kevin  Chatham-Stephens,  MD,  Susan  Maslanka,  PhD,  Carolina  Luquez,  PhD,  Neal  Lin,
MD,  Stephanie  Griese,  MD,  Patricia  Yu,  MPH,  Shannon  Fleck,  MPH,  Eric  Dziuban,  MD,
Barbara  Mahon,  MD,  Susan  Gorman,  PharmD,  Olga  Henao,  PhD,  Satish  Pillai,  MD,
Michael  Bartenfeld,  MPH,  Michael  Williams,  MPH,  Joy  Hsu,  MD,  CDC.  Susan  Gorman,
PharmD, Patricia M. Griffin, MD, Samuel Groseclose, DVM, Georgina Peacock, MD, Nicki
Pesik,  MD,  Brett  Petersen,  MD,  Scott  Santibanez,  MD,  Robert  Tauxe,  MD,  Tracee
Treadwell,  DVM,  CDC.  Roman  Bilynsky,  MD,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Institute  of
Chemical Defense; Christopher Davis, MD, George Korch, MD, Sally Phillips, PhD, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services; David Cho, PhD, Dorothy Scott, MD, David
Rouse,  MS,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Malcolm  Johns,  MS,  U.S.  Department  of
Homeland  Security,  U.S.  Public  Health  Service;  Susan  Gorman,  PharmD,  Christopher
Braden,  MD,  Dan  Sosin,  MD,  Georgina  Peacock,  MD,  CDC.  Co-Chairs:  Agam  Rao,  MD;
Dana Meaney Delman, MD, CDC. Members: Amesh Adalja, MD, University of Pittsburgh
School  of  Medicine;  Neeraj  Badjatia,  MD,  University  of  Maryland  School  of  Medicine;
Rich  Beigi,  MD,  University  of  Pittsburgh  School  of  Medicine;  Charles  Cairns,  MD,
University  of  Arizona  Health  Sciences  College  of  Medicine;  Jeffrey  Dichter,  MD,  Allina
Health  Sepsis  Program  &  Critical  Care  Program;  Margaret  Fisher,  MD,  The  Unterberg
Children’s  Hospital  at  Monmouth  Medical  Center;  Aaron  Gardner,  MD,  Eastern  Idaho
Regional  Medical  Center; Vita  Kesner,  MD,  PhD,  Emory  University  School  of Medicine;
Avindra  Nath,  MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  National  Institute  of  Neurological
Disorders  and  Stroke,  Section  of  Infections  of  the  Nervous  System;  Gordon  Peterson,
MD,  Loma  Linda  University  School  of  Medicine;  Elizabeth  Walz,  MD,  Fairfield  Medical
Center;  Max  Wiznitzer,  MD,  Rainbow  Babies  and  Children’s  Hospital;  Carolina  Luquez,
PhD, Jim Sejvar, MD, CDC. Co-Chairs: Jeremy Sobel, MD, Karen Neil, MD, CDC. Members:
John Bradley, MD, University of California School of Medicine; Jarrod Bruce, MD, Fairfield
Medical  Center;  Michael  Christian,  MD,  Cleveland  Clinic;  Marion  Danis,  MD,  National
Institutes  of  Health,  Department  of  Bioethics;  Carl  Eriksson,  MD,  Oregon  Health  &
Science University; Robert Fisher, PhD, Food and Drug Administration; Leslie Grammer,
MD,  Northwestern  University  Feinberg  School  of  Medicine;  Catherine  Hyndman,  MD,
Bristol  Bay  Area  Health  Corporation;  Mohan  Punja,  MD,  East  Carolina  University
Department of Emergency Medicine; Lewis Rubinson, MD, PhD, University of Maryland
School of Medicine; Jeanne Sheffield, MD, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine;
Colleen Terriff, PharmD, Washington State University College of Pharmacy; Eric Toner,
MD, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine; Pritish Tosh, MD, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine;  Kenneth  Tyler,  MD,  University  of  Colorado  School  of  Medicine;  Susan
Maslanka, PhD, Leonard Ortmann, PhD, Scott Santibanez, MD, Patricia Yu, MPH, CDC.
Edward  Adams,  Georgia  College  and  State  University;  Pegah  Afra,  MD,  University  of
Utah Health Services Center; Sharon Balter, MD, New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene; Paul Biedrzycki, MPH, MBA, City of Milwaukee Health Department;
Mitchell  Brin,  MD,  Allergan/University  of  California,  Irvine;  David  Cornblath,  MD,  Johns
Hopkins  University  School  of  Medicine;  Greg  Deye,  MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health;
Hilary Hewes, MD, University of Utah Health Services Center; John Hick, MD, Hennepin
County Medical Center; Timothy Jones, MD, Tennessee Department of Health; Thivakorn
Kasemsri,  MD,  Texas  Tech  University  Health  Sciences  Center;  Katie  Kurkjian,  DVM,
Virginia  Department  of  Health;  Carmen  Maher,  RN,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;
Shannon Manzi, PharmD, Boston Children’s Hospital; Mitchell Moriber, DO, Rolling Plains
Memorial Hospital; Tia Powell, MD, Albert Einstein College of Medicine; Duc Vugia, MD,
California  Department of Public  Health; Mary  Watson,  MS,  Atlanta  VA Medical  Center;
George Wendel, MD, University of Texas Southwest Medical Center; Ryan Fagan, MD,
CDC. Timothy Babinchak, MD, Christine Hall, MD, Emergent Biosolutions, Inc.; Martina
Badell, MD, Bassam Rimawi, MD, Emory University School of Medicine; Neeraj Badjatia,
MD, University of Maryland School of Medicine; Mitchell Brin, MD, Allergan/University of
California,  Irvine;  Jarrod  Bruce,  MD,  Fairfield  Medical  Center;  Michael  Christian,  MD,
Cleveland  Clinic,  Marion  Danis,  MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Department  of
Bioethics; Jeffrey Dichter, MD, Allina Health; Shannon Manzi, PharmD, Boston Children’s
Hospital; Gordon Peterson, MD, Loma Linda University School of Medicine; Pritish Tosh,
MD, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine; Elizabeth Walz-Chin, MD, Fairfield Medical Center;
Max  Wiznitzer,  MD,  University  Hospitals  of  Cleveland;  Kevin  Chatham-Stephens,  MD,
Stephanie Griese, MD, Carolina Luquez, PhD, Karen Neil, MD, Jeremy Sobel, MD, Patty
Yu,  MPH,  Agam  Rao,  MD,  CDC.  Kelsey  Edge,  MPH;  Amanda  Lubit,  DVM;  Maddison
Ferraro;  Lisa  Brown,  MPH;  Patrick  Rose,  PhD.  Stephen  Arnon,  MD,  Jessica  Khouri,  MD,
California  Department  of  Public  Health,  Infant  Botulism  Treatment  and  Prevention
Program;  George  Lewis,  DVM,  PhD,  United  States  Army  Medical  Research  and
Development Command; Shannon Manzi PharmD; Murray Brandstater, MD, Loma Linda
University;  Mitchell  Brin,  MD,  Allergan,  University  of  California,  Irvine;  John  Hick,  MD,
Hennepin  County.  Caroline  Jackman,  Julia  Chen,  Mandip  Kaur,  MPH,  Shacara  Johnson,
MPH,  Michael  Judd,  MPH,  Connor  Bridge,  Eileen  Huang,  MPH,  Heather  Tubbs,  MPH,
Maliha  Ishaq,  Stephanie  King,  David  Kazadi,  PhD,  Jesse  O’Shea,  MS,  Ehren  Dancy,
Hannah Kisselburgh, Satish Pillai, MD, Anne Wagstaff, Rabahuddin Syed, Sana Matloub.
Lorine  Spencer,  PhD,  CDC.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Jeremy  Sobel,  MD,  Division  of
Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and
Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.  Telephone:  404-639-7419;  Email:  jsobel@cdc.gov.
Top 1Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center
for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC  Top  All  authors  have  completed
and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for
disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were
disclosed.  Top  *  The  strength  of  botulinum  antitoxin  is  quantified  in  terms  of
neutralization capacity, which reflects the amount of toxin that a dose of antitoxin can
render inactive. The potency of botulinum toxin is quantified in units called the mouse
intraperitoneal lethal dose50 (MIPLD50), the amount of toxin, specific for each serotype,
required  to  kill  one  half  of  a  group  of  mice  injected  intraperitoneally.  The  antitoxin’s
neutralization capacity for each toxin type is the number of MIPLD50 that an amount of
antitoxin (of that toxin type) can neutralize and is expressed in international units (IUs).
One  IU  of  antitoxin  type  A,  B,  C,  D,  or  F  neutralizes  10,000  MIPLD50  of  the
corresponding toxin; one IU of antitoxin type E neutralizes 1,000 MIPLD50 of toxin type
E.  The  neutralizing  IU  for  toxin  type  G  has  not  been  standardized.  Top  Top  Top  *
Sources:  Institute  of  Medicine.  Crisis  standards  of  care:  a  systems  framework  for
catastrophic disaster response. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2012;
and Hick JL, Barbera JA, Kelen GD. Refining surge capacity: conventional, contingency,
and crisis capacity. Disaster Med Public Health Prep 2009;3(Suppl 2):S59–67. Top * N =
332. Data were obtained during clinical consultations with physicians treating botulism
patients; physicians were asked about the presence or absence of signs and symptoms
(Source: Rao AK, Lin NH, Jackson KA, Mody RK, Griffin PM. Clinical characteristics and
ancillary  test  results  among  patients  with  botulism—United  States,  2002–2015.  Clin
Infect Dis 2018;66[suppl_1]:S4–10).
†  Some  symptoms  of  botulism  are  nonspecific  and  might  resemble  those  of  anxiety,
including  dry  mouth,  difficulty  swallowing,  nausea,  dizziness;  in  settings  with  fewer
resources,  observation  for  more  specific  signs  and  symptoms  may  be  considered  to
document  progression  before  treatment.  Ocular  symptoms  are  considered  most
objective.
§ Defined as a temperature <100.4°F [<38°C].
¶ Includes complaints of generalized weakness, fatigue, or malaise.
** Includes slurred speech, trouble speaking clearly, or dysarthria.
††  Includes  any  changes  in  the  sound  of  voice,  such  as  hoarseness,  nasal  speech,  or
dysphonia.
§§ Includes difficulty breathing, respiratory distress, and dyspnea.
¶¶ Includes droop and paralysis.
***  Includes  sluggish,  poorly  reactive,  and  nonreactive  or  fixed  pupils.  Top  *  Source:
Chatham-Stephens K, Fleck-Derderian S, Johnson SD, Sobel J, Rao AK, Meaney-Delman
D.  Clinical  features  of  foodborne  and  wound  botulism:  a  systematic  review  of  the
literature, 1932–2015. Clin Infect Dis 2018;66(suppl_1):S11–6.
† Source: Badell ML, Rimawi BH, Rao AK, Jamieson DJ, Rasmussen S, Meaney-Delman D.
Botulism during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review. Clin Infect
Dis 2018;66(suppl_1):S30–7.
§ Source: Griese SE, Kisselburgh HM, Bartenfeld MT, et al. Pediatric botulism and use of
equine  botulinum  antitoxin  in  children:  a  systematic  review.  Clin  Infect  Dis
2018;66(suppl_1):S17–29.
¶ Includes complaints of generalized weakness and malaise.
** Includes slurred speech, trouble speaking clearly, and dysarthria in all patients and
also change in voice and weak cry in children.
†† Includes difficulty breathing, respiratory distress, and dyspnea.
§§ Includes extraocular palsy and cranial nerve 3, 4, or 6 palsies.
¶¶  Includes  change  in  the  sound  of  voice,  such  as  hoarseness,  nasal  voice,  or
dysphonia, except in children, in whom it includes only difficulty speaking.
*** Includes sluggish, poorly reactive, nonreactive, and fixed pupils.
†††  Includes  droop  or  weakness.  Top  *  When  assessing  the  likelihood  of  botulism,
consider  clinical  criteria  and  available  epidemiologic  data.  Classify  patients  into  a
botulism  likelihood  category  per  the  clinician’s  judgement.  Additional  information  on
clinical criteria is available (Rao AK, Lin NH, Griese SE, Chatham-Stephens K, Badell ML,
Sobel  J.  Clinical  criteria  to  trigger  suspicion  for  botulism:  an  evidence-based  tool  to
facilitate timely recognition of suspected cases during sporadic events and outbreaks.
Clin  Infect  Dis  2017;66[suppl_1]:S38–S42).  Top  *  When  assessing  the  likelihood  of
botulism,  consider  clinical  criteria  and  available  epidemiologic  data.  Classify  patients
into a botulism likelihood category per the clinician’s judgement. Additional information
on clinical criteria is available (Rao AK, Lin NH, Griese SE, Chatham-Stephens K, Badell
ML, Sobel J. Clinical criteria to trigger suspicion for botulism: an evidence-based tool to
facilitate timely recognition of suspected cases during sporadic events and outbreaks.
Clin  Infect  Dis  2017;66[suppl_1]:S38–S42).  Top  Source:  Rao  AK,  Lin  NH,  Griese  SE,
Chatham-Stephens  K,  Badell  ML,  Sobel  J.  Clinical  criteria  to  trigger  suspicion  for
botulism:  an  evidence-based  tool  to  facilitate  timely  recognition  of  suspected  cases
during  sporadic  events  and  outbreaks.  Clin  Infect  Dis  2017;66(suppl_1):S38–S42.  *
Suspect botulism when all three criteria are met. For all patients with botulism, intact
mental  status  is  expected.  If  a  patient  has  altered  mental  status,  this  might  be  from
other  causes  (e.g.,  respiratory  failure,  drug  or  alcohol  use,  preexisting  condition,  or
concurrent infection). † Although this tool can also be used in a conventional standard
of care setting, a more detailed evaluation is expected. In a setting of crisis standard of
care, meeting these criteria alone might be sufficient to treat for presumed botulism. §
Fever concurrent with the acute onset of botulism in an adult is exceedingly rare; fever
also is rare in infants and young children but might be more common than in adults.
Top * Times are estimates; testing might take longer during an outbreak.
† Do not delay administration of antitoxin while attempting to obtain a specimen. Top
Top  Abbreviations:  IU  =  international  units;  MIPLD50  =  mouse  intraperitoneal  lethal
dose50.
* The standard adult dose is one vial (Source: Botulism antitoxin heptavalent [A, B, C,
D, E, F, G—equine] [package insert]. Gaithersburg, MD: Cangene Corporation [Emergent
Biosolutions]; 2017. https://www.fda.gov/media/85514/download).
† Six hundred units that are not recognized internationally. Top Suggested citation for
this  article:  Rao  AK,  Sobel  J,  Chatham-Stephens  K,  Luquez  C.  Clinical  Guidelines  for
Diagnosis  and  Treatment  of  Botulism,  2021.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2021;70(No.
RR-2):1–30. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7002a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/rr/rr7002a1.htm
