Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Brent Wolff, Frank Mahoney, Anna Leena Lohiniva, and Melissa
Corkum  Qualitative  research  methods  are  a  key  component  of  field  epidemiologic
investigations because they can provide insight into the perceptions, values, opinions,
and  community  norms  where  investigations  are  being  conducted  (1,2).  Open-ended
inquiry  methods,  the  mainstay  of  qualitative  interview  techniques,  are  essential  in
formative  research  for  exploring  contextual  factors  and  rationales  for  risk  behaviors
that  do  not  fit  neatly  into  predefined  categories.  For  example,  during  the  2014–2015
Ebola  virus  disease  outbreaks  in  parts  of  West  Africa,  understanding  the  cultural
implications  of  burial  practices  within  different  communities  was  crucial  to  designing
and  monitoring  interventions  for  safe  burials  (Box  10.1).  In  program  evaluations,
qualitative methods can assist the investigator in diagnosing what went right or wrong
as  part  of  a  process  evaluation  or  in  troubleshooting  why  a  program  might  not  be
working as well as expected. When designing an intervention, qualitative methods can
be  useful  in  exploring  dimensions  of  acceptability  to  increase  the  chances  of
intervention acceptance and success. When performed in conjunction with quantitative
studies, qualitative methods can help the investigator confirm, challenge, or deepen the
validity  of  conclusions  than  either  component  might  have  yielded  alone  (1,2).   
Qualitative  research  was  used  extensively  in  response  to  the  Ebola  virus  disease
outbreaks in parts of West Africa to understand burial practices and to design culturally
appropriate  strategies  to  ensure  safe  burials.  Qualitative  studies  were  also  used  to
monitor key aspects of the response. In October 2014, Liberia experienced an abrupt
and  steady  decrease  in  case  counts  and  deaths  in  contrast  with  predicted  disease
models of an increased case count. At the time, communities were resistant to entering
Ebola treatment centers, raising the possibility that patients were not being referred for
care  and  communities  might  be  conducting  occult  burials.  To  assess  what  was
happening at the community level, the Liberian Emergency Operations Center recruited
epidemiologists  from  the  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services/Centers  for
Disease  Control  and  Prevention  and  the  African  Union  to  investigate  the  problem.
Teams  conducted  in-depth  interviews  and  focus  group  discussions  with  community
leaders, local funeral directors, and coffin makers and learned that communities were
not conducting occult burials and that the overall number of burials was less than what
they had experienced in previous years. Other key findings included the willingness of
funeral  directors  to  cooperate  with  disease  response  efforts,  the  need  for  training  of
funeral home workers, and considerable community resistance to cremation practices.
These findings prompted the Emergency Operations Center to open a burial ground for
Ebola  decedents,  support  enhanced  testing  of  burials  in  the  private  sector,  and  train
private-sector funeral workers regarding safe burial practices. Source: Melissa Corkum,
personal communication. Similar to quantitative approaches, qualitative research seeks
answers to specific questions by using rigorous approaches to collecting and compiling
information and producing findings that can be applicable beyond the study population.
The  fundamental  difference  in  approaches  lies  in  how  they  translate  real-life
complexities of initial observations into units of analysis. Data collected in qualitative
studies typically are in the form of text or visual images, which provide rich sources of
insight but also tend to be bulky and time-consuming to code and analyze. Practically
speaking, qualitative study designs tend to favor small, purposively selected samples
ideal for case studies or in-depth analysis (1). The combination of purposive sampling
and  open-ended  question  formats  deprive  qualitative  study  designs  of  the  power  to
quantify  and  generalize  conclusions,  one  of  the  key  limitations  of  this  approach.
Qualitative  scientists  might  argue,  however,  that  the  generalizability  and  precision
possible through probabilistic sampling and categorical outcomes are achieved at the
cost of enhanced validity, nuance, and naturalism that less structured approaches offer
(3).  Open-ended  techniques  are  particularly  useful  for  understanding  subjective
meanings and motivations underlying behavior. They enable investigators to be equally
adept  at  exploring  factors  observed  and  unobserved,  intentions  as  well  as  actions,
internal meanings as well as external consequences, options considered but not taken,
and  unmeasurable  as  well  as  measurable  outcomes.  These  methods  are  important
when the source of or solution to a public health problem is rooted in local perceptions
rather  than  objectively  measurable  characteristics  selected  by  outside  observers  (3).
Ultimately, such approaches have the ability to go beyond quantifying questions of how
much or how many to take on questions of how or why from the perspective and in the
words  of  the  study  subjects  themselves  (1,2).  Another  key  advantage  of  qualitative
methods  for  field  investigations  is  their  flexibility  (4).  Qualitative  designs  not  only
enable but also encourage flexibility in the content and flow of questions to challenge
and  probe  for  deeper  meanings  or  follow  new  leads  if  they  lead  to  deeper
understanding of an issue (5). It is not uncommon for topic guides to be adjusted in the
course of fieldwork to investigate emerging themes relevant to answering the original
study question. As discussed herein, qualitative study designs allow flexibility in sample
size to accommodate the need for more or fewer interviews among particular groups to
determine the root cause of an issue (see the section on Sampling and Recruitment in
Qualitative  Research).  In  the  context  of  field  investigations,  such  methods  can  be
extremely  useful  for  investigating  complex  or  fast-moving  situations  where  the
dimensions of analysis cannot be fully anticipated. Ultimately, the decision whether to
include  qualitative  research  in  a  particular  field  investigation  depends  mainly  on  the
nature of the research question itself. Certain types of research topics lend themselves
more naturally to qualitative rather than other approaches (Table 10.1). These include
exploratory investigations when not enough is known about a problem to formulate a
hypothesis or develop a fixed set of questions and answer codes. They include research
questions  where  intentions  matter  as  much  as  actions  and  “why?”  or  “why  not?”
questions  matter  as  much  as  precise  estimation  of  measured  outcomes.  Qualitative
approaches also work well when contextual influences, subjective meanings, stigma, or
strong social desirability biases lower faith in the validity of responses coming from a
relatively impersonal survey questionnaire interview. The availability of personnel with
training and experience in qualitative interviewing or observation is critical for obtaining
the  best  quality  data  but  is  not  absolutely  required  for  rapid  assessment  in  field
settings.  Qualitative  interviewing  requires  a  broader  set  of  skills  than  survey
interviewing. It is not enough to follow a topic guide like a questionnaire, in order, from
top  to  bottom.  A  qualitative  interviewer  must  exercise  judgment  to  decide  when  to
probe  and  when  to  move  on,  when  to  encourage,  challenge,  or  follow  relevant  leads
even  if  they  are  not  written  in  the  topic  guide.  Ability  to  engage  with  informants,
connect ideas during the interview, and think on one’s feet are common characteristics
of good qualitative interviewers. By far the most important qualification in conducting
qualitative fieldwork is a firm grasp of the research objectives; with this qualification, a
member of the research team armed with curiosity and a topic guide can learn on the
job  with  successful  results.  Semi-structured  interviews  can  be  conducted  with  single
participants  (in-depth  or  individual  key  informants)  or  with  groups  (focus  group
discussions [FGDs] or key informant groups). These interviews follow a suggested topic
guide  rather  than  a  fixed  questionnaire  format.  Topic  guides  typically  consist  of  a
limited number (10– 15) of broad, open-ended questions followed by bulleted points to
facilitate
 optional
 probing.
 The
 conversational
 back-and-forth
 nature
 of
 a
semi-structured format puts the researcher and researched (the interview participants)
on more equal footing than allowed by more structured formats. Respondents, the term
used  in  the  case  of  quantitative  questionnaire  interviews,  become  informants  in  the
case of individual semi-structured in-depth interviews (IDIs) or participants in the case
of  FGDs.  Freedom  to  probe  beyond  initial  responses  enables  interviewers  to  actively
engage  with  the  interviewee  to  seek  clarity,  openness,  and  depth  by  challenging
informants  to  reach  below  layers  of  self-presentation  and  social  desirability.  In  this
respect,  interviewing  is  sometimes  compared  with  peeling  an  onion,  with  the  first
version  of  events  accessible  to  the  public,  including  survey  interviewers,  and  deeper
inner layers accessible to those who invest the time and effort to build rapport and gain
trust.  (The  theory  of  the  active  interview  suggests  that  all  interviews  involve  staged
social encounters where the interviewee is constantly assessing interviewer intentions
and  adjusting  his  or  her  responses  accordingly  [1].  Consequently  good  rapport  is
important for any type of interview. Survey formats give interviewers less freedom to
divert  from  the  preset  script  of  questions  and  formal  probes.)  Individual  In-Depth
Interviews  and  Key-Informant  Interviews  The  most  common  forms  of  individual
semi-structured  interviews  are  IDIs  and  key  informant  interviews  (KIIs).  IDIs  are
conducted among informants typically selected for first-hand experience (e.g., service
users,  participants,  survivors)  relevant  to  the  research  topic.  These  are  typically
conducted as one-on-one face-to-face interviews (two-on-one if translators are needed)
to  maximize  rapport-building  and  confidentiality.  KIIs  are  similar  to  IDIs  but  focus  on
individual  persons  with  special  knowledge  or  influence  (e.g.,  community  leaders  or
health authorities) that give them broader perspective or deeper insight into the topic
area (Box 10.2). Whereas IDIs tend to focus on personal experiences, context, meaning,
and  implications  for  informants,  KIIs  tend  to  steer  away  from  personal  questions  in
favor  of  expert  insights  or  community  perspectives.  IDIs  enable  flexible  sampling
strategies  and  represent  the  interviewing  reference  standard  for  confidentiality,
rapport, richness, and contextual detail. However, IDIs are time-and labor-intensive to
collect  and  analyze.  Because  confidentiality  is  not  a  concern  in  KIIs,  these  interviews
might  be  conducted  as  individual  or  group  interviews,  as  required  for  the  topic  area.
Focus Group Discussions and Group Key Informant Interviews FGDs are semi-structured
group  interviews  in  which  six  to  eight  participants,  homogeneous  with  respect  to  a
shared experience, behavior, or demographic characteristic, are guided through a topic
guide  by  a  trained  moderator  (6).  (Advice  on  ideal  group  interview  size  varies.  The
principle is to convene a group large enough to foster an open, lively discussion of the
topic, and small enough to ensure all participants stay fully engaged in the process.)
Over  the  course  of  discussion,  the  moderator  is  expected  to  pose  questions,  foster
group participation, and probe for clarity and depth. Long a staple of market research,
focus  groups  have  become  a  widely  used  social  science  technique  with  broad
applications  in  public  health,  and  they  are  especially  popular  as  a  rapid  method  for
assessing community norms and shared perceptions. Focus groups have certain useful
advantages  during  field  investigations.  They  are  highly  adaptable,  inexpensive  to
arrange and conduct, and often enjoyable for participants. Group dynamics effectively
tap  into  collective  knowledge  and  experience  to  serve  as  a  proxy  informant  for  the
community as a whole. They are also capable of recreating a microcosm of social norms
where social, moral, and emotional dimensions of topics are allowed to emerge. Skilled
moderators can also exploit the tendency of small groups to seek consensus to bring
out disagreements that the participants will work to resolve in a way that can lead to
deeper  understanding.  There  are  also  limitations  on  focus  group  methods.  Lack  of
confidentiality  during  group  interviews  means  they  should  not  be  used  to  explore
personal experiences of a sensitive nature on ethical grounds. Participants may take it
on themselves to volunteer such information, but moderators are generally encouraged
to  steer  the  conversation  back  to  general  observations  to  avoid  putting  pressure  on
other participants to disclose in a similar way. Similarly, FGDs are subject by design to
strong  social  desirability  biases.  Qualitative  study  designs  using  focus  groups
sometimes  add  individual  interviews  precisely  to  enable  participants  to  describe
personal experiences or personal views that would be difficult or inappropriate to share
in a group setting. Focus groups run the risk of producing broad but shallow analyses of
issues  if  groups  reach  comfortable  but  superficial  consensus  around  complex  topics.
This  weakness  can  be  countered  by  training  moderators  to  probe  effectively  and
challenge  any  consensus  that  sounds  too  simplistic  or  contradictory  with  prior
knowledge.  However,  FGDs  are  surprisingly  robust  against  the  influence  of  strongly
opinionated  participants,  highly  adaptable,  and  well  suited  to  application  in  study
designs  where  systematic  comparisons  across  different  groups  are  called  for.  Like
FGDs,  group  KIIs  rely  on  positive  chemistry  and  the  stimulating  effects  of  group
discussion but aim to gather expert knowledge or oversight on a particular topic rather
than  lived  experience  of  embedded  social  actors.  Group  KIIs  have  no  minimum  size
requirements  and  can  involve  as  few  as  two  or  three  participants.  Egypt’s  National
Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) program undertook qualitative research to gain
an understanding of the contextual behaviors and motivations of healthcare workers in
complying with IPC guidelines. The study was undertaken to guide the development of
effective  behavior  change  interventions  in  healthcare  settings  to  improve  IPC
compliance. Key informant interviews and focus group discussions were conducted in
two governorates among cleaning staff, nursing staff, and physicians in different types
of  healthcare  facilities.  The  findings  highlighted  social  and  cultural  barriers  to  IPC
compliance,  enabling  the  IPC  program  to  design  responses.  For  example,  Qualitative
research  identified  sources  of  resistance  to  quality  clinical  practice  in  Egypt’s
healthcare settings and culturally appropriate responses to overcome that resistance.
____________________
Source:  Anna  Leena  Lohiniva,  personal  communication.  Visualization  methods  have
been developed as a way to enhance participation and empower interviewees relative
to  researchers  during  group  data  collection  (7).  Visualization  methods  involve  asking
participants to engage in collective problem- solving of challenges expressed through
group production of maps, diagrams, or other images. For example, participants from
the  community  might  be  asked  to  sketch  a  map  of  their  community  and  to  highlight
features of relevance to the research topic (e.g., access to health facilities or sites of
risk  concentrations).  Body  diagramming  is  another  visualization  tool  in  which
community  members  are  asked  to  depict  how  and  where  a  health  threat  affects  the
human body as a way of understanding folk conceptions of health, disease, treatment,
and prevention. Ensuing debate and dialogue regarding construction of images can be
recorded  and  analyzed  in  conjunction  with  the  visual  image  itself.  Visualization
exercises  were  initially  designed  to  accommodate  groups  the  size  of  entire
communities, but they can work equally well with smaller groups corresponding to the
size  of  FGDs  or  group  KIIs.  Fundamental  differences  between  qualitative  and
quantitative  approaches  to  research  emerge  most  clearly  in  the  practice  of  sampling
and  recruitment  of  study  participants.  Qualitative  samples  are  typically  small  and
purposive.  In-depth  interview  informants  are  usually  selected  on  the  basis  of  unique
characteristics or personal experiences that make them exemplary for the study, if not
typical  in  other  respects.  Key  informants  are  selected  for  their  unique  knowledge  or
influence in the study domain. Focus group mobilization often seeks participants who
are typical with respect to others in the community having similar exposure or shared
characteristics. Often, however, participants in qualitative studies are selected because
they  are  exceptional  rather  than  simply  representative.  Their  value  lies  not  in  their
generalizability but in their ability to generate insight into the key questions driving the
study.  Sample  size  determination  for  qualitative  studies  also  follows  a  different  logic
than that used for probability sample surveys. For example, whereas some qualitative
methods  specify  ideal  ranges  of  participants  that  constitute  a  valid  observation  (e.g.,
focus  groups),  there  are  no  rules  on  how  many  observations  it  takes  to  attain  valid
results.  In  theory,  sample  size  in  qualitative  designs  should  be  determined  by  the
saturation principle, where interviews are conducted until additional interviews yield no
additional insights into the topic of research (8). Practically speaking, designing a study
with a range in number of interviews is advisable for providing  a level of flexibility if
additional interviews are needed to reach clear conclusions. Recruitment strategies for
qualitative  studies  typically  involve  some  degree  of  participant  self-selection  (e.g.,
advertising  in  public  spaces  for  interested  participants)  and  purposive  selection  (e.g.,
identification  of  key  informants).  Purposive  selection  in  community  settings  often
requires authorization from local authorities and assistance from local mobilizers before
the informed consent process can begin. Clearly specifying eligibility criteria is crucial
for minimizing the tendency of study mobilizers to apply their own filters regarding who
reflects  the  community  in  the  best  light.  In  addition  to  formal  eligibility  criteria,
character traits (e.g., articulate and interested in participating) and convenience (e.g.,
not  too  far  away)  are  legitimate  considerations  for  whom  to  include  in  the  sample.
Accommodations  to  personality  and  convenience  help  to  ensure  the  small  number  of
interviews  in  a  typical  qualitative  design  yields  maximum  value  for  minimum
investment.  This  is  one  reason  why  random  sampling  of  qualitative  informants  is  not
only  unnecessary  but  also  potentially  counterproductive.  Analysis  of  qualitative  data
can  be  divided  into  four  stages:  data  management,  data  condensation,  data  display,
and  drawing  and  verifying  conclusions  (9).  From  the  outset,  developing  a  clear
organization  system  for  qualitative  data  is  important.  Ideally,  naming  conventions  for
original data files and subsequent analysis should be recorded in a data dictionary file
that includes dates, locations, defining individual or group characteristics, interviewer
characteristics,  and  other  defining  features.  Digital  recordings  of  interviews  or
visualization products should be reviewed to ensure fidelity of analyzed data to original
observations. If ethics agreements require that no names or identifying characteristics
be  recorded,  all  individual  names  must  be  removed  from  final  transcriptions  before
analysis  begins.  If  data  are  analyzed  by  using  textual  data  analysis  software,
maintaining  careful  version  control  over  the  data  files  is  crucial,  especially  when
multiple coders are involved. Condensing refers to the process of selecting, focusing,
simplifying, and abstracting the data available at the time of the original observation,
then  transforming  the  condensed  data  into  a  data  set  that  can  be  analyzed.  In
qualitative research, most of the time investment required to complete a study comes
after the fieldwork is complete. A single hour of taped individual interview can take a
full day to transcribe and additional time to translate if necessary. Group interviews can
take even longer because of the difficulty of transcribing active group input. Each stage
of  data  condensation  involves  multiple  decisions  that  require  clear  rules  and  close
supervision.  A  typical  challenge  is  finding  the  right  balance  between  fidelity  to  the
rhythm  and  texture  of  original  language  and  clarity  of  the  translated  version  in  the
language of analysis. For example, discussions among groups with little or no education
should  not  emerge  after  the  transcription  (and  translation)  process  sounding  like
university  graduates.  Judgment  must  be  exercised  about  which  terms  should  be
translated  and  which  terms  should  be  kept  in  vernacular  because  there  is  no
appropriate  term  in  English  to  capture  the  richness  of  its  meaning.  After  the  initial
condensation,  qualitative  analysis  depends  on  how  the  data  are  displayed.  Decisions
regarding how data are summarized and laid out to facilitate comparison influence the
depth  and  detail  of  the  investigation’s  conclusions.  Displays  might  range  from  full
verbatim  transcripts  of  interviews  to  bulleted  summaries  or  distilled  summaries  of
interview  notes.  In  a  field  setting,  a  useful  and  commonly  used  display  format  is  an
overview chart in which key themes or research questions are listed in rows in a word
processer  table  or  in  a  spreadsheet  and  individual  informant  or  group  entry
characteristics  are  listed  across  columns.  Overview  charts  are  useful  because  they
allow easy, systematic comparison of results. Analyzing qualitative data is an iterative
and ideally interactive process that leads to rigorous and systematic interpretation of
textual or visual data. At least four common steps are involved: Above all, qualitative
data  analysis  requires  sufficient  time  and  immersion  in  the  data.  Computer  textual
software  programs  can  facilitate  selective  text  retrieval  and  quizzing  the  data,  but
discerning patterns and arriving at conclusions can be done only by the analysts. This
requirement  involves  intensive  reading  and  rereading,  developing  codebooks  and
coding,  discussing  and  debating,  revising  codebooks,  and  recoding  as  needed  until
clear patterns emerge from the data. Although quality and depth of analysis is usually
proportional to the time invested, a number of techniques, including some mentioned
earlier, can be used to expedite analysis under field conditions. The most widely used
software packages (e.g., NVivo [QSR International Pty. Ltd., Melbourne, VIC, Australia]
and  ATLAS.ti  [Scientific  Software  Development  GmbH,  Berlin,  Germany])  evolved  to
include  sophisticated  analytic  features  covering  a  wide  array  of  applications  but  are
relatively expensive in terms of license cost and initial investment in time and training.
A  promising  development  is  the  advent  of  free  or  low-cost  Web-based  services  (e.g.,
Dedoose  [Sociocultural  Research  Consultants  LLC,  Manhattan  Beach,  CA])  that  have
many of the same analytic features on a more affordable subscription basis and that
enable local research counterparts to remain engaged through the analysis phase (see
Teamwork  criteria).  The  start-up  costs  of  computer-assisted  analysis  need  to  be
weighed  against  their  analytic  benefits,  which  tend  to  decline  with  the  volume  and
complexity  of  data  to  be  analyzed.  For  rapid  situational  analyses  or  small  scale
qualitative  studies  (e.g.  fewer  than  30  observations  as  an  informal  rule  of  thumb),
manual coding and analysis using word processing or spreadsheet programs is faster
and  sufficient  to  enable  rigorous  analysis  and  verification  of  conclusions.  Qualitative
methods belong to a branch of social science inquiry that emphasizes the importance of
context,  subjective  meanings,  and  motivations  in  understanding  human  behavior
patterns.  Qualitative  approaches  definitionally  rely  on  open-ended,  semistructured,
non-numeric strategies for asking questions and recording responses. Conclusions are
drawn  from  systematic  visual  or  textual  analysis  involving  repeated  reading,  coding,
and  organizing  information  into  structured  and  emerging  themes.  Because  textual
analysis is relatively time-and skill-intensive, qualitative samples tend to be small and
purposively selected to yield the maximum amount of information from the minimum
amount
 of
 data
 collection.
 Although
 qualitative
 approaches
 cannot
 provide
representative  or  generalizable  findings  in  a  statistical  sense,  they  can  offer  an
unparalleled level of detail, nuance, and naturalistic insight into the chosen subject of
study. Qualitative methods enable investigators to “hear the voice” of the researched in
a  way  that  questionnaire  methods,  even  with  the  occasional  open-ended  response
option,  cannot.  Whether  or  when  to  use  qualitative  methods  in  field  epidemiology
studies ultimately depends on the nature of the public health question to be answered.
Qualitative approaches make sense when a study question about behavior patterns or
program performance leads with why, why not, or how. Similarly, they are appropriate
when  the  answer  to  the  study  question  depends  on  understanding  the  problem  from
the perspective of social actors in real-life settings or when the object of study cannot
be adequately captured, quantified, or categorized through a battery of closed-ended
survey questions (e.g., stigma or the foundation of health beliefs). Another justification
for qualitative methods occurs when the topic is especially sensitive or subject to strong
social desirability biases that require developing trust with the informant and persistent
probing  to  reach  the  truth.  Finally,  qualitative  methods  make  sense  when  the  study
question  is  exploratory  in  nature,  where  this  approach  enables  the  investigator  the
freedom  and  flexibility  to  adjust  topic  guides  and  probe  beyond  the  original  topic
guides. Given that the conditions just described probably apply more often than not in
everyday  field  epidemiology,  it  might  be  surprising  that  such  approaches  are  not
incorporated  more  routinely  into  standard  epidemiologic  training.  Part  of  the  answer
might have to do with the subjective element in qualitative sampling and analysis that
seems at odds with core scientific values of objectivity. Part of it might have to do with
the  skill  requirements  for  good  qualitative  interviewing,  which  are  generally  more
difficult  to  find  than  those  required  for  routine  survey  interviewing.  For  the  field
epidemiologist  unfamiliar  with  qualitative  study  design,  it  is  important  to  emphasize
that  obtaining  important  insights  from  applying  basic  approaches  is  possible,  even
without  a  seasoned  team  of  qualitative  researchers  on  hand  to  do  the  work.  The
flexibility of qualitative methods also tends to make them forgiving with practice and
persistence.  Beyond  the  required  study  approvals  and  ethical  clearances,  the  basic
essential  requirements  for  collecting  qualitative  data  in  field  settings  start  with  an
interviewer having a strong command of the research question, basic interactive and
language skills, and a healthy sense of curiosity, armed with a simple open-ended topic
guide  and  a  tape  recorder  or  note-taker  to  capture  the  key  points  of  the  discussion.
Readily  available  manuals  on  qualitative  study  design,  methods,  and  analysis  can
provide  additional  guidance  to  improve  the  quality  of  data  collection  and  analysis.  <
Previous Chapter 9: Optimizing Epidemiology– Laboratory Collaborations  Next Chapter
11:  Developing  Interventions  >  The  fellowship  application  period  and  host  site
application period are closed. For questions about the EIS program, please contact us
directly at EISApplication@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/eis/field-epi-manual/chapters/Qualitative-Data.html
