Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  You  can  be  exposed  to  hazards  (like  germs,  mold,  nuisance
dust,  wildfire  smoke,  and  air  pollution)  in  the  air  in  various  situations.  This  page  will
help you understand the differences between various kinds of respirators and masks so
that you can identify the type that will meet your needs best. You can protect yourself
by  taking  steps  to  reduce  exposures.  To  decrease  exposure  to  infectious  respiratory
diseases, increase physical distancing, add fresh outdoor air, and use air filters. During
wildfires  or  poor  air  quality,  you  can  close  windows,  use  air  filters,  and  limit  time
outdoors.  Wearing  a  respirator  or  mask  is  another  way  to  reduce  exposures  to
respiratory  hazards.  Respirators  fit  closely  to  your  face  and  protect  you  by  filtering
particles out of the air you breathe. They also filter out droplets and particles that you
exhale when breathing, coughing, or sneezing to prevent the spread of germs to others.
Masks also filter out your exhaled breath to protect others. If a mask fits closely to your
face, it also provides some protection from germs spread by others. Based on the type
of  respiratory  hazard  and  the  length  of  exposure,  health  effects  can  range  from  mild
irritation  and  discomfort  to  severe  illness  or  disease.  Common  respiratory  hazards
include:  Infectious  Diseases  Exposure  to  germs  in  the  air  can  cause  respiratory
infectious diseases, like influenza and COVID-19. Respiratory secretions can form small
particles  and  droplets  that  can  be  spread  from  person  to  person.  If  the  particles  and
droplets carry germs that stay infectious in the air, they can lead to infection. During
periods of increased infections or when you are sick, it is not always possible to stay
home  or  stay  away  from  others  to  keep  you  from  becoming  sick.  You  can  wear  a
respirator  or  mask  to  reduce  your  exposure  to  germs  as  well  as  prevent  you  from
spreading  your  germs  to  others.  Mold  Mold  grows  in  places  with  a  lot  of  moisture.
People are commonly  exposed  to  mold  when  cleaning  water-damaged  buildings after
weather events like floods and hurricanes. They are exposed to particles from the mold
as well as vapors and gases from cleaning products when remediating flood damage in
their house. Refer to the CDC guidance on Respiratory Protection for Residents and/or
Cleaning Homes that Were Flooded. Nuisance Dust Nuisance dust consists of any solid
particle  in  the  air.  Cleaning,  grinding,  sanding,  smoking,  or  polishing  can  create
nuisance dust. Nuisance dust also includes pollen. You can wear a respirator or mask to
reduce your exposure to nuisance dust. Wildfire Smoke and Air Pollution Wildfire smoke
and other types of air pollution consist of small particles, other compounds like vapors,
and gases such as carbon monoxide. During periods of extremely poor air quality, it’s
not  always  possible  to  reduce  exposure  enough  to  prevent  health  effects  by  closing
windows or limiting time outdoors. Refer to the CDC guidance to Protect Yourself from
Wildfire  Smoke  and  the  EPA  Wildfire  Smoke  Resources  to  Protect  Your  Health  for
guidance and  health  fact sheets.  When  employers require respirators in  a  workplace,
they  should  be  used  as  part  of  a  respiratory  protection  program.  The  Occupational
Safety and Health Administration requires many workplaces to follow their Respiratory
Protection
 Standard.
 There
 are
 multiple
 types
 of
 NIOSH
 Approved
atmosphere-supplying respirators and air purifying respirators available for workplace
settings. Information about NIOSH Approved respirators for use in workplace settings is
available through various NIOSH infographics. Air purifying particulate respirators and
masks work by removing particles and blocking droplets. This reduces your exposure to
harmful  respiratory  hazards.  Correctly  wearing  a  respirator  or  mask  can  protect  you
from  some  respiratory  hazards.  Example  of  how  respirators  and  masks  protect  you
Respirators are more protective than masks. You can use respirators such as filtering
facepiece  respirators  (FFRs)  and  elastomeric  respirators  (quarter-mask  and  half-mask
types)  at  home  and  out  in  the  community.  Wearing  a  NIOSH  Approved®  respirator
reduces  your  exposure  to  hazards  in  the  air.  Masks  are  a  less  protective  option.
Examples  include  barrier  face  coverings  (BFCs),  disposable  face  masks,  and  cloth
masks.  Disposable  face  masks  and  cloth  masks  are  the  least  effective  at  reducing
exposures.  Respirators  and  masks  may  filter  particles  and  block  droplets  when  you
exhale (breathe, talk, cough, etc.). This reduces the risk that a person with a respiratory
infection  will  spread  germs  to  others.  If  you  have  a  respiratory  infection,  there’s  a
change you could pass your infection to others. Wearing a respirator or mask reduces
the number of germs that you exhale into the environment around you. This is one way
to prevent the spread of respiratory germs from person to person, like wearing a mask
to prevent the spread of the germ that causes COVID-19. Example of how respirators
and mask protect others There is no standard test to measure the level of protection a
respirator or mask provides to others around you. The more closely a respirator or mask
fits  to  your  face  including  fulling  covering  your  nose  and  mouth,  the  more  likely  the
filter is to capture your exhaled particles or droplets. A respirator or mask with a loose
fit  will  allow  more  particles  and  droplets  to  exit  through  the  gaps  around  your  face.
Additionally, the better the filtration of the respirator or mask, the better the expected
level  of  protection.  If  you  are  sick,  isolating  yourself  away  from  others  is  a  more
effective  way  to  protect  others  than  wearing  a  respirator  or  mask.  Wearing  an  air
purifying  particulate  respirator  or  mask  will  filter  particles,  but  it  does  not  filter  out
harmful  gases  or  vapors.  Respirators  and  masks  intended  for  particles  reduce  your
exposure by filtering some particles out and blocking droplets when you inhale. They
can help protect you from particles like smoke, air pollution, mold, and germs in the air
you inhale. They do not filter out harmful gases and vapors such as carbon monoxide or
gasoline.  It  is  important  to  consider  the  level  of  filtration  and  fit  when  selecting  a
respirator  or  mask.  Respirators  and  some  masks,  like  BFCs,  are  manufactured  to
standards  developed  in  collaboration  with  government  and  industry  partners.  These
standards specify requirements like the level of filtration, fit, and quality controls the
respirator or mask must meet. Standards give you confidence that a respirator or mask
will protect you as intended if worn appropriately. Some masks, like many disposable
face masks and cloth masks, are not made to a standard. They provide unknown levels
of protection. To help you know how well your respirator or mask filters out particles,
you  can  look  to  see  if  the  manufacturer  claims  a  percentage  filtration  based  on
standards. NIOSH Approved respirators, like N95® filtering facepiece respirators, meet
the most rigorous standards. Respirators conforming to international standards, like the
KN95, are also tested to a standard. NIOSH Approved and international respirators will
report the level of filtration they provide, such as a minimum of 95% or a minimum of
80%. However, those conforming to international standards may not have the rigorous
quality assurance requirements meeting those that are NIOSH Approved. Depending on
the  intended  use,  manufacturers  may  test  their  respirators  and  masks  to  numerous
different standards. Masks that claim to  meet the ASTM  BFC Standard  will report the
level of filtration they provide, such as a minimum of 20%. The respirator and mask can
only  filter  particles  that  try  to  pass  through  the  filter  material.  Filtering  facepiece
respirators and elastomeric respirators cover the nose and mouth and fit tightly against
the face creating a seal (tight-fitting) that forces the particles to pass through the filter
material. Masks are designed to cover your nose and mouth but not form a tight seal to
your  face  (loose-fitting).  Using  masks  that  are  tighter  to  your  face  forces  particle
through the filter material. If gaps exist between your face and the respirator or mask,
some small particles that you cannot see can enter your nose or mouth through those
gaps. Minimizing these gaps is important. The bridge of the nose and the sides of the
respirator or mask are common locations for leaks. Facial hair is also a common cause
for gaps. Because the size and shape of your face is unique, you might need to try a
few  different  respirators  or  masks  to  find  one  that  forms  a  good  seal  to  your  face.
Example  of  tight-fitting  respirator  Example  of  loose-fitting  mask  NIOSH  Approved
respirators  and  BFCs  will  come  with  instructions  on  how  to  wear,  store,  and  clean  or
properly  dispose  of  the  respirator  or  BFC.  You  should  wear  these  according  to  the
manufacturer’s instructions without modifications. How to Use Your N95 Respirator and
How to Care for Your Mask provide generic instructions on how to properly wear an N95
respirator and how to care for a cloth and disposable face mask. High manufacturing
quality  gives  you  confidence  that  a  respirator  or  mask  will  protect  you  as  intended.
Manufacturing  quality  demonstrates  that  the  manufacturer  is  able  to  consistently
manufacture  a  product  to  the  specifications  of  the  original  design.  Some  standards
require the manufacturer to have a written quality plan. Others, like the NIOSH approval
process for respirators, require the manufacturer to show the quality of their respirator
or  mask.  NIOSH  also  conducts  factory  and  product  audits  for  NIOSH  Approved
respirators to ensure manufacturers maintain quality. How Well It Protects You: NIOSH
Approved  elastomeric  half-mask  respirators  (EHMRs)  and  elastomeric  quarter-mask
respirators  (EQMRs)  protect  you  against  gases,  vapors,  and  particles  when  equipped
with  the  appropriate  filter,  cartridge,  or  canister.  How  Well  It  Protects  Others  Around
You:  Some  EHMRs  and  EQMRs,  such  as  those  without  exhalation  valves,  filter  the  air
you breathe out and you can use them to protect others around you. If the EHMR or
EQMR do not filter the air you breathe out, you should not use them if your goal is to
protect  others  around  you.  Filtration:  These  are  reusable  respirators  that,  when
equipped  with  particle  filters,  achieve  a  minimum  of  95%  filtration  efficiency.  Fit:
EHMRs  and  EQMRs  cover  the  nose  and  mouth  and  are  tight-fitting.  Manufacturing
Quality:  NIOSH  Approved  EHMRs  and  EQMRs  meet  NIOSH  requirements  including
demonstrated  manufacturing  quality.  You  can  find  respirators  that  meet  these
standards and more information on their availability on the NIOSH Certified Equipment
List. How Well It Protects You: NIOSH Approved FFRs, such as N95 respirators, protect
you against particles. They do not protect against gases or vapors. How Well It Protects
Others Around You: Some NIOSH Approved FFRs have exhalation valves that open to let
air  escape  when  you  breathe  out.  This  makes  it  easier  to  breathe  and  can  make  the
respirator more comfortable to wear. An FFR with an exhalation valve may not protect
others as well as one without a valve. Filtration: NIOSH Approved FFRs are a disposable
respirator  that  achieve  a  minimum  of  95%  filtration  efficiency.  Fit:  NIOSH  Approved
FFRs  seal  against  your  face  around  the  nose  and  mouth  and  are  tight-fitting.
Manufacturing  Quality:  NIOSH  Approved  FFRs  meet  NIOSH  requirements  including
demonstrated  manufacturing  quality.  You  can  find  lists  of  respirators  that  meet  this
standard and more information on their availability on the NIOSH Certified Equipment
List. How Well It Protects You: International FFRs, such as KN95s, protect you against
particles.  They  do  not  protect  against  gases  or  vapors.  How  Well  It  Protects  Others
Around You: Some international FFRs have exhalation valves that open to let air escape
when  you  breathe  out.  This  makes  it  easier  to  breathe  and  can  make  the  respirator
more  comfortable  to  wear.  An  international  FFR  with  an  exhalation  valve  may  not
protect  others  as  well  as  one  without  a  valve.  Filtration:  International  FFRs  are  a
disposable  type  of  respirator  that  achieve  a  level  of  filtration  efficiency  based  on  the
specified  standard  with  a  minimum  of  80%.  Fit:  International  FFRs  seal  against  your
face  around  the  nose  and  mouth  and  are  tight-fitting.  Since  manufacturers  designed
these respirators for populations outside of the United States, they may not seal as well
to your face as a NIOSH Approved respirator. Manufacturing Quality: International FFRs
meet the requirements specified by the country which includes manufacturing quality.
However, international standards often do not require the manufacturer to demonstrate
quality.  How  Well  It  Protects  You:  BFCs  protect  you  against  particles.  They  do  not
protect against gases or vapors. How Well It Protects Others Around You: BFCs filter the
air you breathe out, so you can wear them to protect others around you. Filtration: BFCs
can  be  disposable  or  reusable  masks  that  achieve  a  minimum  of  20%  filtration
efficiency against particles. There are two kinds of BFCs intended to provide a higher
level of protection, Enhanced Performance and Enhanced Performance Plus BFCs. These
BFCs offer a minimum of 50% and 80% filtration. Fit: They cover the nose and mouth.
Manufacturers  must  design  BFCs  to  fit  snugly  to  your  face  to  reduce  gaps.  However,
they  may  not  provide  as  tight  of  a  seal  as  a  NIOSH  Approved  FFR  or  elastomeric
respirator. Manufacturing Quality: BFCs meet the ASTM F3502-21 consensus standard
and are tested by a laboratory. The manufacturer must specify how to wear it properly
to reduce gaps and, if reusable, the number of times you can wash the BFC. The NIOSH
Personal Protective Equipment Information (PPE-Info) webpage has lists of BFCs that the
manufacturer claims to meet enhanced recommendations, as well as more information
on  their  availability.  How  Well  It  Protects  You:  Disposable  face  masks  may  block
droplets. They may not filter small particles, and they do not protect against gases or
vapors. How Well It Protects Others Around You: They may protect others around you.
Filtration: Disposable face masks are one time use masks that provide varying levels of
filtration.  Fit:  They  cover  your  nose  and  mouth  and  are  loose-fitting.  Manufacturing
Quality:  There  are  no  standards  or  regulations  for  disposable  face  masks.  It  is  very
difficult to know the level of filtration and protection they provide. How Well It Protects
You: Cloth masks may block droplets. They may not protect against small particles, and
they do not protect against gases and vapors. How Well It Protects Others Around You:
They may protect others around you. Filtration: Cloth masks are reusable masks that
provide  varying  levels  of  filtration.  Fit:  They  cover  your  nose  and  mouth  and  are
loose-fitting.  Manufacturing  Quality:  There  are  no  standards  or  regulations  for  cloth
masks.  It  is  very  difficult  to  know  the  level  of  filtration  and  protection  they  provide.
Different standards for respirators and masks allow manufacturers to provide products
that meet a variety of needs. These differences can also cause confusion when trying to
select  the  best  product  for  your  situation.  The  table  below  summarizes  these
differences so that you can identify the types of respirators or masks that meet your
needs.  equipped  with  particle  filters  without  exhalation  valves  or  with  filtered
exhalation  valves  equipped  with  particle  filters  with  exhalation  valves  without
exhalation  valves  with  exhalation  valves  without  exhalation  valves  with  exhalation
valves  1Determined  according  to  the  standard  test  methods  used  to  evaluate  the
product.  2Tight-fitting  indicates  the  respirator  is  designed  to  form  a  seal  to  the  face;
loose-fitting indicates the BFC or mask is not designed to form a seal to the face. 3How
well a respirator or mask protects you is rated by comparing the filtration and fit to the
historical  use  of  respirators  and  masks  in  workplace  settings.  This  includes  use  for
protection from hazardous particles and infectious particles and droplets. 4How well a
respirator or mask protects others around you is rated by comparing the filtration to the
historical  use  of  medical  masks  by  healthcare  personnel  to  protect  nearby  patients.
5The level of manufacturing quality is rated by the quality control standards used when
manufacturing  a  respirator  or  mask.  Wearing  a  respirator  can  make  it  harder  to
breathe.  If  you  have  a  medical  condition  such  as  a  heart  or  lung  problem,  ask  your
doctor before using a respirator or mask. If you have difficulty breathing, get dizzy, or
have  other  symptoms  while  wearing  a  respirator,  go  to  a  place  with  cleaner  air  and
remove it. Wearing a respirator, especially if it is hot or you are physically active, can
increase heat-related illness. Take breaks often and drink water. Children ages 2 years
and older can wear respirators and masks. However, NIOSH Approved respirators do not
come in suitable sizes for very young children. Choose a comfortable respirator or mask
that your child can wear properly. If a respirator or mask fits poorly or is uncomfortable,
a child might take it off or wear it incorrectly (for example, pulling it down from their
nose).  This  reduces  the  intended  benefits.  NIOSH  Approved  respirators  and
international  respirators  may  be  available  in  smaller  sizes  that  fit  children.  However,
manufacturers typically design them to be used by adults in workplaces. They may not
have been tested for broad use in children. People of all ages with certain disabilities
may find it difficult to wear a respirator or mask. Challenges may be caused by: People
with  certain  disabilities  or  their  caregivers  can  assess  whether  they  need  to  wear  a
respirator or mask. They should do this by considering the person’s ability to: To make
communicating easier, individuals may consider wearing a clear mask or a mask with a
clear  panel.  If  a  clear  mask  is  not  available,  they  might  use  other  options  to
communicate while wearing a mask that covers the lips. Examples include using written
communication,  closed  captioning,  or  decreasing  background  noise.  N95  and  NIOSH
Approved are certification marks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) registered in the United States and several international jurisdictions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/publicppe/community-ppe.html
