A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. This companion guide offers an in-depth
look  at  how  respiratory  illness  cases  can  be  extracted  from  syndromic  surveillance
data.  Diagnostic  codes  and  clinical  terms  used  to  create  definitions  for  diagnosed
COVID-19, influenza and RSV are outlined below. The National Syndromic Surveillance
Program (NSSP) is a collaboration among CDC, local and state health departments, with
private sector partners. Together, these partners collect, share, and analyze automated
electronic  healthcare  data  in  near-real  time.  The  national  data  include  emergency
departments  in  all  50  states,  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  Guam.  View  the  coverage
map  here.  Diagnostic  codes  and  clinical  terms  were  used  to  create  definitions  for
diagnosed  COVID-19,  influenza,  and  RSV.  Jurisdiction-level  data  are  not  shown  for
Missouri  because  the  proportion  of  records  with  a  discharge  diagnosis  is  low.
Jurisdiction-level  data  are  not  shown  for  New  Hampshire,  South  Dakota,  and
Washington  to  ensure  data  use  and  other  sharing  agreements  are  appropriately
addressed prior to public release. Guam is not shown due to small counts. Emergency
department visits were assigned to the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR)
week they occurred; MMWR weeks begin on Sunday and end on the following Saturday.
MMWR week #1 of an MMWR year is the first week of the year that has at least four
days  in  the  calendar  year.  Variability  in  testing  practices  for  different  viruses  and  in
different  age  groups  may  lead  to  under-ascertainment  of  respiratory  infections  in
electronic  healthcare  data,  including  emergency  department  visits.  Patients  who  are
less likely to be tested are less likely to be included. These data are based on electronic
diagnostic codes transmitted automatically in near real-time, and hospital practices for
assigning  these  codes  can  vary.  These  data  are  dynamic  and  update  as  codes  are
added  and  changed.  The  weekly  percent  of  emergency  department  visits  with
COVID-19 diagnosis on this site are not designed to match the percentages shown on
the CDC COVID Data Tracker. Metrics will differ across websites due to factors such as
updates on different days of the week or different calculations, such as presentation of
a  7-day  moving  average  on  daily  data  rather  than  weekly  totals.  Data  will  also  differ
from  state  websites  due  to  different  update  schedules,  calculations,  or  definitions.
These data are not a random sample and are not intended to capture data from every
hospital. While these data are not designed to be randomly sampled or comprehensive,
they provide a useful overall indicator of trends in emergency department use. For data
that are presented as a percentage, each respiratory illness is presented as a percent
of all emergency department visits by age group. For example, the COVID-19 data show
emergency  department  visits  for  children  ages  5-11  with  diagnosed  COVID-19  as  a
fraction  of  all  emergency  department  visits  for  children  ages  5-11.  The  following
discharge diagnoses (DD) and clinical terms are included: International Classification of
Diseases,
 Tenth
 Revision,
 Clinical
 Modification
 (ICD-10-CM),
 the
 International
Classification  of  Diseases,  Ninth  Revision,  Clinical  Modification  (ICD-9-CM),  and
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT). Please note that
conditions  can  be  defined  in  different  ways  in  electronic  healthcare  data,  and  some
jurisdictions  may  use  different  definitions.  Short  codes  listed  capture  all  codes
underneath  (J09  captures  J09.X1-J09.X9).  Definition  name  in  the  NSSP  Electronic
Surveillance  System  for  the  Early  Notification  of  Community-Based  Epidemics
(ESSENCE)  system:  CDC  COVID-Specific  DD  v1  Definition  name  in  the  NSSP  ESSENCE
system:  CDC  Influenza  DD  v1  Definition  name  in  the  NSSP  ESSENCE  system:  CDC
Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus  DD  v1  To  improve  public  health,  NSSP  helps  gather  and
provide  syndromic  data  from  collaborations  with  state  and  local  health  departments
and others. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/php/onboarding-resources/companion-guide-ed-data-respiratory-illness.html
