Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Michael  E.  King,  Diana  M.  Bensyl,  Richard  A.  Goodman,  and
Sonja A. Rasmussen When a threat to the public’s health occurs, epidemiologists are
ready  responders  who  investigate  the  problem  so  they  can  identify  causes  and  risk
factors, implement prevention and control measures, and communicate with everyone
involved.  Epidemiologic  field  investigations  are  a  core  function  of  epidemiology  and
perhaps the most obvious way information is transformed into action to ensure public
health  and  safety  (see  Chapter  1).  This  chapter  describes  the  step-by-step  process
required in performing an epidemiologic field investigation. The 10 steps covered here
build on and further refine the steps that have been taught traditionally in the Centers
for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention’s  (CDC)  annual  Epidemic  Intelligence  Service
courses, in the three previous editions of this manual (the textbook Field Epidemiology),
and  in  other  CDC  instructional  programs.  The  10  steps  discussed  here  are  similar  to
those  found  in  other  epidemiology  instructional  publications  (1–5).  Lists,  take-home
points,  and  examples  are  provided  to  clarify  key  aspects  and  improve  the  practical
utility of the discussion. This chapter describes a field investigation in the context of a
public health response to a presumed acute infectious disease outbreak, although this
approach  also  applies  to  other  scenarios  and  problems.  Zika  was  first  identified  in
nonhumans  in  1947  and  associated  with  mosquito  transmission.  Since  then,
researchers  have  continued  to  learn  and  adapt  to  new  information  about  Zika
transmission. Before 2007, when the first larger scale outbreak occurred, Zika was not
a disease of special concern given the small number of people affected. In 2008, sexual
transmission  was  suspected  as  a  mode  of  transmission,  but  with  so  few  cases,
confirming it was not possible. Then Zika virus cases increased exponentially in 2015.
Preliminary  investigations  indicated  mother-to-child  transmission  among  pregnant
women,  and  a  case  of  sexual  transmission  was  confirmed.  Each  time  researchers
learned  new  information,  case  definitions  had  to  be  adapted  and  the  focus  of
information gathering had to expand to account for multiple transmission modes.
Source: Adapted from Reference 7.   An outbreak is defined as “the occurrence of more
cases  of  disease  than  expected  in  a  given  area  or  among  a  specific  group  of  people
over  a  particular  period  of  time”  (1).  When  there  are  clearly  many  more  cases  than
usual that are distributed across a larger geographic area, the term epidemic can be
used.  An  outbreak  is  a  situation  that  usually  needs  a  rapid  public  health  response.
Notification of a suspected outbreak can come from different sources, including astute
clinicians, laboratory scientists, public health surveillance data, or the media. After the
decision  is  made  to  start  an  investigation,  clearly  defining  the  objective  of  the
investigation  is  crucial.  Field  investigations  of  common  outbreak  scenarios  have
standard  objectives  and  time-tested  methods  that  can  be  implemented  rapidly.  For
example,  because  transmission  modes  associated  with  foodborne  and  waterborne
outbreaks  are  well-known  (i.e.,  spread  by  contact  with  infected  persons,  animals,  or
contaminated food or water), epidemiologists have developed the National Hypothesis
Generating Questionnaire (6), a standardized questionnaire to help develop hypotheses
and collect information from ill persons regarding demographics and specific exposures.
In contrast, at the time of initial recognition, many outbreaks have no obvious or known
cause, which challenges the epidemiologist to establish a clear objective early—albeit
one  that  is  broad  and  can  be  revised  as  the  investigation  evolves—and  to  generate
hypotheses (Box 3.1). Finally, a certain urgency to field investigations and pressure to
find  an  answer  quickly  will  always  exist.  For  example,  rapid  surveys  or  other  study
designs used in outbreak investigations might lack the level of statistical power or proof
of causality that often are possible in prospectively planned research studies. Likewise,
delays  caused  by  waiting  for  all  laboratory  samples  to  be  tested  can  delay
determination of pathogens or modes of spread and, consequently, implementation of
control  measures.  However,  the  goal  is  to  be  both  timely  and  accurate.  Because  of
these considerations, coordinating with all partners and establishing priorities early is
key  to  a  successful  investigation.  Consider  whether  control  measures  can  be
implemented now.Identify and count cases (i.e., create a case definition and develop a
line  listing).Prepare  for  field  work  Source:  Adapted  from  Reference  8.  Epidemiologists
use a systematic multistep approach to field investigations (Box 3.2). Although these
steps are presented here in a numeric order, they might be conducted out of order or
concurrently  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  investigation.  For  example,  in  certain
circumstances,
 implementing
 a
 control
 measure
 soon
 after
 notification
 and
confirmation  of  an  outbreak  might  be  possible  and  even  advisable.  Often,  Steps
2  (Confirm  the  Diagnosis)  and  3  (Determine  the  Existence  of  an  Outbreak)  are
performed  at  the  same  time.  These  two  steps  highlight  the  need  for  increased
collaboration  (or  teamwork)  early  in  the  investigation  among  public  health  officials,
laboratory personnel, clinicians, and other stakeholders. Step 1. Prepare for Field Work
An important first step in any field investigation is addressing the operational aspects
related to preparing for field work (see Chapter 2). This preparation includes ensuring
that  all  persons  involved  agree  on  the  purpose  of  the  investigation  and  that  the
required  official  approvals  for  the  field  investigation  have  been  received.  A  formal
invitation  for  assistance  must  be  received  from  an  authorized  official;  for  example,
when a state requests assistance from CDC to conduct an investigation, the Governor
or an appropriate public health officer like the state epidemiologist would be authorized
to extend that invitation. In addition, roles and responsibilities of those involved in the
investigation must be delineated. For most investigations, laboratory testing will play a
crucial  role;  thus,  discussions  with  laboratory  colleagues  about  types  of  testing  and
specimens need to occur before the field investigation begins. Concerns related to the
safety of the field team (e.g., whether personal protective equipment will be needed)
also should be considered during this first step. Ensuring that this early preparation for
the field investigation is completed will prevent misunderstandings and other problems
later. Step 2. Confirm the Diagnosis Confirming or verifying the diagnosis ensures, to
the extent possible, that you are addressing the problem that was reported initially and
rules out misdiagnosis and potential laboratory error. For example, in a communicable
disease outbreak, the real clustering of false infections—a consequence of misdiagnosis
and laboratory error—can result in a pseudoepidemic. The term pseudoepidemic refers
to  a  situation  in  which  there  is  an  observed  increase  in  positive  test  results  or  the
incidence  of  disease  related  to  something  other  than  a  true  increase  in  disease.
Diagnoses  can  be  confirmed  by  implementing  some  or  all  of  the  following  activities:
Although laboratory data might be the best and only link between a putative cause and
case,  not  every  case  requires  laboratory  confirmation  before  further  action  can  be
taken.  A  related  step  to  confirming  diagnoses  is  the  need  to  obtain  specimens  (e.g.,
microbiologic strains already isolated) before they have been discarded so that they are
available  for  further  analysis  if  new  questions  arise  later  in  an  investigation.  Step  3.
Determine  the  Existence  of  an  Outbreak  After  the  initial  June  1981  Morbidity  and
Mortality Weekly Report of a cluster of cases of Pneumocystis pneumonia among men
in Los Angeles, the ensuing investigation required approximately 6 months to establish
surveillance and a baseline that confirmed the early phase of what eventually came to
be  known  as  the  national  epidemic  of  human  immunodeficiency  virus/acquired
immunodeficiency  syndrome  (HIV/AIDS).  Source:  Adapted  from  References  10,  11.
Determining the existence of an outbreak is a sometimes difficult step that should be
completed before committing program resources to a full-scale investigation. This step
also  is  necessary  to  rule  out  spurious  problems  (e.g.,  pseudoepidemics  or  reporting
increases  caused  by  surveillance  artifacts).  As  noted  previously,  pseudoepidemics
might result from real clustering of false infections (e.g., inadvertent contaminants of
laboratory specimens) or artifactual clustering of real infections (e.g., increases in the
number of reported cases because of changes in surveillance procedures introduced by
the health department or implemented by a healthcare delivery system) (9). Problems
potentially  associated  with  pseudoepidemics  include  risks  related  to  unnecessary  or
inappropriate  treatment  and  unnecessary  diagnostic  procedures.  To  confirm  the
existence of an outbreak, the field investigation team must first compare the number of
cases  during  the  suspected  outbreak  period  with  the  number  of  cases  that  would  be
expected during a nonoutbreak timeframe by For certain problems, an outbreak can be
rapidly  confirmed  through  use  of  existing  surveillance  data.  For  others,  however,
substantial time lags might occur before a judgment can be made about the existence
of an outbreak (Box 3.3). Step 4. Identify and Count Cases Example of a Simple Case
Definition The 2007 Zika virus (ZIKV) outbreak in Yap used the following case definition:
Case  definition:  A  patient  with  suspected  disease  had  acute  onset  of  generalized
macular or papular rash, arthritis or arthralgia, or nonpurulent conjunctivitis during the
period from April 1 through July 31, 2007. Case classification: We considered a patient
to have confirmed Zika virus disease if Zika virus RNA was detected in the serum or if
all  the  following  findings  were  present:  IgM  antibody  against  Zika  virus  (detected  by
ELISA), Zika virus PRNT90 titer of at least 20, and a ratio of Zika virus PRNT90 titer to
dengue virus PRNT90 titer of at least 4. A patient was classified as having probable Zika
virus  disease  if  IgM  antibody  against  Zika  virus  was  detected  by  ELISA,  Zika  virus
PRNT90  titer  was  at  least  20,  the  ratio  of  Zika  virus  PRNT90  titer  to  dengue  virus
PRNT90 titer was less than 4, and either no Zika virus RNA was detected by RT-PCR or
the  serum  sample  was  inadequate  for  the  performance  of  RT-PCR.  Example  of  a
Complex  Case  Definition   Note  how  the  case  definition  changed  from  2007  as
researchers  learned  more  about  ZIKV  transmission.  Laboratory  Criteria  for  Diagnosis
Recent ZIKV Infection Recent Flavivirus Infection, Possible ZIKV Epidemiologic Linkage
See  Also  Subtype  Case  Definitions  Source:  Adapted  from  Duffy  MR,  Chen  TH,  Thane
Hancock W, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap Island, Federated States of Micronesia. N
Engl  J  Med  2009;360:2536–2543;  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.
National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System (NNDSS). Zika virus disease and Zika
virus
 infection,
 2016
 case
 definition.
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/zika/case-definition/2016/06/.  The  aim  of  this
step is to identify, or ascertain, as many cases as possible without including noncases.
As  a  practical  matter,  this  entails  casting  a  broad  net  through  use  of  a  classification
scheme—the case definition (see the following discussion)—that maximizes sensitivity
(i.e., correctly identifies persons who have cases of the condition [true-positives]) and
optimizes  specificity  (i.e.,  does  not  include  persons  who  do  not  have  cases  of  the
condition [false-positives]) (see Box 3.4). The case definition is a statement consisting
of three elements that together specify a person Although the case definition might be
broad at the onset of an epidemiologic field investigation, it is a flexible classification
scheme that often is revised and narrowed as the investigation progresses. To minimize
the likelihood of ascertainment bias (i.e., a systematic distortion in measurement due to
the  way  in  which  data  are  collected),  cases  ideally  are  sought  and  counted  through
systematic  searches  of  a  multiplicity  of  potential  sources  to  identify  the  maximum
number, or a representative sample, of cases. Examples of sources include Information
about identified cases (e.g., coded patient identifiers, age, sex, race/ethnicity, date of
illness onset or diagnosis, symptoms, signs, laboratory findings, or other relevant data)
should be systematically recorded in a spreadsheet or through other means (e.g., a line
listing  or  similar  epidemiologic  database)  for  subsequent  analysis  and  for  use  in
conducting further investigative studies (e.g., hypothesis testing). All staff involved in
data collection and maintenance should be trained to use the forms and questionnaires
(whether these be on paper or electronic) and to store the forms to protect personal
information while facilitating rapid data analysis. Depending on the nature, scope, and
extent of the outbreak, consideration should be given to the need for additional active
case finding and surveillance once sufficient information has been collected to support
prevention  and  control  efforts.  Specifically,  ongoing  or  intensified  surveillance  can  be
paramount in subsequent efforts to evaluate the effectiveness of control measures for
curbing  and  terminating  the  epidemic  (see  Step  9).  Step  5.  Tabulate  and  Orient  the
Data  in  Terms  of  Time,  Place,  and  Person  This  step  involves  translating  and
transforming  data  from  the  line  listing  into  a  basic  epidemiologic  description  of  the
outbreak.  This  description  characterizes  the  outbreak  in  terms  of  time,  place,  and
person (referred to as descriptive epidemiology). Through systematic review of data in
the line listing, key actions typically involve In addition, these key actions contribute to
developing initial hypotheses for explaining the potential cause, source, and mode of
spread of the outbreak’s causative agent(s). Time Establishing the time of the outbreak
or  epidemic  requires  the  following  actions:  Chapter  6  includes  examples  of  epidemic
curves displaying the types of information that can be analyzed to aid in conducting a
field investigation. Place Use information collected for the line listing and through other
inquiry to orient cases in relation to locations, including Using information about place,
construct spot maps (Figures 3.1, 3.2, 3.3) or other visual methods to depict locations
of  cases  at  time  of  onset  of  illness  or  possible  exposure  to  causal  agents  or  factors,
including  Person  Use  information  collected  for  the  line  listing  to  describe  cases  in
relation to such factors as When possible and where indicated, obtain denominator data
(e.g., total cook-out attendees in a foodborne disease outbreak) to develop preliminary
estimates  of  rates  of  illness  in  relation  to  demographic,  exposure,  and  other
characteristics. Fig3-1  Spot map of residents on the ninth floor of the Metropole Hotel,
Hong  Kong,  February  21,  2003,  who  had  symptoms  later  identified  as  severe  acute
respiratory syndrome. Source: Reference 12. Reprinted with permission from the World
Health  Organization,  February  5,  2018.  Schematic  map  of  village  X,  Sierra  Leone,
indicating  cumulative  Ebola  virus  infection  household  status  and  quarantine  status,
August 1– October 10, 2014. Source: Reference 13. Cases of Ebola virus disease, Africa,
1976–2017. Source: Reference 14. Step 6. Consider Whether Control Measures Can Be
Implemented Now When the etiology and mode of spread, as well as interventions, are
known at the time an outbreak is recognized, control measures can begin immediately.
For example, before hepatitis A vaccine was routinely administered to children starting
at  age  1  year,  a  single  case  of  hepatitis  A  in  a  child  day  care  setting  led  to
administration of immune globulin prophylaxis to an entire cohort of exposed children
and  staff.  This  was  performed  because  of  the  known  epidemiologic  associations
between asymptomatic and symptomatic cases; it directed efforts toward prophylaxis
of  exposed  persons  while  minimizing  the  need  for  an  extensive  investigation  to
specifically  identify  infected  persons.  The  response  was  predicated  on  routine  policy
and  guidelines  developed  by  experts  on  the  basis  of  studies  and  previous  outbreak
experience  and  virtual  certainty  about  the  etiology  of  the  problem  and  its  mode  of
spread. Source: Adapted from Reference 15. Control measures include two categories
of interventions: (1) those that can be directed at the source(s) of most infectious and
other disease-causing agents (e.g., treating infected persons and animals or isolating
infected persons who are contagious) and (2) those that can be directed at persons who
are susceptible to such agents (administering postexposure prophylaxis, vaccinating in
advance, or employing barrier techniques) (see Chapter 11 and Box 3.5). In concept,
control  measures  are  implemented  only  after  the  preceding  and  subsequent
steps—including  developing  and  testing  hypotheses  about  the  cause  or  mode  of
spread—have  been  implemented.  In  practice,  however,  decisions  about  control
measures  might  be  necessary  at  any  step  in  the  sequence,  and  preliminary  control
measures can be instituted on the basis of limited initial information and then modified
as needed as the investigation proceeds. Control measures should be considered again
after  more  systematic  studies  are  complete.  Step  7.  Develop  and  Test  Hypotheses
Hypotheses  about  the  disease-causing  agent,  source  or  reservoir  of  the  agent,
transmission mode, and risk factors for disease can be developed based on information
from
 multiple
 sources
 including:
 Expert
 subject-matter
 knowledge
 by
 field
epidemiologists,  laboratory  colleagues,  and  others;  In  certain  instances,  descriptive
epidemiologic findings alone, or results of cross-sectional survey data or other studies
will  be  sufficient  for  developing  hypotheses.  Often,  however,  analytic  epidemiologic
methods—especially  cohort  or  case–  control  studies—will  be  needed  for  identifying
possible risk and other causative factors and for testing the strength of the association
of the factors with the disease. The process of hypothesis testing, therefore, can entail
multiple iterations of hypothesis generating and testing, serial studies, and collection,
analysis,  and  management  of  considerable  additional  data.  See  Chapter  7  for
description  of  how  cohort  and  case–  control  studies  can  be  used  effectively  in
foodborne or waterborne disease outbreaks and other types of field investigations (Box
3.6). Typically, statistically significant (e.g., small p value) findings of associations alone
do  not  constitute  an  adequate  body  of  evidence  to  support  conclusions  about  the
validity  of  hypotheses  and  to  implement  interventions  to  terminate  an  outbreak.
Instead, all key information and investigative findings should be viewed as a whole in
relation to such standards as the Bradford Hill tenets of causation (17) (Box 3.7). In a
nationwide  foodborne  outbreak,  the  descriptive  results  of  interviews  based  on  the
National  Hypothesis  Generating  Questionnaire  were  used  to  identify  institutional
settings (e.g., hospitals and schools), peanut butter, and chicken as potential sources of
salmonellosis.  The  high  percentage  of  respondents  with  exposure  to  institutional
settings (58%) and exposure to peanut butter (71%) and chicken (86%) enabled them
to  focus  further  investigation  activities  in  these  three  areas.  As  the  investigation
continued,  cases  from  institutional  settings  indicated  a  common  food  distributor.  A
particular brand of peanut butter was distributed to the facilities, and an open tub of
this  brand  of  peanut  butter  was  available  for  Salmonella  testing.  The  outbreak  strain
was isolated from the sample. Source: Adapted from Reference 16. Step 8. Plan One or
More  Systematic  Studies  At  this  stage  of  most  epidemiologic  field  investigations,  the
purposes  of  systematic  or  other  studies  might  include  improving  the  quality  of
information  underlying  the  investigation’s  conclusions  about  the  problem  (e.g.,
improving  the  quality  of  numerators  or  denominators).  Additional  examples  include
refining the accuracy of the estimates of persons at risk and examining other germane
concerns
 (e.g.,
 expanding
 characterization
 of
 the
 causative
 agent
 and
 its
epidemiology). Step 9. Implement and Evaluate Control and Prevention Measures The
ultimate  purpose  of  an  epidemiologic  field  investigation  is  to  implement  scientifically
rational and advisable control measures for preventing additional outbreak-associated
morbidity or mortality. Control measures implemented in outbreaks will vary based on
the causative agent; modes of spread; size and characteristics of the population at risk;
setting; and other considerations, such as available resources, politics, and community
concerns. Categories of control measures used for terminating outbreaks are described
in this chapter in Step 6 and are further addressed in Chapter 11. Source: Adapted from
Reference  17.  Evaluating  the  impact  of  control  measures  is  essential.  Therefore,
evaluation efforts should be implemented concurrently with control measures to assess
their effectiveness in attenuating and ultimately terminating the outbreak. If not yet in
place, active surveillance should be initiated to monitor for new cases and for evidence
of effect of the control measures and to guide decision-making about additional needs
(e.g., further investigation, additional studies, or modifications to the control measures).
Regardless  of  the  intervention,  the  ethical  implications  of  any  action  must  be
considered.  Because  outbreak  investigations  typically  involve  collection  of  private,
personally  identifiable  information  from  individual  persons,  and  often  from  their
families,  coworkers,  or  other  acquaintances,  epidemiologists  should  be  familiar  with
applicable  local,  state,  and  federal  laws  regarding  privacy  protections.  Step  10.
Communicate
 Findings
 Field
 epidemiologists
 must
 be
 diligent
 and
 effective
communicators  throughout  and  after  outbreak  investigations.  The  information  they
provide helps keep the public and stakeholders accurately apprised during an outbreak,
informs decisions about actions to halt the outbreak, and documents the investigation.
This  step  requires  the  following  actions:  This  chapter  presents  a  10-step  approach  to
conducting an epidemiologic field investigation. Although no steps should be skipped,
they might be conducted concurrently or out of order depending on the circumstances
of  the  investigation.  Although  descriptive  epidemiologic  findings  are  sufficient  for
supporting  initiation  of  public  health  action  in  certain  investigations,  more  extensive
inquiry, including analytic studies, often is required to provide a scientifically rational
basis  for  interventions.  Regardless  of  complexity,  the  list  of  steps  that  organize
epidemiologic field investigations helps to ensure focus and thoroughness throughout
the investigative response. The authors thank the late Michael B. Gregg who served as
Editor-in-Chief  for  the  first  three  editions  of  Field  Epidemiology;  he  also  authored  the
initial  version  of  this  chapter.  For  many  years,  Dr.  Gregg  taught  this  subject  in  the
Epidemic  Intelligence  Service  Summer  Course.  <  Previous  Chapter  2:  Initiating
Operations  Next  Chapter  4:  Collecting  Data  >   The  fellowship  application  period  and
host  site  application  period  are  closed.  For  questions  about  the  EIS  program,  please
contact us directly at EISApplication@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/eis/field-epi-manual/chapters/Field-Investigation.html
