Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Authors: Tatiana Lanzieri, MD; Susan Redd; Emily Abernathy,
MS; Joseph Icenogle, PhD Congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) is an illness in infants that
results  from  maternal  infection  with  rubella  virus  during  pregnancy.  When  rubella
infection  occurs  during  early  pregnancy,  serious  consequences–such  as  miscarriages,
stillbirths, and a constellation of severe birth defects in infants–can result. The risk of
congenital infection and defects is highest during the first 12 weeks of gestation and
decreases  thereafter;  defects  are  rare  after  infection  in  the  20th  week  (or  later)  of
gestation.[1–3] Common congenital defects of CRS include cataracts, congenital heart
disease, hearing impairment, and developmental delay. Infants with CRS often present
with  more  than  one  of  these  signs  but  may  also  present  with  a  single  defect,  most
commonly  hearing  impairment.  See  Chapter  14,  “Rubella,”  for  more  information  on
rubella infection. The link between congenital cataracts and maternal rubella infection
was  first  made  in  1941  by  an  Australian  ophthalmologist,  Norman  Gregg,  who  had
noticed  an  unusual  number  of  infants  with  cataracts  following  a  rubella  epidemic  in
1940.[4] In the absence of vaccination, rubella was an endemic disease with epidemics
occurring every 6–9 years. If rubella infections occurred among nonimmune pregnant
women,  CRS  cases  occurred.  During  the  1962–1965  global  rubella  pandemic,  an
estimated  12.5 million  rubella  cases  occurred  in  the United  States,  resulting  in  2,000
cases  of  encephalitis,  11,250  therapeutic  or  spontaneous  abortions,  2,100  neonatal
deaths, and 20,000 infants born with CRS.[5] In 1969, live attenuated rubella vaccines
were licensed in the United States. The goal of the rubella vaccination program was and
continues to be prevention of congenital rubella infections, including CRS.[5] In 2004,
an independent panel of internationally recognized experts in public health, infectious
diseases, and immunizations reviewed the available data on rubella epidemiology and
unanimously agreed that rubella elimination (i.e., the absence of year-round endemic
transmission)  had  been  achieved  in  the  United  States.[6]  During  2005–2017,  the
number of reported CRS cases in the United States declined dramatically to <1 case per
year (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], unpublished data). Among the
15 CRS cases that occurred during this time, all but one were known importations (CDC,
unpublished data). Of the 47 CRS cases occurring during 1998–2017, the mother was
born outside the United States in 41 (89%). Although rubella has been eliminated in the
United  States,  it  continues  to  be  endemic  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  It  is  estimated
that more than 100,000 infants worldwide are born each year with CRS.[7] According to
a survey of the member countries in the World Health Organization (WHO), the number
of  countries  that  have  incorporated  rubella-containing  vaccines  into  their  routine
national immunization programs increased from 83 in 1996 to 148 (76%) of countries in
2016. As of December 2016, the WHO Region of the Americas and the European Region
have  established  rubella  elimination  goals,  verified  by  the  Region  of  the  Americas  in
2015.[8]  The  South-East  Asia  region  has  a  rubella/CRS  reduction  goal  (95%)  by
2020;[9]   the  Western  Pacific  Region  has  established  a  rubella  elimination  target
without  a  specific  date;  and  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  and  African  Regions  do  not
currently  have  elimination  targets.  In  2011,  WHO  recommended  that  all  countries
providing 2 doses of measles vaccine that have not introduced rubella vaccine, consider
including  rubella-containing  vaccine  in  their  immunization  program.[10]   The  United
States  elimination  of  rubella  and  CRS  was  reconfirmed  in  2011  and  maintenance  of
elimination was reported in 2014.[9,11] The United States has established and achieved
the goal of eliminating CRS and the indigenous transmission of rubella. As noted above,
elimination  of  endemic  rubella  was  documented  and  verified  in  the  United  States  in
2004.[6] However, because of international travel and countries without routine rubella
vaccination,  imported  cases  of  rubella  and  CRS  cases  still  occur.  To  maintain
elimination,  the  United  States  should  continue  to  maintain  high  vaccination  rates
among  children;  ensure  that  women  of  childbearing  age,  particularly  women  in  the
United States who were born outside of the United States, are vaccinated; and maintain
effective surveillance for both rubella and CRS. For specific information on vaccination
with  rubella-containing  vaccines,  refer  to  the  Pink  Book,  which  provides  general
recommendations,  including  vaccine  scheduling  and  use,  immunization  strategies  for
providers,  vaccine  contents,  adverse  events  and  reactions,  vaccine  storage  and
handling,  and  contraindications  and  precautions.  Top  of  Page  The  following  case
definition for CRS was approved by the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists
(CSTE) and published in 2009.[12] Suspected: An infant who does not meet the criteria
for  a  probable  or  confirmed  case  but  who  has  one  or  more  of  the  following  findings:
Probable: An infant who does not have laboratory confirmation of rubella infection but
has at least two of the following, without a more plausible etiology: OR An infant who
does not have laboratory confirmation of rubella infection but has at least one or more
of the following, without a more plausible etiology: AND one or more of the following:
Confirmed:  An  infant  with  at  least  one  of  the  symptoms  clinically  consistent  with
congenital rubella syndrome listed above, and laboratory evidence of congenital rubella
infection demonstrated by: Infection only: An infant without any clinical symptoms or
signs of rubella but with laboratory evidence of infection demonstrated by: Comment: In
probable  cases,  either  or  both  of  the  eye-related  findings  (cataracts  and  congenital
glaucoma)  should  be  considered  as  a  single  complication.  In  cases  classified  as
infection  only,  if  any  compatible  signs  or  symptoms  (e.g.,  hearing  impairment)  are
identified  later,  the  case  is  reclassified  as  confirmed.  Congenital  rubella  syndrome
cases  will  be  classified  epidemiologically  as  internationally  imported  or  US-acquired,
according to the source of infection in the mother, using the definitions below, which
parallel  the  classifications  for  rubella  cases.  Internationally  imported  case:  To  be
classified  as  an  internationally  imported  CRS  case,  the  mother  must  have  acquired
rubella  infection  outside  the  United  States,  or  in  the  absence  of  documented  rubella
infection, the mother was outside the United States during at least some of the period
when she may have had exposure to rubella that affected her pregnancy (from 21 days
before conception and through the first 24 weeks of pregnancy). US-acquired case: A
US-acquired case is one in which the mother acquired rubella from an exposure in the
United  States.  US-acquired  cases  are  subclassified  into  4  groups  as  described  in  the
rubella  case  classification  section  in  Chapter  14,  “Rubella.”  Note:  Internationally
imported,  import-linked,  and  imported-virus  cases  are  considered  collectively  to  be
import-associated
 cases.
 States
 may
 also
 choose
 to
 classify
 cases
 as
“out-of-state-imported”  when  imported  from  another  state  in  the  United  States.  For
national reporting, however, cases will be classified as either internationally imported or
US-acquired. Top of Page Diagnostic tests used to confirm CRS include serologic assays
and detection of rubella virus. For detailed information and for specific information on
specimen  collection  and  shipment  refer  to  Chapter  22,  “Laboratory  Support  for  the
Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.”  Specimen  collection  and  shipping  are
important  steps  in  obtaining  laboratory  diagnosis  or  confirmation    for  vaccine
preventable  diseases.  Guidelines  have  been  published  for  specimen  collection  and
handling  for  microbiologic  agents.  Information  is  also  available  on  using  CDC
laboratories  as  support  for  reference  and  disease  surveillance;  this  includes  The
APHL/CDC  Vaccine  Preventable  Disease  Reference  Centers  [2  pages]  can  perform
real-time  RT-PCR  and  genotyping  for  rubella.  Specific  instructions  for  specimen
collection and shipping may be obtained from the CDC rubella website or by contacting
the  CDC  Viral  Vaccine  Preventable  Diseases  Branch  at  404-639-4557.  Specimens  for
virus isolation and genotyping should be sent to CDC as directed by the State Health
Department. Top of Page Each state and territory (jurisdiction) has regulations or laws
governing  the  reporting  of  diseases  and  conditions  of  public  health  importance.[13]
These regulations and laws list the diseases to be reported and describe those persons
or  groups  responsible  for  reporting,  such  as  healthcare  providers,  hospitals,
laboratories,  schools,  daycare  and  childcare  facilities,  and  other  institutions.  Persons
reporting should contact the jurisdiction/state health department for jurisdiction-specific
reporting  requirements.  The  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome  Case  Report  Worksheet  is
included  as  Appendix  17  [2  pages],  to  serve  as  a  guide  for  data  collection  during
investigation of reported cases. Provisional notifications of CRS cases should be sent by
the  jurisdiction/state  health  department  to  CDC  by  e-mail:  RubellaReport@cdc.gov.
Notifications  should  be  sent  to  the  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System
(NNDSS)  using  event  code  10370.  Reporting  should  not  be  delayed  because  of
incomplete information or lack of laboratory confirmation; following completion of case
investigations,  data  previously  submitted  to  NNDSS  should  be  updated  with  the
available  new  information.  The  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome  Case  Report  worksheet
(Appendix 17 [2 pages]) is used to collect clinical and laboratory information on cases
of CRS that are reported by jurisdiction and local health departments. CRS cases are
classified by year of patient’s birth. The following data are epidemiologically important
and should be collected in the course of case investigation. Additional information may
also be collected at the direction of the state health department. Top of Page Cases of
US-acquired CRS are sentinel events indicating the presence of rubella infections in a
community that may have been previously unrecognized. The diagnosis of a single case
of  US-acquired  CRS  in  a  community  should  result  in  intensified  rubella  and  CRS
surveillance  and  an  investigation  to  determine  where  the  mother  was  exposed  to
rubella.  If  the  mother  was  exposed  in  a  different  jurisdiction,  jurisdiction/state  health
officials should contact the other jurisdiction to alert public health officials to possible
rubella  circulation.  Infants  with  CRS  may  present  with  various  manifestations  of  the
syndrome, depending on timing of the infection in pregnancy. Infants born to women
infected  with  rubella  during  pregnancy  should  be  evaluated  for  infection  and  CRS.
However, depending on the gestational age of the infant at the time of the mother’s
infection,  symptoms  may  not  be  apparent  after  20  weeks’  gestation;  the  only  defect
may be hearing impairment. Furthermore, some children are infected in utero but have
no congenital defects. Laboratory confirmation should be sought in all suspected CRS
cases,  regardless  of  signs  or  symptoms.  Surveillance  for  CRS  should  be  implemented
when confirmed or probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant
women  might  have  been  exposed.[14]  Women  who  contract  rubella  while  pregnant
should be monitored for birth outcome, and appropriate testing should be performed on
the infant after birth. Healthcare providers should be advised to evaluate infants born
with conditions consistent with CRS and to collect specimens for virus detection and to
perform  a  rubella-specific  IgM  antibody  test  on  infants  suspected  of  having  CRS.
Although many surveillance systems still rely on paper and pencil for data collection,
use of data from sources such as electronic medical records, electronic case reporting,
and  clinical  laboratory  information  systems  (LIMS)  can  significantly  improve  reporting
speed, enhance data quality, and reduce workload.[15–21] Cases of US-acquired rubella
have  occurred  among  susceptible  persons  providing  care  for  infants  with  CRS.[22]
Because  infants  can  shed  the  virus  for  prolonged  periods  (up  to  1  year  of  age  or
longer), infants with CRS should be considered infectious until they are at least 1 year
old or until 2 clinical specimens obtained 1 month apart are negative for rubella virus
by RT-PCR, either real-time or conventional; culture is also acceptable. The majority of
infants  will  shed  virus  for  3  months  after  birth,  so  screening  will  typically  start  at  3
months  after  a  decline  would  reasonably  be  expected.  Infants  with  CRS  should  be
placed in contact isolation during any hospital admission before 1 year of age or until
the infant is no longer considered infectious. In addition, health officials should consider
excluding  infants  with  CRS  from  child  care  facilities  until  he  or  she  is  no  longer
considered  infectious.  Persons  having  contact  with  infants  with  CRS  should  have
documented  evidence  of  immunity  to  rubella  (see  Chapter  14,  “Rubella”)  and
caregivers of infants with CRS should be aware of the potential hazard of the infants to
susceptible pregnant contacts.  Top of Page To receive email updates about this page,
enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt15-crs.html
