A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 These  Core  Components  are  for  noncritical  surfaces  that  come  in  contact  with  only
intact  skin  such  as:  These  Core  Components  are  intended  for  acute  care  hospitals.
However, all healthcare settings, such as long-term care and outpatient facilities, could
apply  these  with  additional  special  considerations  such  as  patient  population.  This
management  structure  should  hold  regular  meetings  to  review  practices  and  quality
measures and establish or review facility goals: All personnel who clean and disinfect
reusable patient care equipment and environmental surfaces in patient care areas must
understand their roles and responsibilities.  Administrators can provide education and
training  on:  Administrators  can  ensure  training  is  sustainable  and  regularly  occurring
by: 
Identify standardized, setting-specific protocols for cleaning and disinfection, including
use of technologies and products
 An environmental cleaning and disinfection monitoring strategy allows EVS personnel,
other relevant HCP and the facility cleaning and disinfection program to understand the
current  state  of  facility  cleanliness  and  to  identify  areas  for  improvement.  EVS
personnel  are  responsible  for  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  reusable  patient  care
equipment  and  environmental  surfaces  in  patient  care  areas.  They  can  be  directly
employed  by  the  healthcare  facility,  a  contractor,  or  another  management  structure.
Additional HCP are also often responsible for cleaning and disinfection in patient care
areas.  The  safety  culture  of  an  organization  is  the  individual  and  group  values,
attitudes,  perceptions,  competencies,  and  patterns  of  behavior  that  determine  the
commitment  to  health  and  safety  management.  Noncritical  environmental  surfaces
come into contact with intact skin, but not mucous membranes. They include: Reusable
patient care equipment are devices that HCP can reuse to diagnose and treat multiple
patients (e.g., surgical forceps, endoscopes and stethoscopes). Routine cleaning is the
regular  cleaning  (and  disinfection,  when  indicated)  when  the  room  is  occupied  to
remove organic material, reduce microbial contamination, and provide a visually clean
environment.  Emphasis  is  on  surfaces  within  the  patient  zone.  Critical  patient  care
equipment are equipment and devices that enter sterile tissue or the vascular system,
such as surgical instruments, cardiac and urinary catheters. They are not in the scope
of  this  document.  Semi-critical  patient  care  equipment  are  equipment,  such  as
endoscopes, respiratory and anesthesia equipment, and vaginal ultrasound probes, that
comes  into  contact  with  mucus  membranes.  They  are  not  in  the  scope  of  this
document.  Terminal  (discharge/transfer)  cleaning  is  cleaning  and  disinfection  that  is
performed  after  the  patient  is  discharged  or  transferred.  Includes  the  removal  of
organic material and significant reduction and elimination of microbial contamination.
HAIs are associated with medical devices, complications following surgery, transmission
between  patients  and  healthcare  workers,  antibiotic  overuse,  and  more.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/hcp/infection-control/index.html
