Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Healthcare workers can be exposed to biological fluids that are
capable  of  transmitting  diseases.  Those  diseases,  which  are  caused  by  a  variety  of
microorganisms such as, Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), Ebola Virus,
and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) can pose significant risks to life and health.
Healthcare workers wear protective clothing (e.g., surgical gowns, isolation gowns, and
coveralls) to protect both patients and themselves from the transfer of microorganisms
by blood and body fluids. A common misunderstanding among many end users is that
they  are  protected  from  blood,  body  fluids,  and  other  potentially  infectious  materials
when  they  wear  any  type  of  fluid-resistant  garment.  This  document  provides  an
overview of scientific evidence and information on national and international standards,
test  methods,  and  specifications  for  fluid-resistant  and  impermeable  gowns  and
coveralls  used  in  healthcare.  This  document  focuses  on  selecting  protective  clothing
primarily  on  the  basis  of  their  barrier  properties;  it  does  not  address  all  aspects  of
garments  related  to  their  design,  integrity,  durability,  comfort,  and  functionality.  As
with any type of personal protective equipment (PPE), the key to proper selection and
use of gowns and coveralls is to understand the hazards and the risk of exposure. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has categorized three primary routes
of  transmission:  (i)  contact  (direct  and  indirect),  (ii)  respiratory  droplets,  and  (iii)
airborne  droplet  nuclei  [Siegel  2007].  Contact  transmission  is  generally  the  most
common  and  direct  contact  occurs  when  microorganisms  transfer  directly  from  one
person  to  another.  Airborne  transmission  occurs  by  dissemination  of  either  airborne
droplet  nuclei  or  small  particles  in  the  respirable  size  range  containing  infectious
agents. Droplet transmission refers to respiratory droplets generated through coughing,
sneezing, or talking. By using appropriate protective clothing, it is possible to create a
barrier to eliminate or reduce contact and droplet exposure, and therefore prevent the
transfer  of  microorganisms  between  patients  and  healthcare  workers.  This  document
provides information about protective clothing standard test methods and classification
standards when the transmission of the microorganisms is through direct contact with
blood  or  body  fluids.  Direct  contact  can  occur  through  broken  skin  or  mucous
membranes located areas such as the eyes, nose, or mouth. In addition to blood, other
body fluids can include (but are not limited to) urine, saliva, sweat, feces, vomit, breast
milk, and semen. Employers should conduct a thorough risk assessment first to identify
potential exposures to blood and body fluids. The risk of exposure sometimes depends
on  the  stage  of  the  disease  and  severity  of  symptoms.  For  example,  for  Ebola  virus
disease, severe symptoms are strongly associated with high levels of virus production.
In  addition,  close  contact  with  the  patient  and  invasive  medical  care  can  increase
opportunities for transmission. This should be considered during the risk assessment,
such as in the case of Ebola virus disease, as Ebola patients can release large volumes
(as  much  as  8  liters/day)  of  body  fluids  (vomit,  diarrhea)  [Kreuels  2014].  A  complete
assessment  of  the  risks  is  outside  the  scope  of  this  document,  but  resources  are
available. For example, the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation
(AAMI)  published  a  guidance  document  on  selection  and  use  of  protective  apparel  in
healthcare  facilities,  Technical  Information  Report  (TIR)  11  [AAMI  2005].  Some  of  the
factors important to assessing the risk of exposure in health facilities include source,
modes of transmission, pressures and types of contact, and duration and type of tasks. 
Once the hazard and the risks of exposure are identified, gown and coverall selection
can be guided by current scientific understanding of how protective clothing materials
provide protection against microorganisms in blood and body fluids. A microorganism’s
movement  through  protective  clothing  materials  depends  upon  several  factors,
including the following: Several different microorganisms have been found in healthcare
settings,  including  bacteria,  viruses,  and  some  fungi.  The  shape  and  size  of
microorganisms  varies,  and  this  will  affect  their  ability  to  move  through  a  fabric
structure.  In  general,  fungi  are  larger  than  bacteria,  and  bacteria  are  larger  than
viruses. For instance, HIV virus is spherical and 100–120 nanometers (nm) in diameter.
The  Ebola  virus  is  a  single-stranded  RNA  virus  with  a  filamentous  shape,  a  median
particle  length  ranging  from  974  nm  to  1,086  nm,  and  average  80  nm  in  diameter.
Microorganisms are transported by carriers such as body fluids, sloughed skin cells, lint,
dust, and respiratory droplets. A significant number of microorganisms can be carried in
a very minute volume of blood or body fluids, which may not be visible to the naked
eye  (see  Figure  1).  For  example,  the  number  of  infectious  units  of  Hepatitis  B  in  a
0.1-microliter  (µL)  droplet  is  10,000,  which  is  why  it  is  highly  infectious  and  easily
transferrable.  Ebola  virus  RNA  levels  in  blood  also  increase  rapidly  during  the  acute
phase of the illness. One study reported an average peak titer of 3.4 x 105 RNA copies
per  0.1  µL  (i.e.,  34  times  higher  than  the  concentration  of  Hepatitis  B)  for  cases
associated with a fatal outcome [Towner 2004]. Several studies [Brown 1992; Kotilainen
et  al.  1992;  Shadduck  et  al.  1990;  McCullough  1993]  have  also  reported  that  when
liquid containing microorganisms penetrate a material, microorganisms are carried with
it, and penetration is possible without liquid being visible. Because of this, standardized
test methods must be sensitive enough to detect microorganism penetration, since this
is the only way to determine if microorganism penetration has occurred in any part of
the garment, including the seams. 
 Figure 1: Bloodborne pathogen strikethrough (penetration) conversion chart (This chart
converts the amount of strikethrough to the amount of potential bloodborne pathogen
contamination). The four spots at the top were formed from premeasured droplets of
synthetic blood and marked in microliters (µL) ranging from 100 µL to 0.1 µL. Adapted
with permission from AAMI TIR 11:2005, “Selection and use of protective apparel and
surgical  drapes  in  health  care  facilities.”  One  challenge  that  employers  such  as
hospitals  and  pre-hospital  emergency  care  organizations  face  is  selecting  the  most
appropriate protective clothing for healthcare workers based on the recommendations,
practices, and regulations. This challenge is complex because there are several terms
(e.g., fluid-resistant, fluid-proof, impermeable, and impervious) used in the industry to
define  barrier  resistance  properties  of  garments.  The  term  “fluid-resistant”  usually
refers to fabrics that resist liquid penetration, but may allow penetration with pressure.
According to Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, “impermeable” means not allowing
passage, as of fluids; impenetrable [Thomas 1997]. Calling a fabric “impermeable” or
“impervious”  usually  means  that  the  fabric  prevents  liquids  or  microorganisms  from
penetrating. Impermeable could be in reference to water, to blood, to viruses, or to all.
The  terms  “impervious”  and  “impermeable”  are  often  used  interchangeably.
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  industry  consensus  for  using  these  terms.  Therefore,
manufacturers  usually  provide  fabric  or  garment  specifications  associated  with  the
standard  test  methods  or  standard  classifications.  In  addition,  due  to  the  misleading
use of these terms, the FDA does not approve marketing surgical gowns or drapes with
“impervious,”  “impermeable,”  “fluid  repellant,”  or  “fluid-resistant”  labeling  claims.
Evidence-based  guidance  is  needed  in  order  to  define  these  terms  to  improve
communication
 among
 employers/purchasers
 and
 gown
 and
 coverall
manufacturers/suppliers. In this document, we use the term “fluid-resistant” to apply to
protective clothing tested against water as the liquid challenge and reserve the use of
the  term  “impermeable”  to  materials  that  have  demonstrated  blockage  of
microorganisms using a recognized standard test method (discussed later). Employers
should consider the garment design as part of their selection process. Unfortunately, no
clinical  studies  have  been  done  to  compare  the  efficacy  of  gowns  vs.  coveralls.  Both
have  been  used  effectively  by  healthcare  workers  in  clinical  settings  during  patient
care. Thus, other factors need to be considered when comparing gowns and coveralls
during  the  selection  process.  While  the  material  and  seam  barrier  properties  are
essential  for  defining  protection,  the  coverage  provided  by  the  material  used  in  the
garment  design,  as  well  as  certain  features  including  closures,  will  greatly  affect
protection.  For  example,  a  coverall  with  a  front  zipper  closure  could  result  in  the
compromise  of  barrier  protection  if  the  ordinary  cloth  and  plastic  zipper  used  in  its
construction  is  not  covered  with  a  flap  of  barrier  material  that  can  be  sealed  to  the
garment. Similarly, most of the surgical gowns rated for high levels of barrier protection
may include the high-performance barrier materials in only certain portions of the gown
(sleeves  and  front  panel).  This  is  especially  important  when  contact  from
hazardous/contaminated fluids can come from multiple directions. In general, there is a
significant difference between the design of traditional coveralls and isolation/surgical
gowns.  Although  coveralls  typically  provide  360-degree  protection  because  they  are
designed to cover the whole body, including back and lower legs and sometimes head
and  feet  as  well,  the  design  of  surgical/isolation  gowns  do  not  provide  continuous
whole-body  protection  (e.g.,  possible  openings  in  the  back,  coverage  to  the  mid-calf
only) (see Figure 2).   Figure 2: Examples of a typical coverall and an isolation gown.
Gowns, on the other hand, are relatively easier to put on and, in particular, to take off.
They  are  generally  more  familiar  to  healthcare  workers  and  hence  more  likely  to  be
used and removed correctly. These factors also facilitate training in their correct use.
During patient care, the risk of the anticipated exposure is typically in the area of front
chest  and  sleeves,  thus  gowns  are  used  frequently  in  health  care.  The  level  of  heat
stress  generated  due  to  the  added  layer  of  clothing  is  also  expected  to  be  less  for
gowns than coveralls due to several reasons, which include the openings in the design
of  gowns  and  total  area  covered  by  the  fabric.  For  gowns,  it  is  important  to  have
sufficient  overlap  of  the  fabric  so  that  it  wraps  around  the  body  to  cover  the  back
(ensuring that if the wearer squats or sits down, the gown still protects the back area of
the body). Employers should consider some of the critical fabric and clothing properties
(e.g.,  strength  properties  of  the  fabric  and  seams  [e.g.,  tensile  strength  and  seam
strength],  barrier  properties  of  seams/closures,  size  of  the  garment,  etc.)  when
selecting the appropriate protective clothing. If the fabric or seams and barrier layer on
the  fabric  is  not  durable  enough  to  withstand  typical  stresses  applied  during  wear  or
use (e.g., if wrong size garment is used), garments may tear during kneeling, reaching,
or  bending.  In  addition,  garments  too  large  for  the  wearer  may  catch  or  snag  on
objects.  Seams/closures  are  critical  components  of  the  overall  barrier  protection
provided by fluid-resistant or impermeable garments. It is vital to select the appropriate
seam configuration to be able to protect from the penetration of blood and body fluids.
Several  seaming  techniques  are  used  in  the  construction  of  protective  clothing,
including  serged  or  sewn,  bound,  taped,  double  taped,  and  ultrasonic  welded.
Employers should consider the barrier resistance of seams/closures when selecting the
appropriate  protective  clothing  in  addition  to  the  strength  properties.  Once  a  facility
selects a specific garment and each healthcare worker knows his or her proper garment
size, switching to another supplier requires each wearer to determine the proper size
needed  for  the  specific  product  model  selected.  “ANSI/ISEA  101-2014  American
National  Standard  for  Limited-Use  and  Disposable  Coveralls—Size  and  Labeling
Requirements,”  includes  a  sizing  chart  and  a  set  of  exercises  in  which  a  user  can
validate that a garment is the proper size, thereby assisting facilities in selecting the
appropriate  size  for  each  wearer.  The  manner  in  which  the  clothing  is  donned  and
doffed in sequence with other PPE is an important consideration when selecting gowns
and coveralls. This is critical because the ease or difficulty with which PPE is put on and
removed  may  affect  its  effectiveness  and  the  potential  for  self-contamination,
especially during doffing of contaminated PPE. Donning and doffing features included in
the selection process should consider the entire PPE ensemble, not simply the gown or
coverall.  In  addition  to  the  barrier  resistance  properties  and  other  factors  discussed
above, there are other critical characteristics of protective clothing that employers and
purchasers  must  use  in  their  decision-making  process.  These  include  factors  such  as
compliance  with  regulatory  agencies,  durability  (abrasion  resistance,  tensile  strength,
seam  strength),  comfort  (breathability,  air  permeability),  flammability,  electrostatic
properties,  cost,  availability,  ergonomics/human  factors,  and  integration  with  other
types  of  PPE.  Of  particular  importance  is  how  the  selected  gown  or  coverall  will
interface  with  other  items  of  PPE  worn  by  the  individual  healthcare  worker,  including
gloves  with  the  sleeve  of  the  gown  or  coverall  and  face/eye  or  respiratory  protective
equipment with the hood or collar area of the gown or coverall. These interfaces are
essential  to  the  individual’s  overall  protection,  because  the  overall  ensemble  of  PPE
provides their protection. In selecting gowns and coveralls, further consideration should
be given to the physical characteristics of the work environment and specific activities
of healthcare workers. Different physical conditions where gowns or coveralls are used
can  compromise  their  material  and  properties  of  seam  barriers.  Certain  actions,
including kneeling or leaning on a chair or table contaminated with blood, can result in
pressure levels that exceed the levels used in the standard test methods. The gowns or
coveralls may no longer provide expected levels of protection under these conditions.
Gown and coverall manufacturers should be consulted before selections are made to:
Several fluid-resistant and impermeable protective clothing options are available in the
market  place  for  healthcare  workers.  These  include  isolation  gowns,  surgical  gowns,
and  coveralls.  When  selecting  the  most  appropriate  protective  clothing,  employers
should  consider  all  of  the  available  information  on  recommended  protective  clothing,
including  the  potential  limitations.  Employers  should  consult  protective  clothing
manufacturers as needed in regards to availability and practicality for their facilities. A
key  step  in  this  process  is  to  understand  the  relevant  standards  and  test  methods.
Descriptive information about each standard is provided in the body of this document.
When the transmission route is defined as “direct contact transmission,” such as in the
case  of  Ebola  and  HIV,  employers  should  consider  gowns  and  coveralls  that
demonstrate resistance to synthetic blood, as well as passage of virus. Standard test
methods  can  be  used  to  evaluate  the  resistance  of  fabrics  or  seams/closures  to
synthetic blood penetration and viral penetration, as described in Table 1. The United
States commonly uses American Society of Testing and Materials International (ASTM)
methods,  while  Europe  commonly  uses  International  Organization  for  Standardization
(ISO) methods.  Table 1. Standard test methods to evaluate the resistance of fabrics to
synthetic blood and virus penetration ASTM F1670 and ISO 16603 are “screening-tests”
that evaluate the resistance of a material to synthetic blood penetration [ASTM 2003a;
ISO 2004a]. The synthetic blood used for these tests is a mixture of cellulose, coloring,
buffer solution, and stabilizing agents. Synthetic blood has a surface tension (0.042 ±
0.002 Newton per meter [N/m]) and viscosity representative of blood and some body
fluids (see Table 2 for surface tension of the body fluids). Within the context of gowns
and  coverall  testing,  the  surface  tension  of  the  challenge  liquid  is  critical.  This  is
because  liquids  with  higher  surface  tension,  like  water  (0.070–0.072  N/m),  are  more
likely to bead on a surface than liquids with lower surface tension, which are more likely
to wet and penetrate through the garment. Consequently, some test methods that use
water  as  a  challenge  agent  may  not  be  representative  for  evaluating  the  barrier
effectiveness of the healthcare PPE and may overestimate the effectiveness of the PPE
for blood-borne pathogens. Test methods evaluating the water resistance of garments
will be discussed later in this document.
Table 2: Surface tension values for water, synthetic blood, and human blood and body
fluids1
 3 Atopic The viral penetration resistance tests, namely ASTM F1671 and ISO 16604, are
similar  to  ASTM  F1670  and  ISO  16603,  but  they  use  a  bacteriophage  (Phi-X174)
challenge  suspension  instead  of  synthetic  blood  [ASTM  2003a;  ISO  2004b].  At  the
conclusion  of  the  exposure  period  in  the  ASTM  F1671  or  ISO  16604  viral  penetration
tests, the opposing surface of the material is rinsed with an assay fluid, and this fluid is
then  cultured  in  the  presence  of  the  host  bacterium,  E.  coli.  Plaques  form  when  a
bacteriophage  is  present,  with  the  number  of  plaques  indicating  the  number  of
penetrating bacteriophages. Materials pass the viral penetration test when no liquid is
observed to penetrate the specimen and the E. coli bacteriophage is not detected in the
assay  fluid.  The  choice  of  virus  challenge  agent  in  the  standard  methods  is  a  critical
test  condition.  For  these  test  methods,  the  bacteriophage  serves  as  a  surrogate  to
simulate  viruses  that  are  pathogenic  to  humans.  Phi-X174  bacteriophage  has  nearly
spherical morphology similar to HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C. At 27 nm in diameter,
it  is  similar  in  size  and  shape  to  Hepatitis  C  (30  nm  in  diameter),  which  is  the
smallest-known bloodborne viral pathogen. As mentioned earlier, the size and shape of
a virus are believed to affect viral penetration, and thus selecting a small virus (27 nm
in  diameter)  would  serve  as  a  “worst-case”  scenario  for  the  barrier  material.  Smaller
particles are expected to more easily pass through pores in the fabrics used in barrier
materials.  Some  of  the  other  viruses,  such  as  Ebola  virus,  are  larger  in  diameter
compared to Phi-X174. Currently, there is no scientific evidence to suggest the Ebola
and other larger viruses would be more likely to penetrate through protective clothing
than  a  smaller  virus.  The  amount  of  pressure  applied  in  the  standard  methods  is
another critical test condition. The biggest difference between the ASTM and ISO test
methods is the pressure levels used when conducting test procedures. In ASTM F1670
and ASTM F1671, tests are conducted using 13.8 kilopascal (kPa) (2 pounds per square
inch [psi]), and the criterion is that no penetration should occur. Whereas, in ISO 16603
and ISO 16604, the maximum pressure level before any penetration occurs is found by
applying  increasing  pressure  levels  (0  kPa  to  20  kPa)—14  kPa  is  the  most  equivalent
pressure  to  that  of  the  ASTM  tests.  Note  that  ISO  16603  and  ISO  16604  are  used  to
classify and rank materials, and they do not relate the classification of material barrier
performance  to  any  specific  circumstances  of  use.  Penetration  (often  called
strikethrough) can be initiated by an external force acting against clothing. The force
generated by an external pressure, such as from a pressing or leaning motion, is likely
one  of  the  major  routes  of  blood  penetration,  especially  in  the  chest  and  sleeves  of
protective clothing. These pressures arise when individuals wearing protective clothing
lean or press on a surface that may be wet with blood or body fluids, such as in the
case of a healthcare worker leaning against a patient’s bed or an emergency medical
responder kneeling on a contaminated roadway. Studies have documented a range of
pressures  to  which  protective  clothing  is  subjected  during  clinical  use.  [Altman  et  al.
1991]  reported  that  the  pressures  exerted  on  surgical  gowns  during  pressing  and
leaning in surgery can range from 1 psi to 60 psi. Blood penetration has been shown to
increase with increasing pressure [Granzow et al. 1998]. Although high pressures have
been  reported,  other  studies  have  found  that  many  common  surgical  movements
(including  leaning,  reaching,  and  arm  resting)  result  in  less  than  2  psi  pressure.  For
example,  [Smith  et  al.  1995]  evaluated  the  pressures  generated  during  a  variety  of
surgical  procedures  and  found  that  most  pressures  applied  to  the  front  of  surgical
gowns  are  2.9  psi  or  less  for  15  seconds  or  less.  Another  study  showed  that  leaning
against the operating table caused a pressure of 0.52 psi (3.6 kPa), while reaching for
an instrument showed the greatest (0.70 psi, which equals 4.8 kPa) [Smith and Nichols
1991]. The greatest pressure seen during any maneuver was 1.84 psi (12.7 kPa) while
reaching.  Smith  and  Nichols  estimated  representative  abdominal  pressures  during
surgical procedures to be between 0.25 and 2.0 psi. Others have looked at the areas
where blood/body fluid penetration occurs through the garment. One study found that
blood  penetration  was  most  common  on  the  chest,  forearm,  and  abdomen,  and  was
correlated with the areas of highest exposure and pressure [Quebbeman et al. 1992].
Others  have  noted  that  the  cuff,  forearm,  thigh,  chest,  and  abdomen  are  most
vulnerable to blood strikethrough [Pissiotis et al. 1997]. Studies suggest that if a liquid
is in prolonged contact with a fabric, prewetting can occur, and this can result in the
fabric’s decreased resistance to penetration [Flaherty et al. 1993; Olderman 1984]. The
viral  penetration  of  surgical  gowns  by  HIV  has  been  compared  with  the  soak-through
point (the point at which fluid visibly soaks through the fabric) by multiple investigators
[Tyler et al. 1989; Shadduck et al. 1990]. It was reported that HIV could penetrate some
surgical gown materials in common use at the time of the studies, and HIV penetration
was  sometimes  noted  in  the  absence  of  visible  soak-through.  This  is  important  to
remember, because endusers can often have a false sense of security when they see
no visible penetration in their garments. The conditions of the ASTM F1671 test require
subjecting barrier material specimens in a special test cell to the viral challenge for one
hour, with the sixth minute of the exposure at 13.8 kPa (2 psi) for one minute. These
conditions  were  selected  because  they  are  used  in  a  related  method,  “ASTM  F903
Standard  Test  Method  for  Resistance  of  Materials  Used  in  Protective  Clothing  to
Penetration by Liquids,” which assesses liquid chemical penetration through protective
clothing materials. Research at Kansas State University [McCullough and Schoenberger
1992] was performed to show how these test conditions best correlated with a human
factors evaluation where visible blood strikethrough occurred. This is referred to as the
elbow lean test. This technical report is structured to be as broad as possible in listing
multiple test methods with minimum performance requirements in order to maximize
the potential that an employer will find appropriate data from different manufacturers.
However, it is important to note that different test methods, while similar, do not yield
the  same  absolute  results  due  to  differences  in  test  equipment,  conditions,  and
procedures. These particular methods/standards have been selected because they are
broadly used in the industry and current international protective clothing classification
standards to describe the performance levels provided by garments and to differentiate
the  protection  levels  provided.  Employers  should  be  aware  that  garments  qualifying
under  different  standard  methods  may  in  fact  provide  different  levels  of  protection.
Limited  information  is  available  to  compare  different  products  using  these  test
methods. Standards are available to define the performance requirements for clothing
or  clothing  materials  used  to  protect  against  infectious  agents.  ANSI/AAMI  PB70,  EN
13795,  EN  14126,  and  NFPA  1999  are  examples  of  standards  frequently  used  in  the
United States and Europe. ANSI/AAMI PB70 is used to classify the garments used in the
healthcare industry, such as surgical and isolation gowns. Typically, EN 14126 is used
for protective coveralls, and EN 13795 is used for surgical gowns. NFPA 1999-2013 is
primarily  intended  for  emergency  medical  first  responders,  but  its  scope  also  covers
medical  first  receivers.  In  the  United  States,  ANSI/AAMI  PB70  establishes  a  system  of
classification for protective apparel (including surgical gowns and isolation gowns) used
in  healthcare  facilities,  based  on  their  liquid  barrier  performance.  It  also  specifies
labeling requirements and test methods for determining the compliance of protective
apparel labeled with liquid barrier claims or liquid-borne microbial barrier claims. The
ANSI/AAMI  PB70  was  accepted  by  the  FDA  in  2004.  The  ANSI/AAMI  PB70  standard
includes  four  standard  tests  to  evaluate  the  barrier  effectiveness  of  surgical  gowns,
isolation gowns, and surgical drapes. Based on the results of these standardized tests,
four  levels  of  barrier  performance  are  defined,  with  Level  1  being  the  lowest  level  of
protection, and Level 4 being the highest level of protection. Table 3 summarizes the
requirements  of  ANSI/AAMI  PB70:2012  regarding  the  classification  of  barrier
performance  of  surgical  gowns,  isolation  gowns,  and  surgical  drapes.   Table  3:
ANSI/AAMI  PB  70:12  classification  of  barrier  performance  of  surgical  gowns,  other
protective  apparel,  surgical  drapes  and  drape  accessories.  3  AATCC  127  Water
resistance: hydrostatic pressure test determines the ability of a material to resist water
penetration under constant contact with increasing pressure [AATCC 1998] As indicated
in  Table  3,  the  requirements  for  levels  1,  2,  and  3  have  specific  test  requirements
associated with them. Only Level 4 gowns are tested for viral penetration resistance,
and therefore only Level 4 garments are considered impermeable to viral penetration
using  ASTM  F1671.  The  gowns  complying  with  the  lower  levels  (Level  1,  2,  and  3)
cannot be considered impermeable. However, Level 1–3 gowns can provide increasing
resistance to liquids. ANSI/AAMI PB70 Level 1, 2, and 3 surgical/isolation gown-testing
requirements  only  use  water  as  a  challenge.  Because  the  surface  tension  of  water  is
much higher than that of blood, blood can penetrate through fabrics more readily than
water.  Therefore,  no  correlation  can  be  made  between  AATCC  water  resistance  tests
(AATCC 42 and AATCC 127) and ASTM F1671 viral penetration tests, and consequently,
protection  provided  by  Levels  1,  2,  3  gowns  and  that  of  Level  4  gowns.  A  common
misunderstanding among many endusers is that they are protected from blood, body
fluids,  and  other  potentially  infectious  materials  (OPIM)  when  they  wear  any  type  of
fluid-resistant garment or surgical or isolation gown. The requirements for the design
and construction of surgical and isolation gowns are based on the anticipated location
and  degree  of  liquid  contact,  given  the  expected  conditions  of  use.  ANSI/AAMI
PB70:2012 identifies certain areas of surgical and isolation gowns as critical zones (see
Figure 3). [ANSI 2012] The critical zones include those areas where direct contact with
blood, body fluids, and/or OPIM is most likely to occur—even though the areas outside
of  critical  zones  can  inadvertently  be  splashed  or  sprayed  as  well.  According  to  the
standard, for isolation gowns the whole garment is considered a critical zone due to the
unpredictable types of potential contact with blood, body fluids, and OPIM. The entire
isolation gown, including the seams, but excluding the cuffs, hems, and bindings, must
achieve  claimed  barrier  performance.  Open-backed  isolation  gowns  do  not  meet  the
critical area parameters, and therefore they cannot be rated. For surgical gowns, the
critical  zone  comprises  at  least  the  front  panel  (area  A)  and  lower  sleeves  (area  B)
(Figure  3).  The  classification  of  the  surgical  gown  is  based  on  the  lower  performing
component of the two. According to the standard, the back of the gown (area D) can be
non-protective. However, the entire front of the gown (areas A, B, and C) is required to
have a barrier performance of at least Level 1. Therefore, the areas outside of critical
areas in the front of gown (i.e., area C) can be Level 1 even though the whole gown is
classified as Level 4 surgical gown. Therefore, using a surgical gown in isolation settings
may not provide appropriate protection.   Figure 3: Critical zones defined for surgical
gowns  and  isolation  gowns  in  ANSI/AAMI  PB70.  Adapted  with  permission  from
ANSI/AAMI  PB70:2012,  “Liquid  barrier  performance  and  classification  of  protective
apparel  and  drapes  intended  for  use  in  health  care  facilities.”  ANSI/AAMI  PB70  was
referenced in another standard for surgical gowns, ASTM F2407 Standard Specification
for  Surgical  Gowns  Intended  for  Use  in  Healthcare  Facilities.  In  addition  to  ANSI/AAMI
PB70  barrier  resistance  testing  requirements,  this  standard  specification  also
establishes  physical  property  and  comfort  requirements  including  tensile  strength,
seam  strength,  tear  resistance,  lint  generation,  evaporative  resistance,  and  moisture
vapor  transmission  rate,  mainly  for  reporting  purposes  only  [ASTM  2407  2006].  EN
13795 is a European recognized standard of quality and conformance to manufacturing,
testing and performance specifications for single-use and multiple-use surgical gowns,
drapes,  and  clean-air  suits.  The  standard  was  developed  to  assist  healthcare
professionals in making informed decisions when selecting the appropriate product for
the  anticipated  tasks  by  specifying  a  consistent  basis  for  testing  and  providing  a
common  understanding  of  barrier  properties.  EN  13795  categorizes  products  by
performance  type:  high  performance  versus  standard  performance  gown  classes.  It
then further subdivides them into critical and less critical product areas as in ANSI/AAMI
PB70 (critical zones in surgical gowns). EN 13795 also describes the standardized and
harmonized barrier test methodologies that single-use and multiple-use surgical gowns
must undergo. Table 4 shows EN 13795 specific performance requirements for surgical
gowns.  In  addition  to  these  tests,  EN  13795  requires  other  characteristics  be  tested,
including  microbial  and  particulate  matter  cleanliness,  linting,  bursting  strength  (dry
and wet), and tensile strength (dry and wet). However, performance requirements for
these
 characteristics
 are
 the
 same
 for
 both
 standard-performance
 and
high-performance  surgical  gowns,  and  critical  and  less-critical  areas.  Note  that  EN
13795  is  aimed  to  protect  the  patient;  therefore,  within  the  context  of  the  European
standard, the products conforming to this standard are considered medical devices. If a
product is designed to be PPE rather than a medical device, the product has to comply
with  the  corresponding  directive  89/686/EEC  (protective  clothing)  and  standard  “EN
14126  Performance  requirements  and  tests  methods  for  protective  clothing  against
infective  agents.”  EN  14126  has  various  classes  for  most  performance  requirements;
therefore, if EN 14126 is specified, then the classes for the performance requirements
should  also  be  specified.   Table  4.  Overview  of  some  of  the  EN  13795  performance
requirements Similar to “AATCC 127, Water resistance: hydrostatic pressure test,” “EN
20811 Textiles. Determination of resistance to water penetration. Hydrostatic pressure
test”  evaluates  the  behavior  of  the  fabric  structure  under  constantly  increasing
hydrostatic  pressure.  The  results  are  expressed  in  water  column  (cm),  and  higher
values  indicate  a  better  resistance.  Note  that  ANSI/AAMI  PB70  also  cites  this  method
(AATCC 127) for one of the classification requirements. The EN ISO 22612 test method
for resistance to dry microbial penetration is designed to determine the ability of dry
fabric  to  resist  penetration  of  particles  carrying  microorganisms.  The  method
establishes the quantity of microorganisms that can penetrate through the test material
while  being  carried  on  talcum  powder.  Test  results  are  expressed  in  colony  forming
units  (CFU)  observed  on  the  agar  plate.  The  EN  ISO  22610  test  method,  used  to
determine the resistance to wet bacterial penetration, evaluates fabric’s resistance to
microbial penetration under conditions of liquid pooling on the fabric and mechanical
rubbing.  Test  results  are  expressed  in  IB  “Barrier  Index.”  IB=6.0  is  the  maximum
achievable  value,  and  it  means  no  penetration  for  the  purpose  of  the  test.  The
European  standard  EN  14126  defines  performance  requirements  for  materials  in
protective clothing used to protect from infectious agents. Due to the heterogeneity of
microorganisms (in terms of size, shape, infectious dose, survival abilities, etc.), the EN
14126  standard  does  not  define  performance  criteria  for  specific  types  of
microorganisms.  The  test  methods  specified  in  this  standard  focus  on  the  medium
containing  the  microorganism,  such  as  liquid,  aerosol,  or  solid  dust  particle.  The  EN
14126 standard is typically used for coveralls and it specifies ISO 16603 and ISO 16604
as  test  methods  used  to  evaluate  the  penetration  resistance  performance  of  clothing
materials  to  contaminated  liquids  under  hydrostatic  pressure.  Clothing  materials  are
classified based on the performance levels achieved by these test methods (see Table
5). Note that the pressure level in Class 5 is closest to the pressure levels specified in
ASTM  F1670  and  ASTM  F1671  (13.8  kPa).  Note  that  EN  14126  specifications  for  ISO
16603 and ISO 16604 apply only to fabrics used in the garments. Both tests could be
conducted on the seams as well. In order to be appropriately protected from blood and
viral  penetrations,  end  users  should  consult  garment  manufacturers  about  the  seam
barrier  test  results,  in  addition  to  the  fabric  test  results.   Table  5:  Classification
according to EN 14126 of resistance to penetration by blood and body fluids using ISO
16603 and ISO 16604 test methods NFPA 1999 was specifically developed to address a
range of different clothing items worn by emergency medical service first responders,
but  also  applies  to  medical  first  receivers.  The  standard  includes  design  criteria,
performance  criteria,  labeling  requirements,  and  test  methods  that  address  both
single-use  (disposable)  and  multiple-use  (reusable)  emergency  medical  garments,
which can be coveralls, multi-piece clothing sets, or partial body clothing. The standard
uses  ASTM  F1671  to  demonstrate  the  viral  penetration  resistance  of  materials  and
seams, which is supplemented with an overall liquid integrity test for full body clothing.
The latter test shows whether closures and other aspects of the clothing item design
will hold out liquid. There are also testing requirements applied to materials and seams
for  setting  minimum  criteria  such  as  strength  and  physical  hazard  resistance.  The
standard further specifies that compliant clothing items be labeled as compliant to the
standard  and  certified  by  an  independent  certification  organization.  Several  test
methods and performance requirements for barrier resistant gowns and coveralls were
discussed  in  this  technical  document.  Test  methods  for  determination  of  the  barrier
resistance  of  fabrics  such  as  AATCC  42,  AATCC  127,  ASTM  F1670,  ASTM  F1671,  ISO
16603,  ISO  16604,  are  used  for  both  coveralls  and  gowns.  In  general,  for  the
classification  of  the  protective  clothing,  ANSI/AAMI  PB70  and  EN  13795  are  used  for
gowns  and  EN  14126  and  NFPA  1999  are  used  for  coveralls.  There  are  several
differences  between  ANSI/AAMI  PB70  and  EN  13795  surgical  gown  classifications.
Because the test methods and performance requirements cannot be compared directly,
it  is  difficult  to  assign  equivalency  between  surgical  gowns  classified  according  to
ANSI/AAMI PB70 (see Table 3) and EN 13795 (see Table 4). Recent PPE specifications
from  the  World  Health  Organization  for  Filovirus  disease  outbreak  indicate  that  EN
13795 high performance level gown is most similar to ANSI/AAMI PB70 level 3 gown.
Similarly,  for  coveralls  it  is  difficult  to  compare  test  methods  and  performance
specifications directly. In Europe, the EN 14126 standard typically is used to evaluate
and classify coveralls used to protect from infectious agents and EN 13795 is used to
evaluate  and  classify  surgical  gowns.  Unlike  surgical  or  isolation  gowns  (ANSI/AAMI
PB70),  there  is  no  widely  used  classification  standard  in  the  United  States.  Coveralls
with materials and seams tested against ASTM 1671 are specified in NFPA 1999–2013,
Standard  on  Protective  Clothing  for  Emergency  Medical  Operations.  This  standard
establishes  minimum  performance  requirements  for  single-use  emergency  medical
garments,  multiple-use  emergency  medical  garments,  and  other  PPE  for  protection
from  contact  with  blood  and  body-fluid-borne  pathogens  for  personnel  performing
patient  care  during  emergency  medical  operations  [NFPA  2013].  While  originally
designed  for  pre-hospital  healthcare  workers,  it  could  be  used  for  hospital-based
healthcare workers as well. Thus, the current best approach to comparing coveralls is to
use manufacturer supplied test data. Many of the same test methods used to estimate
barrier protection of gowns (Tables 3 and 4) can be used for coveralls as well. Table 6
lists some of the commonly used test methods for determining the barrier effectiveness
of coveralls and describes how the results should be interpreted.  Table 6: Commonly
used test methods for determination of barrier effectiveness of coveralls AAMI [2005].
AAMI-TIR  11  Technical  information  report:  selection  of  surgical  gowns  and  drapes  in
healthcare  facilities.  Arlington,  VA:  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Medical
Instrumentation.  AATCC  [1998].  AATCC  127-1998  Water  resistance:  hydrostatic
pressure  test.  Research  Triangle  Park,  NC:  American  Association  of  Textile  Chemists
and Colorists. AATCC [2000]. AATCC 42-2000 Water resistance: impact penetration test.
Research  Triangle  Park,  NC:  American  Association  of  Textile  Chemists  and  Colorists.
Aburub  A,  Risely  DS,  Mishra  D  [2008].  A  critical  evaluation  of  fasted  state  simulating
gastric  fluid  (FaSSGF)  that  contains  sodium  lauryl  sulfate  and  proposal  of  a  modified
recipe. Int J Pharm 347(1–2):16–22. Altman KW, McElhaney JH, Moylan JA, Fitzpatrick KT
[1991].  Transmural  surgical  gown  pressure  measurements  remits  in  the  operating
theater.  Am  J  Infect  Control  19(3):147–155.  ANSI/AAMI  [2012].  ANSI/AAMI:PB70:2012
Liquid barrier performance and classification of protective apparel and drapes intended
for  use  in  healthcare  facilities.  Arlington,  VA:  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Medical  Instrumentation.  ANSI/ISEA  [2014].  101-2014  American  national  standard  for
limited-use and disposable coveralls—size and labeling requirements. Washington, DC:
American  National  Standards  Institute.  ASTM  [2003a].  ASTM  F1670-03  Standard  test
method  for  resistance  of  materials  used  in  protective  clothing  to  penetration  by
synthetic  blood.  West  Conshohocken,  PA:  ASTM  International.  ASTM  [2003b].  ASTM
F1671-03 Standard test method for resistance of materials used in protective clothing
to penetration by blood-borne pathogens using Phi-X174 bacteriophage penetration as
a  test  system.  West  Conshohocken,  PA:  ASTM  International.  ASTM  F2407  [2006]
Standard  Specification  for  Surgical  Gowns  Intended  for  Use  in  Healthcare  Facilities.
West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International Attinger D, Moore C, Donaldson A, Jafari A,
Stone  HA  [2013].  Fluid  dynamics  topics  in  bloodstain  pattern  analysis:  comparative
review and research opportunities. Forensic Sci Int 231(1–3):375–396. Bothorel B, Heller
A, Grosshans E, Candas V [1992]. Thermal and sweating responses in normal and atopic
subjects  under  internal  and  moderate  external  heat  stress.  Arch  Dermatol  Res
284(3):135–140.  Brown  PL  [1992].  Protective  clothing  for  health  care  workers:
liquidproofness  versus  microbiological  resistance.  In:  McBriarity  J,  Henry  N,  eds.
Performance of protective clothing ASTM STP 1133. Philadelphia, PA: American Society
for  Testing  and  Materials,  pp.  65–82.  BSI  [1992].  EN  20811:  1992  Textiles.
Determination  of  resistance  to  water  penetration.  Hydrostatic  pressure  test.  London:
British
 Standards
 Institution.
 BSI
 [2003].
 EN
 14126:2003
 Protective
clothing—performance requirements and tests methods for protective clothing against
infective  agents.  London:  British  Standards  Institution.  BSI  [2011].  EN  13795:2011
Surgical drapes, gowns and clean air suits, used as medical devices for patients, clinical
staff  and  equipment—general  requirements  for  manufacturers,  processors  and
products,  test  methods,  performance  requirements  and  performance  levels.  London:
British Standards Institution. Flaherty AL, Wick TM [1993]. Prolonged contact with blood
alters surgical gown permeability. Am J Infect Control21(5):249–256. Fuchs A, Dressman
JB [2014]. Composition and physicochemical properties of fasted-state human duodenal
and  jejunal  fluid:  a  critical  evaluation  of  the  available  data.  J  Pharm  Sci  103(11):
3398–3411.  Granzow  JW,  Smith  JW,  Nichols  RL,  Waterman  RS,  Muzik  AC  [1998].
Evaluation of the protective value of hospital gowns against blood strike-through and
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus penetration. Am J Infect Control26(2):85–93.
Hrncir  E,  Rosina  J  [1997].  Surface  tension  of  blood.  Physiol  Res  46(4):  319–321.  ISO
[2004a]. ISO 16603:2004 Clothing for protection against contact with blood and body
fluids—determination  of  the  resistance  of  protective  clothing  materials  to  penetration
by  blood  and  body  fluids—Test  method  using  synthetic  blood.  Geneva,  Switzerland:
International  Organization  for  Standardization.  ISO  [2004b].  ISO  16604:2004  Clothing
for protection against contact with blood and body fluids—determination of resistance
of protective clothing materials to penetration by blood-borne pathogens—Test method
using  Phi-X  174  bacteriophage.  Geneva,  Switzerland:  International  Organization  for
Standardization.  ISO/IEC  [2005].  ISO/IEC  17025:2005  General  requirements  for  the
competence of testing and calibration laboratories. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Organization  for  Standardization.  Kazakov  VN,  Udod  AA,  Zinkovych  II,  Fainerman  VB,
Miller R [2009]. Dynamic surface tension of saliva: general relationships and application
in medical diagnostics. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 74(2):457–461. Kotilainen HR, Cyr
WH,  Truscott  W  [1992].  Ability  of  the  1000  mL  water  leak  test  for  medical  gloves  to
detect  gloves  with  potential  for  virus  penetration.  In:  McBriarty  JP,  Henry  NW,  eds.
Performance of protective clothing. Vol. 4. ASTM STP 1133. Philadelphia, PA: American
Society
 for
 Testing
 and
 Materials.
 Kreuels
 B,
 Wichmann
 D,
 Emmerich
 P,
Schmidt-Chanasit J, de Heer G, Kluge S, Sow A, Renné T, Günther S, Lohse AW, Addo
MM,  Schmiedel  S.  [2014].  A  case  of  severe  Ebola  virus  infection  complicated  by
Gram-negative septicemia. N Engl J Med: Epub ahead of print, 2014 Oct 22. Lenter C,
ed. [1984]. Geigy scientific tables. 8th ed. Vol. 1. Units for measurement, body fluids,
composition of blood, hematology, somatometric data, 1984. West Caldwell, NJ: Farrand
Press. McCullough EA [1993]. Methods for determining the barrier efficacy of surgical
gowns. Am J Infect Control 21(6):368–374. McCullough EA, Schoenberger LK [1992]. A
comparison of methods for measuring the liquid barrier properties of surgical gowns. In:
McBriarty JP, Henry NW, eds. Performance of protective clothing. Vol 4. ASTM STP 1133.
Philadelphia,  PA:  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials,  pp.  83–98.  NFPA  [2013]
National  Fire  Protection  Association.  NFPA  1999:  Standard  on  Protective  Clothing  for
Emergency  Medical  Operations.  National  Fire  Protection  Association,  2013.  Olderman
GM  [1984].  Liquid  repellency  and  surgical  fabric  barrier  properties.  Eng  Med
13(1):35–43.  Pissiotis  CA,  Komborozos  V,  Papoutsi  C,  Skrekas  G  [1997].  Factors  that
influence  the  effectiveness  of  surgical  gowns  in  the  operating  theatre.  Eur  J  Surg
163(8):597–604.  Quebbeman  EJ,  Telford  GL,  Hubbard  S,  Wadsworth  K,  Hardman  B,
Goodman  H,  Gottlieb  MS  [1992].  In-use  evaluation  of  surgical  gowns.  Surg  Gynecol
Obstet  174(5):369–375.  Randall  WC,  Calman  C  [1954].  The  surface  tension  of  human
sweat;  its  determination  and  its  significance.  J  Invest  Dermatol  23(2):113–118.  Siegel
JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L. [2007] 2007 Guideline for isolation precautions:
preventing transmission of infectious agents in health care settings. American Journal of
Infection Control; 35(10): S65-S164 Shadduck PP, Tyler DS, Lyerly HK, Sebastian MW,
Farnitano  C,  Fitzpatrick  KT  [1990].  Commercially  available  surgical  gowns  do  not
prevent  penetration  by  HIV-1.  Surg  Foram41:77–80.  Smith  JW,  Nichols  RL  [1991].
Barrier  efficiency  of  surgical  gowns:  are  we  really  protected  from  our  patients’
pathogens? Arch Surg 126(6):756–763. Smith JW, Tate WA, Yazdani S, Garcia RY, Muzik
AC,  Nichols  RL  [1995].  Determination  of  surgeon-generated  pressures  during  various
surgical procedures in the operating room. Am J Infect Control 23(4):237–246. Spychal
RT,  Savalgi  RS,  Marrero  JM,  Saverymuttu  SH,  Kirkham  JS,  Northfield  TC  [1990].
Thermodynamic effects of bile acids in the stomach. Gastroenterology 99(2):305–310.
Thomas C, ed. [1997] Taber’s cyclopedic medical dictionary. 18th ed. Philadelphia: F.A.
Davis.  Towner  JS,  Rollin  PE,  Bausch  DG,  Sanchez  A,  Crary  SM,  Vincent  M,  Lee  WF,
Spiropoulou CF, Ksiazek TG, Luuwiya M, Kaducu F, Downing R, Nichol ST [2004]. Rapid
diagnosis  of  Ebola  hemorrhagic  fever  by  reverse  transcription-PCR  in  an  outbreak
setting  and  assessment  of  patient  viral  load  as  a  predictor  of  outcome.  J  Virol
78(8):4330–4341. Tyler DS, Lyerly HK, Nastala CL, Shadduck PP, Fitzpatrick KT, Langlois
Moylan  JA  [1989].  Barrier  protection  against  the  human  immunodeficiency  virus.  Curr
Surg  46(4):301–304.   Balci,  F.  Selcen  Kilinc.  “Isolation  gowns  in  health  care  settings:
Laboratory studies, regulations and standards, and potential barriers of gown selection
and use.” American journal of infection control 44.1 (2016): 104-111. Behera BK, Arora
H [2009]. Surgical gown: a critical review. J Ind Text 38(3):205–231. Belkin NL [1994].
Gowns:  selection  on  a  procedure-driven  basis.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
15(11):713–716.  Belkin  NL  [2000].  Selecting  protective  apparel  for  the  degree  of
exposure  anticipated.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol  21(7):436.  Brown  PL  [1992].
Protective  clothing  for  health  care  workers:  liquidproofness  versus  microbiological
resistance.  In:  McBriarity  J,  Henry  N,  eds.  Performance  of  protective  clothing.  Vol.  4.
ASTM  STP  1133.  Philadelphia:  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials,  pp.  65–82.
Gupta  BS  [1988].  The  effect  of  structural  factors  on  the  absorbent  characteristics  of
nonwovens. Tappi J 71(8):147–152. Henry NW III, Monteiori DG [1992]. The resistance of
clothing  materials  to  biological  liquids.  In:  McBriarity  J,  Henry  N,  eds.  Performance  of
protective  clothing.  Vol.  4.  ASTM  STP  1133.  Philadelphia,  PA:  American  Society  for
Testing  and  Materials,  pp.  58–64.  Jaques,  Peter  A.,  et  al.  “Evaluation  of  gowns  and
coveralls  used  by  medical  personnel  working  with  Ebola  patients  against  simulated
bodily  fluids  using  an  Elbow  Lean  Test.”  Journal  of  occupational  and  environmental
hygiene  13.11  (2016):  881-893.  Kilinc-Balci  S  [2015].  A  review  of  isolation  gowns  in
healthcare:  fabric  and  gown  properties.  J  Eng  Fiber  Fabr  Sep;  10(3):  180–190.
Kilinc-Balci S [2014]. How well do you think you are protected? Understanding proper
use  and  disposal  of  protective  gowns  for  healthcare  workers.  NIOSH  science  blog.
National
 Institute
 for
 Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health.
https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2014/05/05/gowns/.  Date  accessed:  November
2014. Kilinc-Balci S and D’Alessandro M [2015]. NIOSH research highlights importance
of  rigorous  standards  for  gowns  used  to  protect  healthcare  workers.  NIOSH  science
blog.
 National
 Institute
 for
 Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health.
https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2015/07/22/isolation-gowns/
 Date
 accessed:
January  2018.  Laing  RM  [2008].  Protection  provided  by  clothing  and  textiles  against
potential hazards in the operating theatre. Int J Occup Saf Ergon 14(1):107–115. Leonas
KK  [2005].  Microorganism  protection.  In:  Scott  RA,  ed.  Textiles  for  protection.  Boca
Raton, FL: Woodhead Publishing-CRC Press, pp. 441–464. Leonas KK, Jinkins RS [1997].
The  relationship  of  selected  fabric  characteristics  and  the  barrier  effectiveness  of
surgical gown fabrics. Am J Infect Control 25(1):16–23. NIOSH [2009]. Improved criteria
for emergency medical protective clothing. NIOSH science blog. By Fries E, Shepherd A.
National
 Institute
 for
 Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health.
https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2009/01/20/ppe-2/.  Date  accessed:  November
2014. Parthasarathi V, Thilagavathi G [2013]. Developing antiviral surgical gown using
nonwoven  fabrics  for  health  care  sector.  Afr  Health  Sci  13(2):327–332.  Rutala  WA,
Weber DJ [2001]. A review of single-use and reusable gowns and drapes in health care.
Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol  22(4):248–257.   Standards  referenced  in  guidance
document and imbedded links 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/topics/protectiveclothing/default.html
