 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Summary
 Outbreaks of rubella continue to occur in the United States 
despite widespread use of the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine. 
Throughout the mid- to late-1990s, rubella outbreaks were characterized by 
increased numbers of cases among adults born in countries that do not have or 
have only recently instituted a national rubella vaccination program. To address 
this change in disease epidemiology, CDC's National Immunization Program 
(NIP) developed the following recommendations in conjunction with public 
health officials in the field. Public health officials should implement 
appropriate responses to reports of suspected rubella to determine if an outbreak 
exists, evaluate its scope, and implement appropriate control measures. 
Health-care providers should be aware of the need for rubella prevention and 
control among women of childbearing age and of the appropriate follow-up 
for pregnant women exposed to rubella. Comprehensive surveillance 
for congenital rubella syndrome should begin during a rubella outbreak.
INTRODUCTION
Since the licensure of the rubella vaccine in 1969, the number of cases of 
rubella  in  the  United  States  has  decreased  99%,  from  57,686  cases  in  1969  to  271
cases 
in 1999 (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). The epidemiology of rubella changed in 
the 1990s, including shifts in the age distribution, ethnicity, and country of origin 
of patients, and in the setting of outbreaks. During the early 1990s, most rubella cases 
in the United States occurred among persons aged <15 years; since the 
mid-1990s, persons aged >15 years have accounted for most reported cases. In 1999, 
adults accounted for 86% of cases, an increase from 41% in 1990, and 73% of persons 
with rubella were Hispanic, compared with 4% in 1991 (CDC, unpublished data, 
2000). Most of these persons were foreign-born. In recent rubella outbreaks, most 
cases occurred among persons from Mexico and Central America. Moreover, 
outbreaks occurred predominantly in workplaces and communities; before the 
mid-1990s,  outbreaks  occurred  mainly  in  religious  communities,  schools,  jails,  and
other 
closed environments. Recently, rubella outbreaks have been identified in poultry and 
meat processing plants that employ large numbers of foreign-born workers.
The number of cases of congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) has also declined, 
and CRS now disproportionately affects infants born to foreign-born women. 
During 1997--1999, a total of 21/26 (81%) infants reported with CRS were Hispanic, and
24/26 (92%) were born to foreign-born mothers (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). 
Although 
information on country of origin was not collected in 1991, a total of 8/42 
(19%) infants with CRS were Hispanic. Identifying and managing susceptible 
pregnant women who might have been exposed to rubella is challenging, especially 
in communitywide outbreaks.
Congenital rubella infection (CRI) encompasses all outcomes associated 
with intrauterine rubella infection, including miscarriage, stillbirth, abortion, 
combinations of birth defects, or asymptomatic infection in the infant (also known as 
infection only) (1). Although serologic testing remains the most available laboratory 
method for confirmation, CRI also can be confirmed by reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays, which detect rubella virus 
(2).
Making best use of available technology will help rubella virus surveillance 
and ascertainment. For example, molecular typing of rubella virus is available to 
identify the origin of the virus as well as which virus strains are circulating. This 
information is necessary to document elimination of indigenous transmission. 
Universal programs to screen newborn hearing in the United States could help 
improve ascertainment of CRS cases because hearing impairment is the most common 
single defect associated with CRS (3). Performing serologic testing for rubella on 
infants who fail hearing screenings at birth could help identify CRS cases.
This report describes seven steps for evaluating and managing suspected 
rubella outbreaks. They were developed by NIP in conjunction with state and local 
public health officials based on experience with recent outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These steps are a) consider a single case of rubella a potential outbreak, b) 
confirm  the  diagnosis,  c)  conduct  case  investigations  and  vaccinate  susceptible
contacts, 
d) enhance active and passive surveillance measures, e) implement rubella 
control measures, f) conduct outreach in affected facilities and communities, and g) 
develop a plan for preventing future rubella outbreaks. This report also provides 
guidelines for evaluating and managing rubella in pregnant and nonpregnant women 
and evaluating infants for CRI.
BACKGROUND
Rubella is usually a mild febrile rash illness in adults and children. 
Other symptoms include lymphadenopathy, malaise, or conjunctivitis. Arthralgia 
and arthritis can occur in <70% of infected adult and adolescent females. 
Rare complications are thrombocytopenic purpura, encephalitis, neuritis, and orchitis. 
The incubation period for rubella is 12--23 days, and 20%--50% of rubella infections 
are asymptomatic. Persons with rubella are most infectious when rash is erupting, 
but can shed virus from 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset (i.e., the 
infectious period).
The most serious consequences of rubella result from infection during the 
first trimester of pregnancy. Rubella infection can affect all organs in the developing 
fetus and cause miscarriage, fetal death, and congenital anomalies. Up to 90% of 
infants born to mothers infected during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop a 
pattern of birth defects called CRS (6); the rate of CRS for infants born to women 
infected during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy is 20%. Infants infected with rubella late
in gestation do not exhibit clinical manifestations of CRS. Any infant infected 
with rubella in utero can shed virus for 
<1 year, sometimes longer (7).
The goal of the rubella vaccination program is to prevent the consequences 
of infection during pregnancy. Many countries do not have rubella 
vaccination programs or have only recently implemented such programs, and many 
adults throughout the world remain susceptible. In 1996, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) estimated that 36% of member countries offered routine rubella 
vaccination (8). In 1999, WHO estimated that 52% of countries offered routine rubella 
vaccination; in the Region of the Americas, 89% of countries used rubella vaccine 
(9).  Adults  in  the  United  States  who  were  born  in  countries  where  routine  rubella
vaccination 
was not offered are at higher risk for contracting rubella and having infants with 
CRS compared with adults born in the United States. Vaccinating 
foreign-born, susceptible adults can be challenging because they might have little or no
contact with the U.S. health-care system. Thus, health-care providers who treat 
foreign-born adults should document their rubella immunity with a written record of a 
rubella-containing vaccine or by serologic testing. If problems arise in 
translating vaccination records from other countries, help is available from the 
CDC Immunization Information Hotline at (800) 232-2522 (English) or (800) 
232-0233 (Spanish). WHO also has summarized current global vaccination policies 
for countries throughout the world (10).
Adequate proof of rubella immunity includes a) written documentation of 
receipt of >1 dose of a rubella-containing vaccine administered on or after the first 
birthday, b) laboratory evidence of immunity, or c) birth before 1957 (except for women
who could become pregnant). However, during an outbreak, persons born before 
1957 should not automatically be considered immune to rubella. Rubella immunity 
is defined as a hemagglutination inhibition antibody titer of 
>1:8, a hemolysis in gel result of 
>10 international units (IU), or an optical density by 
enzyme-linked immunoassay (EIA) above the limit set by the manufacturer 
(11). Persons who do not meet the above criteria are considered susceptible.
REPORTING
Rubella and CRS became notifiable diseases in the United States in 1966 
and 1969, respectively. All 50 states require reporting of rubella and CRS 
(12). For information on these requirements, contact local or state health departments.
State and local health departments rely on health-care providers, 
laboratory personnel, and other public health workers to report confirmed, probable, 
and suspected cases of rubella and CRS so the departments can monitor the 
occurrences of these diseases and facilitate appropriate control measures. Health-care 
providers and laboratory personnel who suspect cases of rubella, CRS, or congenital 
rubella infection only should report them within 24 hours to their local health 
department.  Health-care  providers  should  not  delay  reporting  suspected  cases  of
rubella, 
CRS, and congenital rubella infection only while they wait for laboratory confirmation.
Criteria for Rubella Case Classification
A clinical case of rubella is defined as an illness characterized by a) acute onset 
of generalized maculopapular rash; b) temperature >37.2 C (>99.0 F), if measured; 
and c) arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy (usually suboccipital,
      postauricular, 
and cervical), or conjunctivitis. Case classification for rubella is based on a clinical 
case 
definition and laboratory criteria for diagnosis 
(13). Cases are classified into one of the following categories:
 Suspected. Any generalized rash illness of acute onset.
 Probable. A case that meets the clinical case definition, has no 
or noncontributory serologic or virologic testing, and is not 
epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Confirmed. A case that is laboratory confirmed or that meets the clinical 
case definition and is epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Asymptomatic Confirmed. A laboratory-confirmed case in a person who 
is asymptomatic that also is epidemiologically linked to a 
laboratory-confirmed case clinically consistent with rubella 
(14).
Cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that a person either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
the state for the entire period when he or she might have become infected (i.e., 
14--23 days before rash onset).
 International 
Importation. A case that has its source outside the United 
States with onset of rash within 14--23 days of entry into this country.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella
Laboratory diagnosis of rubella requires any one of the following:
 A positive serologic test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody. 
The preferred testing method for IgM is EIA, using the capture technique; 
indirect assays are acceptable (15). IgM antibodies might not be detectable before 
4--5 days after rash onset, but they can persist for 6 weeks after rash onset. 
If negative results are obtained from a specimen taken before 4--5 days after 
rash onset, another specimen should be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Serum rubella IgM test results that are false positive have been reported in 
persons with other viral infections (e.g., acute infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus [infectious mononucleosis], recent cytomegalovirus infection, and 
parvovirus infection) or in the presence of rheumatoid factor. Patients with 
laboratory evidence of recent measles infection are excluded because 
concurrent infections are unlikely.
 A significant rise in serum rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody 
level between acute- and convalescent-phase titers by any standard serologic 
assay. Sera for IgG testing should be collected as early as possible (within 7--10 
days) after onset of illness and again >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 Isolation of rubella virus from nasal, blood, throat, urine, or cerebrospinal 
fluid specimens (best results come from throat swabs). Specimens should 
be obtained as soon as possible (within 4 days) after rash onset. Efforts should 
be 
made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation from all patients (or 
from some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial investigation 
(14).
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Since the licensure of the rubella vaccine in 1969, the number of cases of 
rubella  in  the  United  States  has  decreased  99%,  from  57,686  cases  in  1969  to  271
cases 
in 1999 (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). The epidemiology of rubella changed in 
the 1990s, including shifts in the age distribution, ethnicity, and country of origin 
of patients, and in the setting of outbreaks. During the early 1990s, most rubella cases 
in the United States occurred among persons aged <15 years; since the 
mid-1990s, persons aged >15 years have accounted for most reported cases. In 1999, 
adults accounted for 86% of cases, an increase from 41% in 1990, and 73% of persons 
with rubella were Hispanic, compared with 4% in 1991 (CDC, unpublished data, 
2000). Most of these persons were foreign-born. In recent rubella outbreaks, most 
cases occurred among persons from Mexico and Central America. Moreover, 
outbreaks occurred predominantly in workplaces and communities; before the 
mid-1990s,  outbreaks  occurred  mainly  in  religious  communities,  schools,  jails,  and
other 
closed environments. Recently, rubella outbreaks have been identified in poultry and 
meat processing plants that employ large numbers of foreign-born workers.
 The number of cases of congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) has also declined, 
and CRS now disproportionately affects infants born to foreign-born women. 
During 1997--1999, a total of 21/26 (81%) infants reported with CRS were Hispanic, and
24/26 (92%) were born to foreign-born mothers (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). 
Although 
 
information on country of origin was not collected in 1991, a total of 8/42 
(19%) infants with CRS were Hispanic. Identifying and managing susceptible 
pregnant women who might have been exposed to rubella is challenging, especially 
in communitywide outbreaks.
 Congenital rubella infection (CRI) encompasses all outcomes associated 
with intrauterine rubella infection, including miscarriage, stillbirth, abortion, 
combinations of birth defects, or asymptomatic infection in the infant (also known as 
infection only) (1). Although serologic testing remains the most available laboratory 
method for confirmation, CRI also can be confirmed by reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays, which detect rubella virus 
(2).
 Making best use of available technology will help rubella virus surveillance 
and ascertainment. For example, molecular typing of rubella virus is available to 
identify the origin of the virus as well as which virus strains are circulating. This 
information is necessary to document elimination of indigenous transmission. 
Universal programs to screen newborn hearing in the United States could help 
improve ascertainment of CRS cases because hearing impairment is the most common 
single defect associated with CRS (3). Performing serologic testing for rubella on 
infants who fail hearing screenings at birth could help identify CRS cases.
 This report describes seven steps for evaluating and managing suspected 
rubella outbreaks. They were developed by NIP in conjunction with state and local 
public health officials based on experience with recent outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These steps are a) consider a single case of rubella a potential outbreak, b) 
confirm  the  diagnosis,  c)  conduct  case  investigations  and  vaccinate  susceptible
contacts, 
d) enhance active and passive surveillance measures, e) implement rubella 
control measures, f) conduct outreach in affected facilities and communities, and g) 
develop a plan for preventing future rubella outbreaks. This report also provides 
guidelines for evaluating and managing rubella in pregnant and nonpregnant women 
and evaluating infants for CRI.
BACKGROUND
Rubella is usually a mild febrile rash illness in adults and children. 
Other symptoms include lymphadenopathy, malaise, or conjunctivitis. Arthralgia 
and arthritis can occur in <70% of infected adult and adolescent females. 
Rare complications are thrombocytopenic purpura, encephalitis, neuritis, and orchitis. 
The incubation period for rubella is 12--23 days, and 20%--50% of rubella infections 
are asymptomatic. Persons with rubella are most infectious when rash is erupting, 
but can shed virus from 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset (i.e., the 
infectious period).
The most serious consequences of rubella result from infection during the 
first trimester of pregnancy. Rubella infection can affect all organs in the developing 
fetus and cause miscarriage, fetal death, and congenital anomalies. Up to 90% of 
infants born to mothers infected during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop a 
pattern of birth defects called CRS (6); the rate of CRS for infants born to women 
infected during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy is 20%. Infants infected with rubella late
in gestation do not exhibit clinical manifestations of CRS. Any infant infected 
with rubella in utero can shed virus for 
<1 year, sometimes longer (7).
The goal of the rubella vaccination program is to prevent the consequences 
of infection during pregnancy. Many countries do not have rubella 
vaccination programs or have only recently implemented such programs, and many 
adults throughout the world remain susceptible. In 1996, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) estimated that 36% of member countries offered routine rubella 
vaccination (8). In 1999, WHO estimated that 52% of countries offered routine rubella 
vaccination; in the Region of the Americas, 89% of countries used rubella vaccine 
(9).  Adults  in  the  United  States  who  were  born  in  countries  where  routine  rubella
vaccination 
was not offered are at higher risk for contracting rubella and having infants with 
CRS compared with adults born in the United States. Vaccinating 
foreign-born, susceptible adults can be challenging because they might have little or no
contact with the U.S. health-care system. Thus, health-care providers who treat 
foreign-born adults should document their rubella immunity with a written record of a 
rubella-containing vaccine or by serologic testing. If problems arise in 
translating vaccination records from other countries, help is available from the 
CDC Immunization Information Hotline at (800) 232-2522 (English) or (800) 
232-0233 (Spanish). WHO also has summarized current global vaccination policies 
for countries throughout the world (10).
Adequate proof of rubella immunity includes a) written documentation of 
receipt of >1 dose of a rubella-containing vaccine administered on or after the first 
birthday, b) laboratory evidence of immunity, or c) birth before 1957 (except for women
who could become pregnant). However, during an outbreak, persons born before 
1957 should not automatically be considered immune to rubella. Rubella immunity 
is defined as a hemagglutination inhibition antibody titer of 
>1:8, a hemolysis in gel result of 
>10 international units (IU), or an optical density by 
enzyme-linked immunoassay (EIA) above the limit set by the manufacturer 
(11). Persons who do not meet the above criteria are considered susceptible.
REPORTING
Rubella and CRS became notifiable diseases in the United States in 1966 
and 1969, respectively. All 50 states require reporting of rubella and CRS 
(12). For information on these requirements, contact local or state health departments.
State and local health departments rely on health-care providers, 
laboratory personnel, and other public health workers to report confirmed, probable, 
and suspected cases of rubella and CRS so the departments can monitor the 
occurrences of these diseases and facilitate appropriate control measures. Health-care 
providers and laboratory personnel who suspect cases of rubella, CRS, or congenital 
rubella infection only should report them within 24 hours to their local health 
department.  Health-care  providers  should  not  delay  reporting  suspected  cases  of
rubella, 
CRS, and congenital rubella infection only while they wait for laboratory confirmation.
Criteria for Rubella Case Classification
A clinical case of rubella is defined as an illness characterized by a) acute onset 
of generalized maculopapular rash; b) temperature >37.2 C (>99.0 F), if measured; 
and c) arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy (usually suboccipital,
      postauricular, 
and cervical), or conjunctivitis. Case classification for rubella is based on a clinical 
case 
definition and laboratory criteria for diagnosis 
(13). Cases are classified into one of the following categories:
 Suspected. Any generalized rash illness of acute onset.
 Probable. A case that meets the clinical case definition, has no 
or noncontributory serologic or virologic testing, and is not 
epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Confirmed. A case that is laboratory confirmed or that meets the clinical 
case definition and is epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Asymptomatic Confirmed. A laboratory-confirmed case in a person who 
is asymptomatic that also is epidemiologically linked to a 
laboratory-confirmed case clinically consistent with rubella 
(14).
Cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that a person either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
the state for the entire period when he or she might have become infected (i.e., 
14--23 days before rash onset).
 International 
Importation. A case that has its source outside the United 
States with onset of rash within 14--23 days of entry into this country.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella
Laboratory diagnosis of rubella requires any one of the following:
 A positive serologic test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody. 
The preferred testing method for IgM is EIA, using the capture technique; 
indirect assays are acceptable (15). IgM antibodies might not be detectable before 
4--5 days after rash onset, but they can persist for 6 weeks after rash onset. 
If negative results are obtained from a specimen taken before 4--5 days after 
rash onset, another specimen should be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Serum rubella IgM test results that are false positive have been reported in 
persons with other viral infections (e.g., acute infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus [infectious mononucleosis], recent cytomegalovirus infection, and 
parvovirus infection) or in the presence of rheumatoid factor. Patients with 
laboratory evidence of recent measles infection are excluded because 
concurrent infections are unlikely.
 A significant rise in serum rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody 
level between acute- and convalescent-phase titers by any standard serologic 
assay. Sera for IgG testing should be collected as early as possible (within 7--10 
days) after onset of illness and again >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 Isolation of rubella virus from nasal, blood, throat, urine, or cerebrospinal 
fluid specimens (best results come from throat swabs). Specimens should 
be obtained as soon as possible (within 4 days) after rash onset. Efforts should 
be 
made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation from all patients (or 
from some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial investigation 
(14).
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Rubella is usually a mild febrile rash illness in adults and children. 
Other symptoms include lymphadenopathy, malaise, or conjunctivitis. Arthralgia 
and arthritis can occur in <70% of infected adult and adolescent females. 
Rare complications are thrombocytopenic purpura, encephalitis, neuritis, and orchitis. 
The incubation period for rubella is 12--23 days, and 20%--50% of rubella infections 
are asymptomatic. Persons with rubella are most infectious when rash is erupting, 
but can shed virus from 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset (i.e., the 
infectious period).
 The most serious consequences of rubella result from infection during the 
first trimester of pregnancy. Rubella infection can affect all organs in the developing 
fetus and cause miscarriage, fetal death, and congenital anomalies. Up to 90% of 
infants born to mothers infected during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop a 
pattern of birth defects called CRS (6); the rate of CRS for infants born to women 
infected during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy is 20%. Infants infected with rubella late
in gestation do not exhibit clinical manifestations of CRS. Any infant infected 
with rubella in utero can shed virus for 
<1 year, sometimes longer (7).
 The goal of the rubella vaccination program is to prevent the consequences 
of infection during pregnancy. Many countries do not have rubella 
vaccination programs or have only recently implemented such programs, and many 
adults throughout the world remain susceptible. In 1996, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) estimated that 36% of member countries offered routine rubella 
vaccination (8). In 1999, WHO estimated that 52% of countries offered routine rubella 
vaccination; in the Region of the Americas, 89% of countries used rubella vaccine 
(9).  Adults  in  the  United  States  who  were  born  in  countries  where  routine  rubella
vaccination 
was not offered are at higher risk for contracting rubella and having infants with 
CRS compared with adults born in the United States. Vaccinating 
foreign-born, susceptible adults can be challenging because they might have little or no
contact with the U.S. health-care system. Thus, health-care providers who treat 
foreign-born adults should document their rubella immunity with a written record of a 
rubella-containing vaccine or by serologic testing. If problems arise in 
translating vaccination records from other countries, help is available from the 
CDC Immunization Information Hotline at (800) 232-2522 (English) or (800) 
232-0233 (Spanish). WHO also has summarized current global vaccination policies 
for countries throughout the world (10).
 Adequate proof of rubella immunity includes a) written documentation of 
receipt of >1 dose of a rubella-containing vaccine administered on or after the first 
birthday, b) laboratory evidence of immunity, or c) birth before 1957 (except for women
who could become pregnant). However, during an outbreak, persons born before 
1957 should not automatically be considered immune to rubella. Rubella immunity 
is defined as a hemagglutination inhibition antibody titer of 
>1:8, a hemolysis in gel result of 
>10 international units (IU), or an optical density by 
enzyme-linked immunoassay (EIA) above the limit set by the manufacturer 
(11). Persons who do not meet the above criteria are considered susceptible.
REPORTING
Rubella and CRS became notifiable diseases in the United States in 1966 
and 1969, respectively. All 50 states require reporting of rubella and CRS 
(12). For information on these requirements, contact local or state health departments.
State and local health departments rely on health-care providers, 
laboratory personnel, and other public health workers to report confirmed, probable, 
and suspected cases of rubella and CRS so the departments can monitor the 
occurrences of these diseases and facilitate appropriate control measures. Health-care 
providers and laboratory personnel who suspect cases of rubella, CRS, or congenital 
rubella infection only should report them within 24 hours to their local health 
department.  Health-care  providers  should  not  delay  reporting  suspected  cases  of
rubella, 
CRS, and congenital rubella infection only while they wait for laboratory confirmation.
Criteria for Rubella Case Classification
A clinical case of rubella is defined as an illness characterized by a) acute onset 
of generalized maculopapular rash; b) temperature >37.2 C (>99.0 F), if measured; 
and c) arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy (usually suboccipital,
      postauricular, 
and cervical), or conjunctivitis. Case classification for rubella is based on a clinical 
case 
definition and laboratory criteria for diagnosis 
(13). Cases are classified into one of the following categories:
 Suspected. Any generalized rash illness of acute onset.
 Probable. A case that meets the clinical case definition, has no 
or noncontributory serologic or virologic testing, and is not 
epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Confirmed. A case that is laboratory confirmed or that meets the clinical 
case definition and is epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Asymptomatic Confirmed. A laboratory-confirmed case in a person who 
is asymptomatic that also is epidemiologically linked to a 
laboratory-confirmed case clinically consistent with rubella 
(14).
Cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that a person either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
the state for the entire period when he or she might have become infected (i.e., 
14--23 days before rash onset).
 International 
Importation. A case that has its source outside the United 
States with onset of rash within 14--23 days of entry into this country.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella
Laboratory diagnosis of rubella requires any one of the following:
 A positive serologic test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody. 
The preferred testing method for IgM is EIA, using the capture technique; 
indirect assays are acceptable (15). IgM antibodies might not be detectable before 
4--5 days after rash onset, but they can persist for 6 weeks after rash onset. 
If negative results are obtained from a specimen taken before 4--5 days after 
rash onset, another specimen should be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Serum rubella IgM test results that are false positive have been reported in 
persons with other viral infections (e.g., acute infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus [infectious mononucleosis], recent cytomegalovirus infection, and 
parvovirus infection) or in the presence of rheumatoid factor. Patients with 
laboratory evidence of recent measles infection are excluded because 
concurrent infections are unlikely.
 A significant rise in serum rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody 
level between acute- and convalescent-phase titers by any standard serologic 
assay. Sera for IgG testing should be collected as early as possible (within 7--10 
days) after onset of illness and again >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 Isolation of rubella virus from nasal, blood, throat, urine, or cerebrospinal 
fluid specimens (best results come from throat swabs). Specimens should 
be obtained as soon as possible (within 4 days) after rash onset. Efforts should 
be 
made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation from all patients (or 
from some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial investigation 
(14).
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Rubella and CRS became notifiable diseases in the United States in 1966 
and 1969, respectively. All 50 states require reporting of rubella and CRS 
(12). For information on these requirements, contact local or state health departments.
 State and local health departments rely on health-care providers, 
laboratory personnel, and other public health workers to report confirmed, probable, 
and suspected cases of rubella and CRS so the departments can monitor the 
occurrences of these diseases and facilitate appropriate control measures. Health-care 
providers and laboratory personnel who suspect cases of rubella, CRS, or congenital 
rubella infection only should report them within 24 hours to their local health 
department.  Health-care  providers  should  not  delay  reporting  suspected  cases  of
rubella, 
CRS, and congenital rubella infection only while they wait for laboratory confirmation.
 
Criteria for Rubella Case Classification
 A clinical case of rubella is defined as an illness characterized by a) acute onset 
of generalized maculopapular rash; b) temperature >37.2 C (>99.0 F), if measured; 
and c) arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy (usually suboccipital,
      postauricular, 
and cervical), or conjunctivitis. Case classification for rubella is based on a clinical 
case 
definition and laboratory criteria for diagnosis 
(13). Cases are classified into one of the following categories:
 Suspected. Any generalized rash illness of acute onset.
 Probable. A case that meets the clinical case definition, has no 
or noncontributory serologic or virologic testing, and is not 
epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Confirmed. A case that is laboratory confirmed or that meets the clinical 
case definition and is epidemiologically linked to a laboratory-confirmed case.
 Asymptomatic Confirmed. A laboratory-confirmed case in a person who 
is asymptomatic that also is epidemiologically linked to a 
laboratory-confirmed case clinically consistent with rubella 
(14).
Cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that a person either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
the state for the entire period when he or she might have become infected (i.e., 
14--23 days before rash onset).
 International 
Importation. A case that has its source outside the United 
States with onset of rash within 14--23 days of entry into this country.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella
Laboratory diagnosis of rubella requires any one of the following:
 A positive serologic test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody. 
The preferred testing method for IgM is EIA, using the capture technique; 
indirect assays are acceptable (15). IgM antibodies might not be detectable before 
4--5 days after rash onset, but they can persist for 6 weeks after rash onset. 
If negative results are obtained from a specimen taken before 4--5 days after 
rash onset, another specimen should be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Serum rubella IgM test results that are false positive have been reported in 
persons with other viral infections (e.g., acute infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus [infectious mononucleosis], recent cytomegalovirus infection, and 
parvovirus infection) or in the presence of rheumatoid factor. Patients with 
laboratory evidence of recent measles infection are excluded because 
concurrent infections are unlikely.
 A significant rise in serum rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody 
level between acute- and convalescent-phase titers by any standard serologic 
assay. Sera for IgG testing should be collected as early as possible (within 7--10 
days) after onset of illness and again >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 Isolation of rubella virus from nasal, blood, throat, urine, or cerebrospinal 
fluid specimens (best results come from throat swabs). Specimens should 
be obtained as soon as possible (within 4 days) after rash onset. Efforts should 
be 
made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation from all patients (or 
from some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial investigation 
(14).
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that a person either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
the state for the entire period when he or she might have become infected (i.e., 
14--23 days before rash onset).
 International 
Importation. A case that has its source outside the United 
States with onset of rash within 14--23 days of entry into this country.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella
Laboratory diagnosis of rubella requires any one of the following:
 A positive serologic test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody. 
The preferred testing method for IgM is EIA, using the capture technique; 
indirect assays are acceptable (15). IgM antibodies might not be detectable before 
4--5 days after rash onset, but they can persist for 6 weeks after rash onset. 
If negative results are obtained from a specimen taken before 4--5 days after 
rash onset, another specimen should be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Serum rubella IgM test results that are false positive have been reported in 
persons with other viral infections (e.g., acute infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus [infectious mononucleosis], recent cytomegalovirus infection, and 
parvovirus infection) or in the presence of rheumatoid factor. Patients with 
laboratory evidence of recent measles infection are excluded because 
concurrent infections are unlikely.
 A significant rise in serum rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody 
level between acute- and convalescent-phase titers by any standard serologic 
assay. Sera for IgG testing should be collected as early as possible (within 7--10 
days) after onset of illness and again >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 Isolation of rubella virus from nasal, blood, throat, urine, or cerebrospinal 
fluid specimens (best results come from throat swabs). Specimens should 
be obtained as soon as possible (within 4 days) after rash onset. Efforts should 
be 
made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation from all patients (or 
from some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial investigation 
(14).
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella
 Laboratory diagnosis of rubella requires any one of the following:
 A positive serologic test for rubella immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody. 
The preferred testing method for IgM is EIA, using the capture technique; 
indirect assays are acceptable (15). IgM antibodies might not be detectable before 
4--5 days after rash onset, but they can persist for 6 weeks after rash onset. 
If negative results are obtained from a specimen taken before 4--5 days after 
rash onset, another specimen should be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Serum rubella IgM test results that are false positive have been reported in 
persons with other viral infections (e.g., acute infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus [infectious mononucleosis], recent cytomegalovirus infection, and 
parvovirus infection) or in the presence of rheumatoid factor. Patients with 
laboratory evidence of recent measles infection are excluded because 
concurrent infections are unlikely.
 A significant rise in serum rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody 
level between acute- and convalescent-phase titers by any standard serologic 
assay. Sera for IgG testing should be collected as early as possible (within 7--10 
days) after onset of illness and again >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 Isolation of rubella virus from nasal, blood, throat, urine, or cerebrospinal 
fluid specimens (best results come from throat swabs). Specimens should 
be obtained as soon as possible (within 4 days) after rash onset. Efforts should 
be 
made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation from all patients (or 
from some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial investigation 
(14).
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Specimens submitted for rubella virus isolation or detection by RT-PCR can 
also be used for molecular typing. Molecular typing can help determine a) the origin 
of the virus, b) which virus strains are circulating in the United States, and c) 
whether these strains have become endemic in the United States. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be obtained as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
Appropriate specimens include throat swabs and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department. 
For information on the procedure for obtaining specimens, contact CDC's 
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Respiratory and Enterovirus Branch, Measles 
Virus Section at (404) 639-3512.
 
Laboratory Procedures for Persons Exposed to Rubella Who Do Not 
Have Rash
 Persons exposed to rubella, particularly pregnant women, should be tested 
for rubella infection. Asymptomatic rubella infection can be diagnosed by a 
positive rubella-specific IgM antibody test or a significant rise in IgG antibody level 
between acute- and convalescent-phase tests. The acute-phase IgG serum specimen 
should
 be
 collected
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 after
 exposure,
 whereas
 the
convalescent-phase 
IgG specimen should be collected >7--14 days (preferably 2--3 weeks) later.
 
Case Classification Criteria for Congenital Rubella Syndrome*
 CRS results from rubella infection in utero, usually manifests in infancy, and 
is characterized by clinical signs or symptoms from the following categories:
 a) Cataracts/congenital glaucoma, congenital heart disease (most 
commonly patent ductus arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis), 
hearing impairment, pigmentary retinopathy.
 b) Purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, 
developmental delay, meningoencephalitis, radiolucent bone disease.
 Infants with CRS usually present with more than one of these signs or 
symptoms. However, infants may present with a single defect. Hearing impairment is
the 
most common single defect.
 Case classification for CRS is based on clinical findings and laboratory criteria 
for diagnosis (13). Cases are classified as follows:
 Suspected. A case with some consistent clinical findings but not meeting 
the criteria for a probable case.
 Probable. A case that is not laboratory confirmed and that has any two 
findings listed in paragraph a) of the clinical description or one finding from 
paragraph a) and one from paragraph b), and lacks evidence of any other etiology.
 Confirmed. A clinically consistent case that is laboratory confirmed.
 Infection Only. A case that demonstrates laboratory evidence of infection, 
but without any clinical symptoms or signs.
CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 CRS cases are also categorized by importation status:
 Indigenous Case. Any case that cannot be proved to be imported.
 State-to-State 
Importation. Requires documentation that the mother either 
had face-to-face contact with a case of rubella outside the state or was out of 
state for the entire period when she might have become infected (14--23 days 
before rash onset or 21 days before conception and during the first 20 weeks 
of gestation).
 International 
Importation. Defined as CRS in a U.S. or non-U.S. citizen 
whose mother was outside the United States for the entire period when she may 
have had exposure to rubella (21 days before conception and during the first 
20 weeks of gestation), or who has known exposure to rubella risks outside 
the United States.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection Only 
 Laboratory diagnosis of CRS or congenital rubella infection only requires any 
one of the following:
 Demonstration of a rubella-specific IgM antibody or infant IgG rubella 
antibody level that persists at a higher level and for a longer time than expected 
from passive transfer of maternal antibody (i.e., rubella titer that does not drop at 
the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month). Approximately 20% of 
infected infants tested for rubella IgM might not have detectable titers before age 
1 month (L.Z. Cooper, M.D., Columbia University, oral communication, 
1998). Thus, infants with symptoms consistent with CRS who test negative soon 
after birth should be retested at age 1 month.
 Isolation of rubella virus, which can be obtained from nasal, blood, 
throat, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid specimens (best results come from throat 
swabs). Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for virus isolation 
from infants at the time of the initial investigation. However, infants with CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only shed virus and are considered infectious for 
a prolonged period. Children with CRS should be presumed infectious at 
least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and urine cultures are negative 
for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities suggest that an infant with 
CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures of clinical 
specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus.
 Detection of virus by RT-PCR. This process can be used to detect the 
presence of rubella virus after growth in tissue culture or directly in clinical specimens.
Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Specimens for molecular typing should be obtained from infants with CRS 
as soon as possible after clinical diagnosis. Appropriate specimens include 
throat 
swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and cataracts from surgery. Specimens for 
molecular typing should be sent to CDC as directed by the state health department.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 The seven steps described in this section are recommended for the 
evaluation, management, and surveillance of suspected rubella outbreaks (Box). They
are 
based on recent experience with outbreaks in the United States 
(4,5). These recommendations can be used in settings beyond those discussed in this
report.
 
Consider a Single Case of Rubella a Potential Outbreak
 Because the incidence of rubella is low in the United States, health 
agencies should consider even one case a potential outbreak. Rubella is an infectious 
disease for which 20%--50% of cases are asymptomatic, and investigation of an 
apparently isolated case could reveal additional cases. Rubella transmission can occur 
in congregate settings such as households, workplaces, universities, jails, 
or communities. The type and size of the outbreak determines the magnitude of 
the response.
 Most recent rubella outbreaks were first identified in the workplace. Facilities 
that employ many foreign-born workers (e.g., meat or poultry processing plants) are 
at greater risk for rubella outbreaks than those with mostly workers born in the 
United States. Initial reports can come from on-site health-care providers who have 
recently seen rash illness among employees.
 
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Workplace
 Search on-site medical logs for rash illness and payroll or sick 
leave documentation for workers who might have been absent because of illness.
 Conduct follow-up interviews with workers who have been sick and contacts 
to determine history of recent rash illness.
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Steps to Improve Ascertainment of Rubella Cases in the Community
 Recently, investigations of workplace outbreaks have revealed spread to 
the community. The following steps can help identify cases in the community:
 Review the community demographics to determine if there are groups at 
high risk for not being vaccinated (e.g., foreign-born persons or members 
of religious communities opposed to vaccination).
 Search medical records of the community's health-care providers and 
hospital emergency rooms.
 Contact schools and day care centers to identify absences caused by 
rash illness.
 Conduct thorough follow-up investigation of patient contacts, 
including household residents, students, and teachers.
Confirm the Diagnosis
Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Confirm the Diagnosis
 Because rubella has many symptoms in common with other rash 
illnesses, laboratory confirmation is required for case confirmation. Laboratory testing 
should be conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. IgM antibodies might not 
be detectable before 4--5 days after rash onset. If negative rubella IgM and IgG 
results are obtained from specimens taken before 4--5 days, repeat serologic testing 
(14).
 
Conduct Case Investigations and Vaccinate 
Susceptible Contacts
 Case investigation and identification of contacts should be conducted for 
all suspected cases of rubella. In addition, asymptomatic confirmed cases should 
be investigated and contacts identified. A descriptive analysis of an outbreak 
allows health agencies to focus control measures --- especially vaccination --- on 
persons most in need. Cases of rubella occurring in vaccinated persons within 7--10 
days after vaccination should be investigated, and specimens should be obtained for 
virus isolation to determine if rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild virus.
 Any direct contact with a patient with rubella during the infectious period 
(i.e., 7 days before to 5--7 days after rash onset) is defined as exposure. Contact 
can include (but is not limited to) living in the same household, attending the same 
class or social function, or working side-by-side on a production line. Although 
rubella transmission is usually associated with repeated exposure, transmission has 
been documented after a single exposure.
 Depending on resources available, investigation of contacts of patients 
with rubella might need to be prioritized based on the probability of transmission. 
The first priority should be persons who share households or persons in a 
congregate environment who share space (e.g., side-by-side workers on a production
line) with 
a patient. The second priority should be persons who share or have 
shared environments with a potential for contact (e.g., places of worship, parties, 
social gatherings), but who did not knowingly have direct contact with a patient. 
If resources allow, investigation of contacts can be extended to geographic areas 
or groups at risk where disease has been documented.
 Every effort should be made to identify all susceptible pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to a patient and test them for rubella immunity. 
For example, in a workplace outbreak, pregnant women who have contact with 
patients (including coworkers and household contacts) should be evaluated for 
rubella immunity. In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat 
pregnant  women  should  be  alerted  to  the  outbreak  and  advised  to  verify  rubella
immunity 
in pregnant women.
 
Steps for Locating Exposed Contacts for Further Investigation
 Record symptom onset date and infectious period for patients on a calendar 
to determine in what setting the exposure might have occurred, where to look 
for other exposed persons, and who suspected patients had contact with 
during their infectious period. For example, if a person had rash onset January 
26, exposure would have occurred 12--23 days earlier (i.e., January 3--14). 
The patient would have been infectious from 7 days before to 5--7 days after 
rash 
onset (i.e., January 19--February 3). Consider asymptomatic confirmed 
patients infectious 5--30 days after the last exposure.
 Use the calendar to list contacts identified during the infectious period.
 Follow up with contacts to assess symptoms of rubella-like illness, 
determine susceptibility, and vaccinate susceptible persons without adequate proof 
of immunity and who have no contraindications to rubella vaccine.
 Continue to investigate contacts of subsequently identified patients. 
(See Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of Childbearing Age 
for information on follow-up of pregnant contacts.)
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Information That Should be Obtained from Patients With Rubella
 Name, address, and telephone number(s) to reach the patient after the 
initial interview, if necessary.
 Demographic information, including country of origin, length of time in 
the United States, and length of time in the state where the rubella diagnosis 
was made.
 Primary language spoken.
   Clinical details, including the following:
  --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
  --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, 
arthralgia/arthritis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
  --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
  --- Dates of vaccination.
  --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 Risk factors for disease, including the following:
 --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
--- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
--- Travel history.
--- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
  --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
  --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
  --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
 Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
Risk factors for disease, including the following:
  --- Contact with a probable or confirmed patient or a person with a rash 
illness suspected of being rubella.
 --- Transmission setting (e.g., day care center, school, workplace, place 
of worship, athletic event, or other congregate or social gathering).
 --- Relationship to outbreak (i.e., whether case is sporadic or part of 
an identified outbreak).
 --- Travel history.
 --- Contact with others who have recently traveled (i.e., import 
status [indigenous, state-to-state, or international], state name, and country 
name [and state within the country]).
 Information regarding contacts during the infectious period (i.e., 7 days 
before to 5--7 days after rash onset), including the following:
 --- List of persons with household contact (e.g., residents and others with 
close contact in the home) and persons with contact in a congregate 
environment with shared space.
 --- List of women who are pregnant who have had contact with a patient 
with rubella.
 --- Rubella symptoms (e.g., rash, fever, lymphadenopathy) of contacts.
 --- Place of employment of contacts.
 Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
 --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
 --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.
 Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
  Laboratory information, including the following:
 --- Date and source of specimen sent for viral culture (e.g., throat, urine, blood).
  --- Viral culture results (positive or negative for rubella virus).
  --- Serologic test results for serum rubella IgM or IgG, with specific titer 
results when applicable (e.g., 1:256). A positive serum rubella IgM or a 
significant rise between acute- and convalescent-phase IgG titers indicates an 
acute infection.  Pregnancy status of female patients, including the following:
 --- Whether pregnant.
 --- If patient is pregnant, obtain information regarding a) number of weeks 
of gestation at onset of illness; b) previous evidence or date of 
serological immunity; c) previously diagnosed rubella infection and date; d) date 
and specific titer result of previous serum rubella IgG titer; and e) 
pregnancy outcome, when available.
 --- Date of onset and duration of rash.
 --- Presence of other symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgia/arthritis,
  lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis) and date of onset.
 --- Complications (e.g., encephalitis, thrombocytopenia, death).
  Vaccination status, including the following:
 --- Number of doses of rubella vaccine.
 --- Dates of vaccination.
 --- If not vaccinated, reason for nonvaccination.
 
Enhance Active and Passive Surveillance Measures
 For this step, outbreak investigators should institute surveillance 
measures designed to identify cases prospectively, as well as any cases with rash onset
that preceded the first identified case. Because some persons with rubella do not 
have rash, these measures should use a broader definition of suspected cases (e.g., 
fever with lymphadenopathy or arthralgia/arthritis in adult women) in areas where 
rubella cases have been confirmed. Broadening the case definition and 
investigating suspected cases could lead to more complete ascertainment.
 
Components of Surveillance for Rubella in an Outbreak Setting
 Identify health-care providers and facilities serving populations at risk 
and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify workplaces with large numbers of persons who might lack 
rubella immunity and involve them in surveillance.
 Identify day cares, schools, places of worship, and community 
organizations (particularly in neighborhoods where many residents might lack 
rubella immunity) and involve them in surveillance.
 Promote awareness among health-care providers that rubella and CRS 
still occur in the United States among certain groups that lack rubella immunity. 
 Distribute written guidelines instructing health-care providers to 
obtain appropriate serology and specimens and to notify health departments of 
all suspected rubella cases. 
 Establish routine contact (e.g., daily or weekly) with hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, schools, and laboratories to obtain reports of persons with rash 
illness or other symptoms indicative of rubella.
In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 In addition to prospective surveillance, retrospective case finding should 
be conducted for 6 weeks (i.e., two incubation periods) before the first identified case. 
If evidence indicates that the outbreak was in progress during this time, 
retrospective case finding should continue until no further cases are identified.
 
Steps to Identify Cases Retrospectively
 Review medical records in health-care settings, including doctors' offices, 
for rubella-like illness.
 Review workplace or school absentee logs.
 Review records of laboratories that conduct testing for the area.
Implement Rubella Control Measures
During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Implement Rubella Control Measures
 During a rubella outbreak, the following control measures should be taken:
 Isolate patients for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Identify and vaccinate susceptible persons who have no contraindications 
to rubella vaccine.
 Ensure that pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and do not 
have adequate proof of immunity are serologically evaluated for rubella-specific 
IgM and IgG antibodies (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Rubella).
 Counsel susceptible pregnant women regarding the risks for 
intrauterine rubella infection and recommend that they restrict their contact with 
persons with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella for 
>6  weeks  (two  incubation  periods)  after  rash  onset  in  the  last  identified  patient.
Pregnant women 
should also be advised to avoid activities where they might be exposed to rubella for 
6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of 
coming in contact with persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic 
rubella infection (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women of 
Childbearing Age).
Control Measures for Specific Settings
Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Control Measures for Specific Settings
 Congregate Environments. Congregate environments include households, 
jails, day cares, schools, military settings, workplaces, places of worship, athletic 
events, and other social gatherings. Control measures recommended for these settings 
are as follows:
 Refer persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for vaccination 
or offer on-site vaccination clinics. After vaccination, these persons no 
longer need to restrict contact. The exception is health-care workers (see 
Health-Care Settings).
 Isolate patients during their infectious period (i.e., 5--7 days after rash 
onset). Recommend that patients restrict contact with pregnant women and 
persons without adequate proof of rubella immunity for 5--7 days after rash onset.
 Recommend for day cares and schools that persons exempt from 
rubella vaccination for medical, religious, or other reasons be excluded 
from attendance for 3 weeks after onset of rash in the last reported patient in 
the outbreak setting.
 Recommend that all susceptible persons who were not vaccinated as part 
of the control efforts (e.g., those who refused vaccination or who 
had contraindications to vaccine) minimize contact with patients for 5--7 days 
after rash onset.
 Recommend that susceptible pregnant women not attend activities, 
particularly in the first trimester of pregnancy, where they might be exposed to rubella 
for >6 weeks (two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in 
the last patient for whom rubella cannot be ruled out to minimize their chances 
of coming in contact with persons with asymptomatic rubella infection.
Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Health-Care Settings. Health-care settings include hospitals, doctors' 
offices, clinics, nursing homes, and other facilities where patients receive subacute 
or extended care. Control measures recommended for these settings include 
excluding and vaccinating health-care workers without adequate evidence of 
immunity, particularly in settings where pregnant women could be exposed.
 All persons who work in health-care facilities or who have contact with 
any patients should be immune to rubella. Any exposed health-care worker who does 
not have adequate evidence of immunity should be excluded from duty beginning 
7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through either a) 21 days after 
last exposure or b) 5--7 days after rash appears. Susceptible, exposed 
health-care workers who are vaccinated should be excluded from direct patient care for
23 
days (i.e., the longest incubation period) after the last exposure to rubella because 
no evidence exists that postexposure vaccination is effective in preventing 
rubella infection in persons already infected at the time of vaccination. Because birth 
before 1957 does not guarantee immunity, health-care facilities should strongly 
recommend 
a dose of MMR vaccine to workers born before 1957 who do not have 
serologic evidence of immunity.
 Communitywide Rubella Outbreaks. When communitywide outbreaks occur, 
the following steps are recommended:
 Attempt to ensure proper isolation procedures for all patients. In general, 
any person exposed to a patient with rubella or CRS who cannot demonstrate 
proof of immunity should receive vaccine or restrict contact with patients with 
rubella or CRS.
 Make every effort to identify and test all exposed pregnant women. 
In communitywide outbreaks, health-care workers who treat pregnant 
women should be alerted to the outbreak and advised to verify rubella immunity 
in pregnant women (see Rubella Prevention and Control Among Women 
of Childbearing Age).
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
Workplace
In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
Community
A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Conduct Outreach in Affected Facilities and Communities
 Outreach activities should begin during the outbreak investigation and 
should convey the seriousness of rubella infection and the importance of rubella 
vaccination and other control efforts. Outreach activities also provide an opportunity to 
reinforce  the  importance  of  persons  seeking  medical  advice  for  rubella-like  illnesses
and 
of health-care workers reporting rubella.
 
Workplace
 In the workplace, outreach activities should focus on educating workers 
and employers regarding rubella and its consequences, using such strategies 
as educational sessions, flyers, letters, and E-mail. Stress that persons who work in 
a place where an outbreak is in progress and who live with or have contact 
with someone who is pregnant should be vaccinated unless known to be immune.
 
Community
 A communitywide outbreak can be most effectively contained if public 
health agencies form partnerships with community leaders, health-care providers, 
and groups with a history of effective community involvement. These persons can act 
as liaisons between public health agencies and the community. Outreach activities 
in the community should include the following:
 Identifying persons in the community who can serve as liaisons between 
public health agencies and the local population (e.g., community activist 
groups, members of the foreign-born community, health-care workers who 
treat migrant populations, and leaders in places of worship).
 Training these liaisons on the current epidemiology and clinical symptoms 
of rubella, as well as laboratory testing methods (for health-care 
providers). Stress the importance of vaccinating persons who are susceptible to 
rubella, particularly persons who live in households with pregnant women or 
any women of childbearing age.
 Working with liaisons to develop targeted education messages and 
materials that address community members' beliefs regarding health care. 
Distribute messages and materials where community members who are at risk are 
likely to have access to them.
 Encouraging liaisons to participate in surveillance activities (e.g., they could 
be aware of persons in community organizations who have missed 
activities because of illness).
 Establishing vaccination sites in areas frequented by the local population 
(e.g., places of worship, day labor pick-up sites, worksites, or places where 
special celebrations are held) and providing counseling on the importance of 
rubella vaccination. Bilingual personnel might be needed to serve as counselors 
and investigators at these sites.
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Develop a Plan for Preventing Future Rubella Outbreaks
 Prevention of future rubella outbreaks includes ensuring high levels of 
rubella immunity, vaccinating susceptible persons, maintaining rubella and CRS 
surveillance  and  reporting,  and  preparing  an  appropriate  and  rapid  response  when  a
case 
of rubella is identified. To make the most effective use of resources to prevent CRS 
and control rubella, state and local health authorities might want to identify and 
prioritize counties and communities in order of decreasing risk and conduct vaccination 
or education campaigns accordingly. Depending on cost and available resources, 
health department personnel might decide to target all counties and communities in 
the state or limit the campaigns to those at highest risk for rubella outbreaks based 
on known or suspected susceptibility patterns and the likelihood of introduction 
of rubella into the community. Based on the current epidemiology of rubella, 
counties most at risk appear to be those with substantial numbers of adolescents and 
young adults born and raised in countries that do not have a history of routine 
rubella vaccination.
 All states should conduct activities for the prevention of 
CRS or CRI, including the following:
 Identifying women of childbearing age at risk for rubella infection and 
ensuring immunity in women by enhancing existing programs (e.g., prenatal testing 
and postpartum vaccination). Approximately 50% of CRS cases could be 
prevented through postpartum vaccination of women known to be susceptible 
to rubella (16).
 Maintaining rubella surveillance and investigating contacts of 
patients appropriately.
 Providing ethnically and linguistically appropriate rubella educational 
materials where persons susceptible to rubella might congregate (e.g., worksites, 
health clinics, WIC* centers, and community centers).
 Ensuring that MMR vaccine is available to providers through the Vaccines 
for Children (VFC) program or the 317 Immunization Grant Program (under 
the Public Health Service Act). For more information on these programs, 
contact 
CDC's National Immunization Program, Immunization Services 
Division, Program Operations Branch at (404) 639-8215.
In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 In addition, states that have had recent rubella outbreaks or a recent 
indigenous  CRS  case  or  that  have  identified  populations  at  high  risk  for  rubella
outbreaks 
might want to emphasize rubella control as well as CRS prevention through the 
following activities:
 Ensuring immunity among all persons (male and female), especially 
foreign-born persons who are not likely to have received rubella vaccination.
 Educating providers, especially VFC providers, regarding the 
potential increased risk for rubella susceptibility among foreign-born persons 
and ensuring that providers recommend vaccine for susceptible persons.
At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 At workplaces where recent rubella outbreaks have occurred or high numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella are employed, state health departments should
 educate management and workers regarding the risks for rubella and CRS.
 recommend that all employees susceptible to rubella receive MMR vaccine.
 recommend that rubella immunization be provided in the workplace. 
Some states might consider conducting projects to demonstrate the feasibility 
of rubella immunization in the workplace.
 ensure that workers who are vaccinated receive personal immunization 
record cards.
 ensure that family members and close personal contacts of susceptible 
workers are referred to the health department or other provider for immunization.
In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 In communities that have had recent rubella outbreaks or where large numbers 
of persons at risk for rubella reside, state health departments should
 identify leaders in communities at risk to serve as spokespersons for 
rubella control and CRS prevention programs;
 work with community groups (i.e., civic or faith-based organizations) to 
conduct education programs and vaccination campaigns;
 encourage employers to establish a rubella screening and vaccination 
program for all current and new employees; and
 provide necessary vaccines for group members at risk identified in 
public health clinics.
 alert other state health departments of rubella outbreaks, particularly 
those with evidence of state-to-state importation.*
VACCINE
This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
Contraindications and Precautions
Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
Allergic Reactions
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
Pregnancy
MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
Immunodeficiency
MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
Illness
Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 This section summarizes information available in the most recent ACIP 
statement on MMR vaccination (17). In the United States, most rubella vaccination 
is administered as part of the MMR vaccine. Approximately 21--28 days are required 
for development of protection following vaccination.
 Persons generally are presumed immune to rubella if they a) have 
documentation of vaccination with >1 dose of MMR or other live, rubella-containing 
vaccine administered on or after the first birthday, b) have laboratory evidence of 
immunity, or c) were born before 1957 (except women who could become 
pregnant). Susceptible adults born after 1957 who do not have a medical 
contraindication should receive >1 dose of MMR vaccine for protection against rubella
and two 
doses >1 month apart if at high risk for exposure to measles 
(17). Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence for rubella immunity for women who
could become pregnant.
 
Contraindications and Precautions
 Following is a summary of contraindications and precautions for 
administration of MMR vaccine. For more detailed information, consult the most recent 
ACIP statement on MMR vaccination (17).
 
Allergic Reactions
 MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons who have 
experienced severe allergic reactions to a previous dose of a rubella-containing vaccine
or to 
a vaccine component (e.g., gelatin or neomycin). Allergy to egg is not 
a contraindication.
 
Pregnancy
 MMR vaccine should not be administered to women known to be pregnant 
or attempting to become pregnant. Because of the theoretical risk to the fetus, 
women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 3 months after receipt of 
a rubella-containing vaccine (18). If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or 
becomes pregnant within 3 weeks after receipt of vaccine, she should be counseled 
regarding the theoretical basis of concern for the fetus. However, receipt of 
rubella-containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy  should  not  ordinarily  be  a  reason  to
consider 
termination of pregnancy. Women who are susceptible to rubella and not vaccinated 
because they are pregnant or might become pregnant within the next 3 months should 
be advised regarding the potential risk for CRS and the importance of being 
vaccinated as soon as they are no longer pregnant 
(17).
 From January 1971 through April 1989, CDC followed to term 321 known 
rubella-susceptible women who were vaccinated within 3 months before or 3 months 
after conception. Ninety-four women received HPV-77 or Cendehill vaccines, one 
received vaccine of unknown strain, and 226 received RA 27/3 vaccine (the only 
rubella vaccine presently used in the United States). None of the 324 infants born to 
these mothers had malformations compatible with CRI, but five had evidence of 
subclinical rubella infection, two of whom were exposed to RA 27/3 vaccine 
(17). Based on these data, the estimated risk for serious malformations attributable to
RA 27/3 
vaccine ranges from zero to 1.6% (17). Breast-feeding is not a contraindication to 
receiving MMR vaccine.
 
Immunodeficiency
 MMR vaccine should not be administered to persons with 
severe immunodeficiency from any cause. Persons with mild immunosuppression 
(e.g., 
from asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection or short-term 
or low-dose steroid use) may be vaccinated.
 
Illness
 Health-care providers should evaluate whether to administer MMR vaccine to
 persons with moderate or severe illness. Minor illnesses (e.g., otitis media 
or mild upper respiratory tract infection) are not contraindications for receipt 
of vaccine.
 persons with history of thrombocytopenia. The decision to vaccinate 
should depend on the benefits of immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella 
compared with the risks for recurrence or exacerbation of thrombocytopenia either 
after vaccination or during natural infection with measles or rubella.
 persons who have received high doses of immunoglobulins. Recent 
evidence indicates that high doses of immunoglobulins can inhibit the immune 
response to rubella vaccine for >3 months.
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Vaccine Information Statements (VIS)
 The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) requires all 
health-care  providers  in  the  United  States  who  administer  MMR  vaccine  to  provide  a
copy of 
the relevant VIS to either an adult vaccinee, or in the case of a minor, to a parent or 
legal representative (18). Health-care providers are not required to obtain the signature
of the patient, parent, or legal representative acknowledging receipt of the 
VIS. However, to document that the VIS was given, health-care providers must note 
in each patient's permanent medical record at the time a VIS is provided the 
date printed on the VIS and the date the VIS is administered to the vaccine 
recipient, parent, or legal representative. NCVIA also requires that health-care providers
note the following information in the patient's permanent medical record:
 The date of administration of the vaccine.
 The manufacturer and lot number of the vaccine.
 The name and address of the health-care provider administering the 
vaccine (i.e., the address where the record is kept; if vaccinations are administered in 
a shopping mall, for example, the address should be the clinic where 
the permanent record will reside).
Reporting of Adverse Events 
The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 
Reporting of Adverse Events 
 The National Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires physicians and other 
health-care  providers  who  administer  vaccines  to  maintain  permanent  immunization
records 
and to report occurrences of adverse events for selected vaccines 
(17). Serious adverse events (i.e., all events requiring medical attention), regardless of
whether they 
are suspected to have been caused by vaccine, should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). VAERS forms and instructions 
are available in the FDA Drug Bulletin and the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference  or  by  calling  the  24-hour  VAERS  information  recording  at
(800) 822-7967.
RUBELLA PREVENTION AND CONTROL AMONG WOMEN OF CHILDBEARING AGE
Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
All Women of Childbearing Age
Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Guidelines for rubella prevention and control among women of childbearing 
age differ depending on the likelihood of exposure to rubella. Identifying women 
who could have been exposed is critical so they can receive appropriate testing 
and follow-up. Guidelines for testing and follow-up for all women of childbearing 
age, pregnant women for whom rubella exposure is unlikely, and pregnant women 
who might have been exposed to rubella are outlined in the following sections.
 
All Women of Childbearing Age
 Health-care providers who treat women of childbearing age should 
routinely determine rubella immunity and vaccinate those who are susceptible and 
not pregnant. Proof of immunity can be either a verified record of vaccination or 
a positive IgG antibody serologic test. Rubella-susceptible women who a) do not 
report being pregnant, b) are not likely to become pregnant in the next 3 months, and
c) 
do not have other contraindicating conditions should be vaccinated. Before 
vaccination, each patient should be counseled to avoid pregnancy for 3 months after 
vaccination because of the theoretical risk for vaccine virus affecting the fetus. Because
routine pregnancy screening is not recommended before rubella vaccination, 
patients should be counseled regarding the theoretical risk to the fetus from 
inadvertent vaccination of a pregnant woman.
 
Pregnant Women Without Likely Exposure
 Even when no outbreaks have been reported and no rubella exposure 
has occurred, health-care providers should routinely conduct a rubella IgG test for 
all pregnant women at the earliest prenatal visit. A positive rubella IgG antibody 
test indicates rubella immunity, and health-care providers can assume that immunity 
was acquired before pregnancy. Women who are found to be susceptible should 
be monitored for signs of rubella during pregnancy and vaccinated 
postpartum.  Susceptible  pregnant  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid  contact  with
persons 
with rash illness.
 An IgM test should not be used to determine rubella immune status; IgM is 
used to diagnose acute and recent rubella infection. The TORCH (i.e., 
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes) panel includes a test for rubella
IgG 
antibodies as well as a test for rubella IgM antibodies. Because of the potential for 
false-positive IgM results, a TORCH panel should not be used to determine rubella 
immunity. Rubella IgM testing should be performed on pregnant women who report 
symptoms of rubella or susceptible pregnant women who might have been exposed to 
rubella to rule out acute or recent infection.
 
Screening and Follow-Up of Pregnant Women Who 
Might Have Been Exposed to Rubella
 Because the consequences of rubella infection during pregnancy are 
serious, every effort must be made to identify all women of childbearing age exposed to
a 
person with confirmed, probable, or suspected rubella. Women found to 
be susceptible and not pregnant should be vaccinated as outlined previously (see 
All Women of Childbearing Age). Susceptible household contacts of pregnant 
women should also be vaccinated.
 All exposed pregnant women should be screened to determine if they a) 
were infected during pregnancy, b) are susceptible, or c) were immune before 
pregnancy. Because of the seriousness of CRI, immunity must be documented by a 
verified, dated record of a positive serologic test. Pregnant women without 
documented  immunity  should  be  tested  for  the  presence  of  rubella  IgG  and  IgM
antibodies 
as outlined in this section. Identifying susceptible pregnant women is critical, so 
they can be isolated from further exposure, monitored for infection, and 
vaccinated postpartum. Pregnant women with evidence of infection during pregnancy
should 
be evaluated to verify rubella infection and determine gestational age at time 
of infection, if possible, to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus.
 Immunoglobulin (IG) does not prevent rubella or mumps infection after 
exposure and is not recommended for that purpose 
(18). Administration of IG after exposure 
to rubella will not prevent infection or viremia, but might modify or suppress 
symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted  sense  of  security.  Therefore,  IG  is  not
recommended 
for routine postexposure prophylaxis of rubella in early pregnancy or any 
other circumstance. Infants with congenital rubella have been born to women 
who received IG shortly after exposure. Administration of IG should be considered only 
if a pregnant woman who has been exposed to rubella will not consider termination 
of pregnancy under any circumstances. In such cases, intramuscular administration 
of 20 mL of IG within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce --- but will 
not eliminate --- the risk for rubella.
 During an outbreak, the following steps should be taken to evaluate and follow 
up with pregnant women who had contact with a person with confirmed, probable, 
or suspected rubella:
 Use documented serologic test results to verify immunity. If 
unavailable, conduct rubella IgG and IgM antibody testing regardless of symptom 
history. Pregnant women who are exposed to rubella and who do not 
have documented proof of immunity should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to identify recent infection. Because 20%--50% of rubella cases 
are asymptomatic, this testing policy is crucial to assess the possibility of risk 
to the fetus. Another way to identify recent infection is to detect a significant 
rise in paired IgG serum. A single positive IgG test indicates rubella immunity, 
but does not give information regarding the timing of the infection. However, 
a significant rise in IgG antibody (determined by testing paired sera) or 
positive IgM antibody test indicates recent infection.
 Recommend restricting activities to avoid exposure while waiting for 
serologic test results. During this time, pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible to rubella should avoid these settings for 6 weeks 
(two incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient 
for whom rubella cannot be ruled out.
 Evaluate exposed pregnant women with positive IgG titers and negative IgM 
to determine if they acquired immunity before pregnancy or infection 
during pregnancy. Women without previously documented immunity who 
were exposed during pregnancy and >6 weeks before IgM testing could test 
negative for IgM antibodies, which are normally not detectable >6 weeks after 
infection. Thus, a negative rubella IgM antibody assay does not rule out infection 
during pregnancy. The dates of the pregnancy, possible exposures, test(s), and 
history of rash illness should be considered in assessing the possibility of risk to 
the fetus.
 Evaluate pregnant women with confirmed rubella to assess risk to the 
fetus. Rubella infection during the first 3 months of pregnancy is associated with 
the greatest risk for CRI, and up to 90% of infants born to mothers infected 
during the first 11 weeks of gestation will develop CRS. Infection late in the first half 
of pregnancy is more likely to result in hearing impairment and less likely to 
be associated with other defects. Although not likely to result in CRS, 
rubella infection late in pregnancy can result in congenital rubella infection only.
 Pregnant women with negative IgG and negative IgM on first testing should 
be retested in 10--14 days; the first specimen should be reanalyzed along with 
the second specimen. A significant rise in IgG or positive IgM indicates 
recent infection. If a susceptible pregnant woman continues to be directly exposed 
to rubella, repeat tests of paired sera in 10--14 days to determine if 
infection occurs, then every 3--4 weeks if exposure continues. Testing can be 
performed earlier if pregnancy outcome might be influenced. Evaluate the infant 
on delivery for signs of CRS, and vaccinate the mother postpartum.
 Recommend restricting activities for susceptible women (i.e., those 
without detectable IgG and IgM antibodies), obtain follow-up serologic testing, 
and vaccinate after delivery. Susceptible pregnant women should be excluded 
from activities (e.g., work or school) that present the possibility of exposure 
to persons with confirmed or suspected cases of rubella. Pregnant women 
found to be susceptible should avoid these settings for 6 weeks (two 
incubation periods) after the onset of symptoms of rubella in the last patient for 
whom rubella cannot be ruled out. Household contacts or other ongoing 
contacts without documented rubella immunity should be vaccinated.
 Evaluate asymptomatic, exposed pregnant women with documented history 
of previous rubella immunity. Rubella reinfection is rare but has 
been documented (19--22). Women with documentation of previous 
rubella immunity who are exposed to rubella during pregnancy should consult 
their physicians. After discussing the potential for reinfection, physicians 
might recommend acute- and convalescent-phase IgG antibody testing or an 
IgM antibody test to document whether reinfection has occurred. However, 
the potential for false-positive IgM tests exists, and the potential risks and 
benefits of testing should be considered.
 Counsel pregnant women with documentation of previous immunity to 
seek medical attention promptly if rubella-like symptoms appear. Any 
pregnant woman with documented immunity and rubella-like symptoms should 
be 
immediately evaluated by a physician to diagnose the symptoms and 
ensure the health of the mother and fetus.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CONGENITAL RUBELLA SYNDROME
Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Consequences of CRI during pregnancy include abortion, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, and a pattern of birth defects called CRS. The most common congenital 
defects related to CRS are cataracts, heart defects, hearing impairment, and 
developmental delay. Other less specific signs and symptoms of CRS include 
purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and 
radiolucent bone disease.
 Pregnant women with known rubella exposure should receive follow-up 
care. Surveillance for CRI and CRS should be implemented when confirmed or 
probable rubella cases are documented in a setting where pregnant women might have
been exposed. The following steps are recommended to achieve these goals:
 Follow the outcome of pregnancy for pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella infection and for susceptible pregnant women with 
rubella exposure. A state or local registry of pregnant women with confirmed 
or suspected rubella should be established to record pregnancy outcomes 
(e.g., abortion, stillbirth, congenital rubella-associated defects) and 
laboratory evaluation of infants. Because hearing impairment, cataracts, and heart 
defects are common among infants with CRS, hearing and vision evaluations 
for infants born to susceptible, pregnant women exposed to rubella could 
help identify cases and aid early diagnosis and intervention.
 Educate and heighten awareness among health-care providers. 
Health-care providers in the area of an outbreak should be made aware of the potential 
for CRS births in their facilities and given information regarding the 
physical manifestations of CRS and appropriate laboratory testing for infants 
with suspected CRS. The classic presentation for CRS is cataracts, 
hearing impairment, and congenital heart disease (especially patent ductus 
arteriosus or peripheral pulmonic stenosis). Some conditions associated with CRS 
(e.g., hearing impairment and developmental delay) might not be apparent at birth.
The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 The following steps are recommended for follow-up and surveillance for CRS 
and congenital rubella infection only cases:
 Discuss appropriate isolation procedures for infants with CRS and 
congenital rubella infection only with health-care providers. Only persons immune 
to rubella should have contact with these infants. Children with CRS should 
be presumed infectious at least through age 1 year unless nasopharynx and 
urine cultures are negative for virus after age 3 months. Some authorities 
suggest that an infant with CRS should be considered infectious until two cultures 
of clinical specimens obtained 1 month part are negative for rubella virus. 
 Use universal newborn hearing screening programs to help detect CRS, 
where available. Approximately 50% of states have such programs, some of 
which use a combination of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory 
brainstem response to identify hearing impairment in newborns. Because 
hearing 
impairment is the most common single defect associated with CRS, 
newborns who fail hearing screening tests should be tested for rubella-specific 
IgM antibodies to rule out CRS.
 Confirm the CRS or congenital rubella infection only diagnosis with 
laboratory testing (see Laboratory Diagnosis of Congenital Rubella Syndrome 
and Congenital Rubella Infection).
 Report all CRS and congenital rubella infection only cases to the state 
health department as soon as they are suspected, even though 
laboratory confirmation might be pending. State health departments should then 
report cases to CDC's Rubella Activity at (404) 639-8230. Cases are then entered 
into the National Congenital Rubella Syndrome Registry. The following data 
are epidemiologically important and should be collected during case 
investigations (additional information can be collected at the direction of the state 
health department):
 --- Demographic information.
 --- Maternal history, including a) date of rubella vaccination(s), b) dates 
and results of previous serologic tests for rubella immunity, c) history 
or documentation of rubella infection during pregnancy, d) history 
of pregnancies inside and outside the United States, e) country of birth 
and length of residence in the United States, and f) history of exposure to 
rubella and travel.
 --- Clinical details (e.g., cataracts, hearing impairment, developmental 
delay, type of congenital heart defect, meningoencephalitis, microcephaly).
 --- Laboratory information, including types and results of laboratory 
testing performed on both mother and child.
 Recommend consultation with specialists for infants with CRS, as 
appropriate, based on clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSION
Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/19/2001
 Rubella outbreak control is essential for eliminating indigenous rubella 
and preventing CRS and CRI. Strategies for rubella outbreak control include 
defining target populations for rubella vaccination, ensuring that susceptible persons 
within the target populations are vaccinated rapidly (or excluded from exposure if 
a contraindication for vaccination exists), and maintaining rubella and 
CRS surveillance (18). Control measures should be implemented as soon as a case 
of rubella is identified. Maintaining control measures is essential when 
pregnant women are possible contacts of patients with rubella. Susceptible pregnant 
women who are exposed to rubella should be thoroughly evaluated for possible 
rubella infection.
References
 Reef SE, Plotkin S, Cordero JF, et al. Preparing for congenital rubella 
syndrome  elimination:  summary  of  the  Workshop  on  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome
Elimination 
in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:85--95.
 Tanemura M, Suzumori K, Yagami Y, Katow S. Diagnosis of fetal rubella infection 
with reverse transcription and nested polymerase chain reaction: a study of 34 
cases diagnosed in fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:578--82.
 Cooper LZ, Ziring PR, Ockerse AB, Fedun BA, Kiely B, Krugman S. Rubella: 
clinical manifestations and management. Am J Dis Child 1969;118:18--29.
  CDC. Rubella among hispanic adults---Kansas, 1998, and Nebraska, 1999. MMWR 
2000;49:225--8.
  CDC. Rubella outbreak---Westchester County, New York,1997--1998. MMWR 
1999;48:560--3.
 Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM. Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella 
at successive stages of pregnancy. Lancet 1982;2:781--94.
 Cooper LZ, Krugman S. Clinical manifestations of postnatal and congenital rubella. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1967;77:434--9.
 Robertson SE, Cutts FT, Samuel R, Diaz-Ortega J-L. Control of rubella and 
congenital syndrome (CRS) in developing countries, part 2: vaccination against rubella.
Bull 
World Health Organ 1997;75:69--80.
 World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record: preventing congenital 
rubella syndrome. September 2000;75:289--96.
  World Health Organization. EPI information system: global summary, September 
1998. Geneva: World Health Organization, Global Programme for Vaccines and 
Immunization, 1998; publication no. WHO/EPI/GEN/98.10.
  Plotkin S. Rubella vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, eds. Vaccines. Third 
ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 1999:409--39.
  Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of diseases 
and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. JAMA 1999;282:164--70.
   CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health surveillance. 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10):30.
  CDC. Manual for the surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 1999.
  Grangeot-Keros L, Enders G. Evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay based 
on recombinant rubella virus-like particles for detection of immunoglobulin M antibodies
to rubella virus. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:398--401.
  Schluter WW, Reef SE, Redd SC, Dykewicz CA. Changing epidemiology of 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States. J Infect Dis 1998;178:636--41.
  CDC. Measles, mumps, and rubella---vaccine use and strategies for elimination 
of measles, rubella and congenital rubella syndrome and control of 
mumps:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). 
MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-8).
 CDC. Epidemiology and prevention of
  vaccine-preventable diseases. Sixth edition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
  Health and Human Services, CDC, January 2000.
  Eilard T, Strannegard O. Rubella reinfection in pregnancy followed by transmission to 
the fetus. J infect Dis 1974;129:594--6.
  Das BD, Lakhani P, Kurtz JB, et al. Congenital rubella after previous maternal 
immunity. Arch Dis Child 1990;65:545--6.
  Keith CG. Congenital rubella infection from reinfection of previously immunised 
mothers. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1991;19:291--3.
  Weber B, Enders G, Schlosser R, et al. Congenital rubella syndrome after 
maternal reinfection. Infection 1993;21:118--21.
* Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed 
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
* Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
*CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
Box
 * Most of the wording in this section comes directly from the case definitions developed
by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) (CDC. Case 
definitions  for  infectious  conditions  under  public  health  surveillance.  MMWR
1997;46[No. RR-10]:30).
 * Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
 *CSTE recommends that states use CDC's Epidemic Information 
Exchange (Epi-X) to disseminate outbreak information. Information on 
Epi-X is available at 
<http://www.cdc.gov/programs/research5.htm>.
  
 Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 7/19/2001 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 7/19/2001
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5012a1.htm
