A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Healthcare  providers  and  veterinarians
can  protect  patients  from  antimicrobial-resistant  germs  such  as  bacteria  and  fungi,
which can cause difficult and sometimes impossible to treat infections. Patients might
visit your practice with an infection or may get infections when receiving health care in
a facility, called healthcare-associated infections (HAIs). These infections can be caused
by  antimicrobial-resistant  pathogens  (harmful  germs),  which  may  lead  to  sepsis  or
death.  In fact, HAIs are commonly caused by antimicrobial-resistant pathogens. CDC
reported in 2019 that more than 85% of antimicrobial-resistant deaths were estimated
to have been caused by seven antimicrobial-resistant pathogens most associated with
healthcare  settings:  The  COVID-19  pandemic  impacted  antimicrobial  resistance  in
hospitals.
 CDC
 data
 show
 that
 infections
 from
 healthcare-associated
antimicrobial-resistant  pathogens  listed  in  its  2019  AR  Threats  Report  increased  in
hospitals  during  2020.  Unprecedented  challenges  could  have  contributed  to  reduced
comprehensive infection prevention and control practices, which are key to preventing
antimicrobial-resistant infections and their spread. Additionally, hospitals treated sicker
patients who required more frequent and longer use of medical devices like catheters
and ventilators. Find out more about the impact of COVID-19 on antimicrobial resistance
in the U.S. Continue following these actions to help protect your patients and people in
the community from antimicrobial-resistant infections.  Antibiotics and antifungals save
lives,  but  any  time  they  are  used  they  can  cause  side  effects  and  lead  to
antimicrobial-resistant infections.  Working with animal owners and producers, you can
slow  the  spread  of  antimicrobial  resistance  by  implementing  disease  prevention  and
control  strategies  and  ensuring  appropriate  prescribing  of  improving  the  use  of
antibiotics  and  antifungals  while  also  providing  high-quality  medical  care  for  your
animal  patients.  People  receiving  cancer  treatment  are  at  a  higher  risk  for  infections
and the growing global health threat of antimicrobial resistances can make infections
harder,  if  not  impossible,  to  treat.  Panelists  discussed  the  impacts  of  resistance  on
cancer  care  and  the  importance  of  infection  prevention  and  control  efforts  to  limit
cancer  patient  exposure  to  antimicrobial-resistant  germs.   Antimicrobial  resistance
happens when germs like bacteria and fungi can defeat the drugs designed to kill them.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance/prevention/veterinarians.html
