A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Use this document to: All cooling towers use the evaporation of water to remove heat
and release it into the atmosphere. Cooling towers use circulating water to cool: Both
open- and closed-circuit cooling towers: If Legionella is present, the aerosolized water
can  spread  the  bacteria  over  miles.  Closed-circuit  cooling  towers  have  an  additional,
closed  loop.  That  loop  can  keep  the  fluid  used  in  the  cooling  processes  from  being
exposed  to  the  atmosphere.   Closed-circuit  cooling  towers  can  operate  in  cool
temperatures  in  a  "dry"  mode  that  does  not  use  water  or  generate  aerosols.
Understanding  cooling  tower  design  components  is  critical  for  Legionella  control.  Use
drift  eliminators:  Use  high-efficiency  drift  eliminators.  Consider  placement:  Locate
cooling  towers  at  least  25  feet  from  building  air  intakes.  This  will  help  prevent  the
cooling  tower's  drift  plume  from  being  drawn  into  a  ventilation  system.  Avoid
stagnation:  Ensure  system  piping  is  designed  to  avoid  stagnation  or  dead  legs.
Recirculate water during intermittent operation. Automate disinfectant use: Design and
install  an  automated  water  treatment  system.  Use  a  water  management  program  to
establish,  track,  and  improve  operation  and  maintenance  activities.  The  necessary
frequency of operation and maintenance activities depends on the  Clean and disinfect
as directed: Follow manufacturer recommendations Perform an offline disinfection and
cleaning  at  least  annually.  Monitor  water  parameters  on  a  regular  basis.  Base
measurement  frequency  on  performance  of  the  water  management  program  or
Legionella  performance  indicators  for  control.  Adjust  frequency  according  to  the
stability  of  performance  indicator  values.  For  example,  increase  the  measurement
frequency  if  there's  a  high  degree  of  measurement  variability.  Lower  water
temperature: Operate cooling tower systems at the lowest possible water temperature.
If  possible,  operate  below  the  most  favorable  Legionella  growth  range  (77–113°F,
25–45°C).  Use  automation:  Automate  anti-corrosion,  anti-scale,  and  disinfectant
addition  and  monitoring.  Avoid  stagnation:  Flush  low-flow  pipe  runs  and  dead  legs  at
least  weekly.  Balance  operating  times  among  cooling  towers  when  multiple  cooling
towers or cells exist. Implement automated blowdown (intentional discharge of system
water and replacement with supply water) to maintain system water quality. Consider
filtration to reduce the level of suspended solids in the cooling water. Base the decision
on system factors like cooling tower location and particle load. Monitor for water service
disruptions  and  develop  plans  to  respond  accordingly.  Maintain  paperwork:  Keep
site-specific  log  sheets,  test  procedures,  service  reports,  and  test  results  on  site.
Consider  testing  for  Legionella  in  accordance  with  the  routine  testing  module  of  this
toolkit (linked below). Cleaning, disinfecting, and remediating cooling towers involves a
hierarchy  of  protocols.  Determine  how  the  following  response  protocols  fit  into  the
water management program.  The protocols are listed in order of increasing intensity
from routine treatment to offline emergency disinfection: Consult ASHRAE Guideline 12
for  instructions  for  each  response.  These  steps  may  require  customization  based  on
system components, operating conditions, or other factors. If the public health authority
having  jurisdiction  suspects  an  associated  outbreak  or  illness,  then  perform  offline
emergency  cleaning  and  disinfection.  See  specific  guidance  below.  Note:  The  public
health authority having jurisdiction determines whether there are associated illness(es)
or an outbreak.  If an outbreak or illness is suspected, test in conjunction with public
health  in  order  to:  Review  the  current  water  treatment  program  (e.g.,  cleanliness,
maintenance, disinfectant program). Remove heat load from the cooling system. Shut
off any associated fans. Disengage all automated chemical feed and control equipment.
Shut  off  system  blowdown.  Keep  make-up  water  valves  open  and  operating.  Close
building  air  intake  vents  near  the  cooling  tower,  especially  those  downwind,  until
cleaning  procedure  is  complete.  Circulate  water  through  all  system  equipment,
including any bypass or standby components. Add an oxidizing disinfectant. Achieve a
disinfectant residual of at least 20 ppm as free available oxidant. Add an appropriate
dispersant.  Apply  antifoam,  if  needed.  Apply  appropriate  corrosion  inhibitors.  Reduce
the  cycles  of  concentration  (if  necessary)  to  achieve  and  maintain  a  pH  of  less  than:
Maintain  a  free  available  oxidant  residual  of  10  ppm  for  at  least  24  hours.  Shorter
contact  times  can  be  effective  at  higher  concentrations.  Drain  the  system  to  the
sanitary sewer. Follow all applicable rules, regulations, and permits. Physically clean all
accessible system equipment, including: Refill the system and circulate water through
all  system  equipment,  including  bypass  or  standby  components.  Add  an  oxidizing
disinfectant. Maintain a free available oxidant residual of at least 10 ppm for one hour.
Drain  the  system  to  the  sanitary  sewer.  Follow  all  applicable  rules,  regulations,  and
permits.  Refill  the  system.  Return  all  chemical  feed  and  control  equipment  to  normal
operation. Described below are control measures and recommendations for each water
parameter.  Control  measures:  Cleaning  frequency  and  scale  and  corrosion  inhibitors
Recommendations: Cleaning frequency varies based on operational factors.
 Remove from service, clean, and disinfect at least annually.
 Monitor  scale  and  corrosion  inhibitor  levels  frequently  as  indicated  by  water  quality
measurements.  Control  measures:  Control  limits  Recommendations:  Operate  at  the
lowest  possible  water  temperature  outside  Legionella's  favorable  growth  range
(77–113°F, 25–45°C). Control measures: Make-up water quality and turnover frequency
Recommendations: Flush low-flow pipe runs and dead legs at least weekly. During wet
system standby (water remains in system and shutdown for less than 5 days), maintain
water treatment program. Circulate water 3 times a week through the open loop of a
closed-circuit  cooling  tower  and  entire  open-circuit  cooling  system.   Ensure  system
water quality is managed through automated system blow down.
Use  potable  water  for  system  make-up  water  or  ensure  reclaimed  or  condensate
sources
 are
 appropriately
 managed.
 Control
 measures:
 Control
 limits
Recommendations: pH: Maintain based on type of disinfectant used and manufacturer
recommendations to prevent corrosion.
 Oxidizing  disinfectants  (e.g.,  chlorine,  bromine):  Maintain  measurable  residuals
throughout
 each
 day.
 Consult
 manufacturer
 recommendations.
 Non-oxidizing
disinfectants:  Maintain  based  on  product  label  concentration  and  contact  time.  Form:
Legionella environmental assessment Illustration: Cooling tower  Toolkit: Developing a
water  management  program  to  reduce  Legionella  growth  and  spread  in  buildings
Training: Preventing Legionnaires' disease: A training on Legionella water management
programs ASHRAE Guideline 12 [Free read-only preview] Cooling Technology Institute
Guideline 159(20) An effective water management program is the primary strategy to
control  Legionella  growth  and  spread  to  prevent  Legionnaires'  disease.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/control-legionella/php/toolkit/cooling-towers-module.html
