A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Below are the Core Elements of Antibiotic
Stewardship  for  Nursing  Homes  and  resources  for  implementing  them.  Improving  the
use of antibiotics in healthcare to protect patients and reduce the threat of antibiotic
resistance is a national priority. Antibiotic stewardship refers to a set of commitments
and  actions  designed  to  "optimize  the  treatment  of  infections  while  reducing  the
adverse  events  associated  with  antibiotic  use."  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC)  recommends  that  all  acute  care  hospitals  implement  an  antibiotic
stewardship program (ASP) and outlined the seven Core elements which are necessary
for implementing successful ASPs. CDC also recommends that all nursing homes take
steps  to  improve  antibiotic  prescribing  practices  and  reduce  inappropriate  use.
Antibiotics  are  among  the  most  frequently  prescribed  medications  in  nursing  homes,
with  up  to  70%  of  residents  in  a  nursing  home  receiving  one  or  more  courses  of
systemic  antibiotics  when  followed  over  a  year.  Similar  to  the  findings  in  hospitals,
studies  have  shown  that  40–75%  of  antibiotics  prescribed  in  nursing  homes  may  be
unnecessary or inappropriate. Harms from antibiotic overuse are significant for the frail
and older adults receiving care in nursing homes. These harms include risk of serious
diarrheal infections from Clostridium difficile, increased adverse drug events and drug
interactions, and colonization and/or infection with antibiotic-resistant organisms. This
document  adapts  the  CDC  Core  Elements  of  Hospital  Antibiotic  Stewardship  into
practical ways to initiate or expand antibiotic stewardship activities in nursing homes.
While  the  elements  are  the  same  for  both  hospitals  and  nursing  homes,  the
implementation  of  these  elements  may  vary  based  on  facility  staffing  and  resources.
Nursing homes are encouraged to work in a step-wise fashion, implementing one or two
activities  to  start  and  gradually  adding  new  strategies  from  each  element  over  time.
Any  action  taken  to  improve  antibiotic  use  is  expected  to  reduce  adverse  events,
prevent  emergence  of  resistance,  and  lead  to  better  outcomes  for  residents  in  this
setting. Demonstrate support and commitment to safe and appropriate antibiotic use in
your facility Identify physician, nursing and pharmacy leads responsible for promoting
and  overseeing  antibiotic  stewardship  activities  in  your  facility  Establish  access  to
consultant  pharmacists  or  other  individuals  with  experience  or  training  in  antibiotic
stewardship  for  your  facility  Implement  at  least  one  policy  or  practice  to  improve
antibiotic use Monitor at least one process measure of antibiotic use and at least one
outcome from antibiotic use in your facility Provide regular feedback on antibiotic use
and  resistance  to  prescribing  clinicians,  nursing  staff  and  other  relevant  staff  Provide
resources to clinicians, nursing staff, residents and families about antibiotic resistance
and  opportunities  for  improving  antibiotic  use  Nursing  home  leaders  commit  to
improving antibiotic use. Facility leadership, both owners and administrators, as well as
regional  and  national  leaders  if  the  facility  is  part  of  a  larger  corporation,  can
demonstrate  their  support  in  the  following  ways:  Write  statements  in  support  of
improving  antibiotic  use  to  be  shared  with  staff,  residents  and  families  Include
stewardship-related  duties  in  position  descriptions  for  the  medical  director,  clinical
nurse leads, and consultant pharmacists in the facility Communicate with nursing staff
and  prescribing  clinicians  the  facility's  expectations  about  use  of  antibiotics  and  the
monitoring  and  enforcement  of  stewardship  policies  Create  a  culture,  through
messaging,  education,  and  celebrating  improvement,  which  promotes  antibiotic
stewardship.  Nursing  homes  identify  individuals  accountable  for  the  antibiotic
stewardship activities who have the support of facility leadership: Empower the medical
director  to  set  standards  for  antibiotic  prescribing  practices  for  all  clinical  providers
credentialed  to  deliver  care  in  a  nursing  home  and  be  accountable  for  overseeing
adherence. To be effective in this role, the medical director should review antibiotic use
data (see Tracking and Reporting section) and ensure best practices are followed in the
medical  care  of  residents  in  the  facility.  Empower  the  director  of  nursing  to  set  the
practice  standards  for  assessing,  monitoring  and  communicating  changes  in  a
resident's condition by front-line nursing staff. Nurses and nurse aides play a key role in
the decision-making process for starting an antibiotic. The knowledge, perceptions and
attitudes  among  nursing  staff  of  the  role  of  antibiotics  in  the  care  of  nursing  home
residents can significantly influence how information is communicated to clinicians who
are  deciding  whether  to  initiate  antibiotic  therapy.  Therefore  the  importance  of
antibiotic stewardship is conveyed by the expectations set by nursing leadership in the
facility.  Engage  the  consultant  pharmacist  in  supporting  antibiotic  stewardship
oversight through quality assurance activities such as medication regimen review and
reporting  of  antibiotic  use  data.  Nursing  home  antibiotic  stewardship  leads  utilize
existing resources to support antibiotic stewards' efforts by working with the following
partners:  Infection  prevention  program  coordinator  Infection  prevention  coordinators
have  key  expertise  and  data  to  inform  strategies  to  improve  antibiotic  use.  This
includes  tracking  of  antibiotic  starts,  monitoring  adherence  to  evidence-based
published  criteria  during  the  evaluation  and  management  of  treated  infections,  and
reviewing  antibiotic  resistance  patterns  in  the  facility  to  understand  which  infections
are  caused  by  resistant  organisms.  When  infection  prevention  coordinators  have
training,  dedicated  time,  and  resources  to  collect  and  analyze  infection  surveillance
data,  this  information  can  be  used  to  monitor  and  support  antibiotic  stewardship
activities.  Consultant  laboratory  Nursing  homes  contracting  laboratory  services  can
request  reports  and  services  to  support  antibiotic  stewardship  activities.  Examples  of
laboratory support for antibiotic stewardship include developing a process for alerting
the  facility  if  certain  antibiotic-resistant  organisms  are  identified,  providing  education
for  nursing  home  staff  on  the  differences  in  diagnostic  tests  available  for  detecting
various  infectious  pathogens  (e.g.,  EIA  toxin  test  vs.  nucleic  amplification  tests  for  C.
difficile),  and  creating  a  summary  report  of  antibiotic  susceptibility  patterns  from
organisms isolated in cultures. These reports, also known as antibiograms, help inform
empiric  antibiotic  selection  (i.e.,  before  culture  results  are  available)  and  monitor  for
new  or  worsening  antibiotic  resistance.  State  and  local  health  departments  Nursing
homes  benefit  from  the  educational  support  and  resources  on  antibiotic  stewardship
and  infection  prevention  which  are  provided  by  the  Healthcare-Associated  Infection
(HAI)  Prevention  programs  at  state  and  local  health  departments.  Nursing  homes
establish  access  to  individuals  with  antibiotic  expertise  to  implement  antibiotic
stewardship  activities.  Receiving  support  from  infectious  disease  consultants  and
consultant pharmacists with training in antibiotic stewardship can help a nursing home
reduce antibiotic use and experience lower rates of positive C. difficile tests. Examples
of establishing antibiotic expertise include: Work with a consultant pharmacist who has
received  specialized  infectious  diseases  or  antibiotic  stewardship  training.  Example
training  courses  include  the  Making  a  Difference  in  Infectious  Diseases  (MAD-ID)
antibiotic  stewardship  course,  and  the  Society  for  Infectious  Diseases  Pharmacists
antibiotic stewardship certificate program. Partner with antibiotic stewardship program
leads at the hospitals within your referral network. Develop relationships with infectious
disease  consultants  in  your  community  interested  in  supporting  your  facility's
stewardship  efforts.  NEW  5  Ways  Consultant  Pharmacists  Can  Be  Antibiotics  Aware
Nursing  homes  implement  prescribing  policies  and  change  practices  to  improve
antibiotic use. The introduction of new policies and procedures which address antibiotic
use  should  be  done  in  a  step-wise  fashion  so  staff  become  familiar  with  and  not
overwhelmed by new changes in practice. Prioritize interventions based on the needs of
your facility and share outcomes from successful interventions with nursing staff and
clinical providers. Below are brief descriptions of policy and practice changes. For more
details, see Appendix A: Policy and practice actions to improve antibiotic use. Ensure
that  current  medication  safety  policies,  including  medication  regimen  review,
developed to address Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations are
being applied to antibiotic prescribing and use. Standardize the practices which should
be applied during the care of any resident suspected of an infection or started on an
antibiotic.  These  practices  include  improving  the  evaluation  and  communication  of
clinical signs and symptoms when a resident is first suspected of having an infection,
optimizing the use of diagnostic testing, and implementing an antibiotic review process,
also  known  as  an  "antibiotic  time-out,"  for  all  antibiotics  prescribed  in  your  facility.
Antibiotic reviews provide clinicians with an opportunity to reassess the ongoing need
for and choice of an antibiotic when the clinical picture is clearer and more information
is available. Integrate the dispensing and consultant pharmacists into the clinical care
team  as  key  partners  in  supporting  antibiotic  stewardship  in  nursing  homes.
Pharmacists  can  provide  assistance  in  ensuring  antibiotics  are  ordered  appropriately,
reviewing culture data, and developing antibiotic monitoring and infection management
guidance  in  collaboration  with  nursing  and  clinical  leaders.  Identify  clinical  situations
which  may  be  driving  inappropriate  courses  of  antibiotics  such  as  asymptomatic
bacteriuria or urinary tract infection prophylaxis and implement specific interventions to
improve  use.  Nursing  homes  monitor  both  antibiotic  use  practices  and  outcomes
related to antibiotics in order to guide practice changes and track the impact of new
interventions. Data on adherence to antibiotic prescribing policies and antibiotic use are
shared  with  clinicians  and  nurses  to  maintain  awareness  about  the  progress  being
made  in  antibiotic  stewardship.  Clinician  response  to  antibiotic  use  feedback  (e.g.,
acceptance) may help determine whether feedback is effective in changing prescribing
behaviors.  Below  are  examples  of  antibiotic  use  and  outcome  measures.  For  more
details,  see  Appendix  B:  Measures  of  antibiotic  prescribing,  use  and  outcomes  and
Appendix  C:  Data  Sources,  Elements,  and  Measures  for  Tracking  Antibiotic  Use  in
Nursing Homes. Perform reviews on resident medical records for new antibiotic starts to
determine whether the clinical assessment, prescription documentation and antibiotic
selection  were  in  accordance  with  facility  antibiotic  use  policies  and  practices.  When
conducted  over  time,  monitoring  process  measures  can  assess  whether  antibiotic
prescribing  policies  are  being  followed  by  staff  and  clinicians.  Track  the  amount  of
antibiotic  used  in  your  nursing  home  to  review  patterns  of  use  and  determine  the
impact  of  new  stewardship  interventions.  Some  antibiotic  use  measures  (e.g.,
prevalence surveys) provide a snap-shot of information; while others, like nursing home
initiated antibiotic starts and days of therapy (DOT) are calculated and tracked on an
ongoing basis. Selecting which antibiotic use measure to track should be based on the
type of practice intervention being implemented. Interventions designed to shorten the
duration  of  antibiotic  courses,  or  discontinue  antibiotics  based  on  post-prescription
review  (i.e.,  "antibiotic  time-out"),  may  not  necessarily  change  the  rate  of  antibiotic
starts, but would decrease the antibiotic DOT. Antibiotic use data from nursing homes
to  improve  antibiotic  stewardship  efforts  is  important  both  for  individual  facility
improvements  and  for  public  health  action.  Expansion  of  electronic  health  records  in
nursing homes will allow for facilities to obtain systems which integrate pharmacy and
laboratory  data  and  make  antibiotic  use  and  resistance  data  to  inform  stewardship
efforts  more  accessible  to  facility  staff  and  leadership.  CDC  is  working  closely  with
many  nursing  home  partners  including  providers,  long-term  care  pharmacies,  and
professional  organizations,  to  develop  an  Antibiotic  Use  (AU)  reporting  option  for
nursing homes within the CDC's National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN). The NHSN
AU  option  allows  for  standardized  antibiotic  use  data,  submitted  electronically,  to  be
aggregated  and  summarized  for  developing  facility-adjusted  national  benchmarks.
Monitor  clinical  outcomes  such  as  rates  of  C.  difficile  infections,  antibiotic-resistant
organisms or adverse drug events to demonstrate that antibiotic stewardship activities
are  successful  in  improving  patient  outcomes.  Nursing  homes  already  tracking  these
clinical outcomes for their infection prevention program can submit data on C. difficile
and selected antibiotic-resistant bacteria, such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE) into the CDC's NHSN
Laboratory-identified  event  reporting  module  for  long-term  care  facilities.  Nursing
homes  provide  antibiotic  stewardship  education  to  clinicians,  nursing  staff,  residents
and  families.  Effective  educational  programs  address  both  nursing  staff  and  clinical
providers on the goal of an antibiotic stewardship intervention, and the responsibility of
each  group  for  ensuring  its  implementation.  There  are  a  variety  of  mechanisms  for
disseminating antibiotic education to nursing home staff including flyers, pocket-guides,
newsletters  or  electronic  communications;  however,  interactive  academic  detailing
(e.g.,  face-to-face  interactive  workshops)  has  the  strongest  evidence  for  improving
medication
 prescribing
 practices.
 Nursing
 homes
 sustain
 improvements
 by
incorporating  both  education  and  feedback  to  providers.  One  nursing  home  antibiotic
stewardship intervention demonstrated a sustained reduction in antibiotic use for two
years after the intervention by linking education with feedback on physician prescribing
practices. Another study showed a 64% reduction in inappropriate antibiotic use (i.e.,
prescriptions which did not adhere to guidelines), by providing feedback on individual
physician  prescribing  practices  and  adherence  to  the  guidelines  over  12  months.
Nursing  homes  engage  residents  and  their  family  members  in  antibiotic  use  and
stewardship  educational  efforts  to  ensure  clinicians  have  their  support  to  make
appropriate antibiotic use decisions. Working with residents and families will reduce the
perception  that  their  expectations  may  be  a  barrier  to  improving  antibiotic  use  in
nursing  homes.  The  Core  elements  of  antibiotic  stewardship  are  the  same  for  both
hospitals and nursing homes. This guide provides examples of how these elements can
be  applied  by  nursing  home  leadership,  clinicians  and  staff  to  monitor  and  improve
antibiotic  use.  Nursing  homes  are  encouraged  to  select  one  or  two  activities  to  start
with  and  over  time,  as  improvements  are  implemented,  expand  efforts  to  add  new
strategies  to  continue  improving  antibiotic  use.  Commit  now  to  ensure  antibiotic
stewardship policies and practices are in place to protect patients and improve clinical
care  in  nursing  homes.  Antibiotics  can  save  lives,  but  any  time  antibiotics  are  used,
they can cause side effects and contribute to the development of antibiotic resistance.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/antibiotic-use/hcp/core-elements/nursing-homes-antibiotic-stewardship.html
