Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Notice  on  HHS  Ownership  of  Respirator  Certification  Marks
NIOSH, on behalf of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), registered
several certification marks with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) that are
specific to NIOSH Approved® respirators. These registered certification marks currently
include  the  NIOSH  stylized  logos  with  and  without  full  text,  NIOSH  Approved®,  and
certification  marks,  such  as  N95®  and  P100®,  that  correspond  to  the  approved
respiratory  protection  levels  for  powered  and  non-powered  air-purifying  respirators
(APRs).  The  registered  certification  marks  can  be  found  on  the  NIOSH  Post-market
Evaluations Conducted by NIOSH webpage under the section Protecting End Users from
Wearing  Respirators  Being  Misrepresented  as  NIOSH  Approved®  Respirators.  Only
manufacturers who are NIOSH approval holders may use these registered certification
marks.  Any  misuse  of  the  aforementioned  marks  is  a  direct  violation  of  applicable
trademark law and may be subject to enforcement action. For more information, view
the  NIOSH  Conformity  Assessment  Letter  to  Manufacturers,  NIOSH  CA  2023-1056.
Misrepresented respirators include all respirators that are falsely marketed and sold as
NIOSH Approved respirators when they are not. Counterfeit respirators specifically refer
to  products  trying  to  copy  an  actual  NIOSH  Approved  model.  Both  counterfeit  and
misrepresented  respirators  may  not  be  capable  of  providing  the  appropriate  or
necessary respiratory protection to workers and users. NIOSH posts information about
misrepresented  and  counterfeit  respirators  here  to  alert  users,  purchasers,  and
manufacturers.  Learn  more  about  how  to  identify  NIOSH  Approved  respirators  and
counterfeits. View examples of counterfeit or misrepresented respirators below.  NIOSH
Certified  Equipment  List  Search  for  NIOSH  Approved  respirators.  This  is  the  official
listing of all NIOSH Approved respirators.  List of NIOSH Approved Filtering Facepiece
Respirators  Find  NIOSH  Approved  particulate  filtering  facepiece  respirators  and  their
donning  instructions.   Respirator  Conformity  Assessment  Notices  View  official  letters
announcing  NIOSH  polices,  notices  for  users  (e.g.,  changes  in  a  respirator’s  approval
status),  and  more.   Frequently  Asked  Questions  Get  answers  to  commonly  asked
questions about NIOSH Approved respirators and counterfeits.  
Subscribe to NPPTL’s listserv to stay informed about changes to a respirator’s approval
status and other relevant notifications. All NIOSH Approved respirators have a testing
and certification (TC) approval number (e.g., TC 84A-XXXX). The NIOSH approval label,
which  you  can  find  on  or  within  the  respirator  packaging,  includes  the  TC  approval
number.  Additionally,  an  abbreviated  approval  label  is  on  the  filtering  facepiece
respirator  (FFR)  itself  or  straps.  NIOSH  Approved  FFRs  will  always  have  one  of  the
following  designations:  You  can  verify  a  TC  approval  number  is  valid  by  checking
the  NIOSH  Certified  Equipment  List.  More  information  is  available  on  the  Respiratory
Protection  Information  Trusted  Source.  To  learn  more  about  how  to  identify  a  NIOSH
Approved  FFR,  check  out  the  fact  sheet  and  graphic  below.    How  to  tell  if  your  N95
Respirator is NIOSH Approved (2021)
PDF,  Image   Example  of  correct  exterior  markings  on  a  NIOSH  Approved  filtering
facepiece respirator. View larger version. How to Tell if Your N95® Respirator is NIOSH
Approved  NIOSH  Approved  N95  respiratory  protective  devices  are  the  most  common
type of filtering facepiece respirator (FFR) used in U.S. workplaces. Our video explains
how  to  determine  if  an  N95  FFR  is  NIOSH  approved,  including  required  labeling  and
where  to  look  to  confirm  an  approval  number.  It  also  provides  tips  for  recognizing
counterfeit  and  misrepresented  respirators.  Check  out  more  tips  to  spot  counterfeit
respirators.    Buyer  Beware!  NIOSH  has  identified  many  combination  chemical/filter
cartridges being sold on well-known online marketplaces claiming to have chemical and
P100® protection that are not part of a NIOSH Approved® respirator configuration and
are  misusing  the  registered  P100  certification  mark.  Such  cartridges  and  respirators
have not undergone NIOSH’s rigorous review process and may not provide the claimed
protection level and may pose a risk to the user. The examples above are counterfeit
combination cartridges using the same part numbers (e.g., 60921, 60923, 60924 and
60926) associated with authentic 3M combination cartridges that are part of a NIOSH
Approved  configuration.  For  example,  many  listings  incorrectly  or  falsely  claim  these
cartridges can be used with the 3M 6000, 7000 and FF-400 series facepieces. One way
to  identify  counterfeit  chemical  cartridge/filters  is  by  the  missing  information  on  the
abbreviated  label.  The  abbreviated  label  (i.e.,  markings)  on  cartridge/filters  that  are
part  of  a  NIOSH  Approved  configuration  must  indicate:  Please  Note:  Mandatory
information  is  missing  from  the  counterfeit  cartridges  shown  in  the  photo  examples
above. However, all of the information appears on the genuine cartridges shown below. 
Some  manufacturers/sellers  that  are  not  NIOSH  approval  holders  may  claim  their
cartridges/filters  are  compatible  with  facepieces  manufactured  by  NIOSH  approval
holders.  Users  cannot  use  these  products  in  place  of  the  cartridge/filter  component
associated  with  the  NIOSH  Approved  respirator.  If  so,  it  will  void  the  NIOSH  approval
and may not provide the claimed level of protection to the user.  Buyer Beware! NIOSH
has  identified  many  filters  sold  on  well-known  online  marketplaces  claiming  to  be
P100®  filters  that  are  not  part  of  a  NIOSH  Approved®  respirator  configuration.  The
examples  above  are  counterfeit  filters  using  the  same  part  numbers  associated  with
authentic  NIOSH  Approved  3M  P100  filters.  For  example,  many  listings  incorrectly  or
falsely claim these filters can be used with the 3M 6000 series facepieces. One way to
identify  counterfeit  P100  filters  is  by  the  missing  information  on  the  filters.  The
abbreviated label (i.e., markings) on NIOSH Approved P100 filters must indicate: Note
that some or most of this mandatory information is missing from the counterfeit filters
shown in the examples above. However, all of this information appears on the genuine
NIOSH Approved P100 filters (examples to the right). Some manufacturers/sellers that
are not NIOSH approval holders may claim their filters are compatible with facepieces
manufactured by NIOSH approval holders. Users cannot use these filters in place of the
filter component associated with the NIOSH Approved respirator. If so, it will void the
NIOSH approval and may not provide the claimed level of protection to the user. Breath
Buddy is NOT a NIOSH approval holder. They are falsely indicating product can be used
with half and full facepieces made by other NIOSH approval manufacturers. The Breath
Buddy Particulate Filter is NOT a component associated with a NIOSH approval.  Users
cannot  use  this  filter  in  place  of  the  filter  component  associated  with  the  NIOSH
Approved  respiratory  protective  device.  If  so,  it  will  void  the  NIOSH  approval.
(1/26/2022) Chengde Technology Co., Ltd. is misusing NIOSH test information regarding
Gosbuy  KN95  face  masks.   The  company  references  NPPTL  testing  claims  ,  using  an
image of the test setup from the assessment. The NIOSH website states manufacturers,
distributors,  suppliers,  and  importers  cannot  use  these  results  to  make  claims  about
their products. They cannot use the results to influence purchasers or make claims that
the product meets NIOSH approval requirements. Chengde Technology Co., Ltd. is not a
NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a  private  label  assignee.  (1/18/2022)   Good  Mask  Co.  is
misusing NIOSH test information regarding the “Good Folding KN95” mask; marketing
as  “CDC-approved,  NIOSH-certified.”  This  statement  is  misleading  because  CDC,
through  NIOSH,  does  not  approve  KN95  masks.  Nor  does  NIOSH  approve  any  other
respiratory  protective  device  solely  certified  to  international  standards.  Additionally,
Good  Mask  Co.  is  misusing  NIOSH  test  information.  The  product  package  indicates  it
meets Chinese standard GB 2626-2006 and submitted to NIOSH under an International
Respirator Assessment request. Good Mask Co.  markets the mask using results from
the assessment. The NIOSH website states manufacturers, distributors, suppliers, and
importers cannot use to make claims about their products. They cannot use the results
to  influence  purchasers  or  make  claims  that  the  product  meets  NIOSH  approval
requirements. Huizhou Green Communication Equipment Manufacturing Co., Ltd. is not
a NIOSH approval holder or a private label assignee. (1/13/2022)  Health Protective is
marketing a KN95 mask as “Certified KN95 respirator mask, adopted by the CDC.” This
statement is misleading because CDC, through NIOSH, does not approve KN95 masks.
Nor  does  NIOSH  approve  any  other  respiratory  protective  device  solely  certified  to
international  standards.  Additionally,  Health  Protective  is  misusing  NIOSH  test
information. The product package indicates it meets Chinese standard GB 2626-2006
and submitted to NIOSH under an International Respirator Assessment request. Health
Protective  advertises  the  KN95  mask  using  results  from  the  assessment.   The  NIOSH
website states  manufacturers,  distributors,  suppliers,  and  importers  cannot  use these
results  to  make  claims  about  their  products.  hey  cannot  use  the  results  to  influence
purchasers
 or
 make
 claims
 that
 the
 product
 meets
 NIOSH
 approval
requirements.  Changshu  City  Hengyun  Nonwoven  Products  Co.,  Ltd.  is  not  a  NIOSH
approval holder or a private label assignee. (1/11/2022)  Guangzhou Zhen Tao Culture
Media Co., Ltd. is marketing Benehal Model 8865 as a NIOSH Approved respirator for
kids. NIOSH does not approve filtering facepiece respirators for children. Suzhou Sanical
Protective  Product  Manufacturing  Co.  Ltd.  manufactures  Benehal  Model  8865,  under
NIOSH approval number TC-84A-7449. However, this unit is not NIOSH approved as a
filtering  facepiece  respirator  for  children.  (12/17/2021)   This  is  an  example  of  a
misrepresentation  of  NIOSH  approval.  SafeShield’s  marketing  of  model  FS-N95  is
misleading and may cause users to believe it is NIOSH approved. SafeShield references
certification  to  NIOSH  CFR  42.84  180-181  and  TEB-APR-STP-0059.  This  information  is
inaccurate.  SafeShield  is  not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  private  label  assignee,  and
model  FS-N95  is  NOT  NIOSH  approved.  (12/1/2021)   This  is  an  example  of  a
misrepresentation of a NIOSH approval. Megha International is marketing the Feel Safe
Mask N95 in a package marked NIOSH Certification. Megha International is not a NIOSH
approval holder or private label assignee. Feel Safe Mask N95 is NOT NIOSH approved.
N95  is  a  registered  certification  mark  owned  by  HHS.  Megha  International  does  not
have permission not use this certification mark because this is not a NIOSH Approved
respirator.  (11/5/2021)  Dongguan  AOXING  is  misusing  NIOSH  test  information  for  its
KN95  Protective  Mask  model  AX-KF95.  NIOSH  received  this  product  through  an
International  Respirator  Assessment  request.  Dongguan  AOXING  is  marketing  product
using  results  from  the  assessment.  The  NIOSH  website  states  manufacturers,
distributors,  suppliers,  and  importers  cannot  use  these  results  to  make  claims  about
their products. They cannot use the results to influence purchasers or make claims that
the  product  meets  NIOSH  approval  requirements.  Dongguan  AOXING  is  not  a  NIOSH
approval  holder  or  a  private  label  assignee.  (11/5/2021)   This  is  an  example  of  a
misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  approval.  Sobmex  is  marketing  numerous  filtering
facepiece respirators with NIOSH listed on the technical specifications sheet. Sobmex is
not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  private  label  assignee.  Sobmex  respirators  are  NOT
NIOSH approved. The NIOSH stylized logo is a registered certification mark owned by
HHS. Sobmex does not have permission to use this certification mark because this is
not a NIOSH Approved respirator. (9/9/2021) Moaron is NOT a NIOSH approval holder,
and they are misrepresenting product as meeting NIOSH approval. The product listing
claims  the  filter  “meets  NIOSH  P100-series.”  NIOSH  only  approves  whole  respirator
configurations,  not  individual  components.  The  Moaron  2091  P100  filter  is  NOT  a
component associated with a NIOSH approval. Moaron is not a NIOSH approval holder;
P100 is a registered certification mark owned by HHS. Therefore, Moaron does not have
permission  to  use  this  certification  mark.  Additionally,  Moaron  incorrectly  advertises
that it is compatible with other NIOSH approved products. Users cannot use this filter in
place  of  the  filter  component  associated  with  the  NIOSH  Approved  respiratory
protective device. If so, it will void the NIOSH approval. (9/9/2021)  This is an example
of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH approval. Pure&Safe is not a NIOSH approval holder
or a private label assignee. The Pure&Safe 5 Layered Reusable Anti-Pollution N95 Face
Mask with Activated Carbon Filter is not NIOSH approved. The NIOSH stylized logo is a
registered  certification  mark  owned  by  HHS.  Pure&Safe  does  not  have  permission  to
use this certification mark because this is not a NIOSH Approved respirator. (5/26/2021)
 This is an example of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH approval. U-SAFE is not a NIOSH
approval  holder  or  a  private  label  assignee.  U-SAFE  models  B120  and  B130  N95
particulate respirator are not NIOSH approved. The NIOSH stylized logo is a registered
certification  mark  owned  by  HHS.   U-SAFE  does  not  have  permission  to  use  this
certification mark because this is not a NIOSH Approved respirator. (4/30/2021)  This is
an  example  of  a  misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  approval.  Osprey  is  not  a  NIOSH
approval holder or a private label assignee. The Osprey N95 particulate respirator is not
NIOSH  approved.  (4/21/2021)   EPC  Product,  LLC  is  misrepresenting  product
manufactured by their company as a NIOSH Approved respirator. Models sold by EPC,
including but not limited to, PT-N95F-01, PT-N95C-02, and PT-N95CS-02 are NOT NIOSH
approved. EPC Product, LLC is not a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder.
(3/26/2021)   SS  Paper  Convertors  is  misrepresenting  protective  masks  as  NIOSH
approved. SS Paper Convertors is not a NIOSH approval holder or private label holder.
La’ Forte brand masks are not NIOSH approved. (2/26/2021)  Zhengzhou Ruipu Medical
Technology  Co.,  Ltd.  is  misusing  NIOSH  test  information  regarding  RUIPU  RIPE
DOCTORS  KN95.  The  product  package  indicates  it  meets  Chinese  standard  GB
2626-2006  and  submitted  to  NIOSH  under  an  International  Respirator  Assessment
request. Zhengzhou Ruipu Medical Technology Co., Ltd.  advertises the product using
results  from  the  assessment.  The  NIOSH  website  states  manufacturers,  distributors,
suppliers, and importers cannot use these results to make claims about their products.
They cannot use the results to influence purchasers or make claims that the product
meets NIOSH approval requirements. Zhengzhou Ruipu Medical Technology Co., Ltd. is
not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a  private  label  holder.  (2/18/2021)   Chengde
Technology  Co.,  Ltd.  is  misusing  NIOSH  test  information  regarding  WWDOLL  model
CD9501B  KN95  Foldable  Protective  Masks.  The  product  package  indicates  it  meets
Chinese  standard  GB  2626-2019  and  submitted  to  NIOSH  under  an  International
Respirator  Assessment  request.  Chengde  Technology  Co.,  Ltd.  markets  the  product
 using  results  from  the  assessment.  The  NIOSH  website  states  manufacturers,
distributors,  suppliers,  and  importers  cannot  use  these  results  to  make  claims  about
their products. They cannot use the results to influence purchasers or make claims that
the product meets NIOSH approval requirements. Chengde Technology Co., Ltd. is not a
NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a  private  label  holder.  (2/18/2021)   Raxwell  Industrial
Technology  Co.,  Ltd.  is  misusing  NIOSH  test  information  regarding  Raxwell  model
RX9501 KN95 Face Masks. The product package indicates it meets Chinese standard GB
2626-2006  and  submitted  to  NIOSH  under  an  International  Respirator  Assessment
request. Raxwell Industrial Technology Co., Ltd. markets the product using results from
the assessment. The NIOSH website states manufacturers, distributors, suppliers, and
importers cannot use these results to make claims about their products. They cannot
use the results to influence purchasers or make claims that the product meets NIOSH
approval  requirements.  Additionally,  Raxwell  Industrial  Technology  Co.,  Ltd.  is
misrepresenting Raxwell model RX9501P N95 as a NIOSH Approved respirator. Raxwell
Industrial Technology Co., Ltd. is not a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder.
(2/18/2021)  This is an example of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH Approved product.
Products  labeled  TENAMYD  FM  and  sold  by  Clean  Life  360  are  NOT  NIOSH  approved.
The  NIOSH  stylized  logo  is  a  registered  certification  mark  owned  by  HHS.  These
companies  cannot  use  this  certification  mark  because  this  is  not  a  NIOSH  Approved
respirator. (2/4/2021)  This is an example of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH approved
product. Zelbuck is not a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder. Respirators
and  replacement  cartridges  and  filters  marked  as  Zelbuck  are  NOT  NIOSH  approved.
The NIOSH stylized logo is a registered certification mark owned by HHS. Zelbuck does
not have permission to use the certification mark because this is not a NIOSH Approved
respirator.  (12/21/2020)   This  is  an  example  of  a  misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH
approval. Yamada Safety First is not a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder.
Yamada  brand  masks,  including  models  5241  and  8242,  are  not  NIOSH  approved.
(12/3/2020)   This  is  an  example  of  a  misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  approval.  Neither
Pangolin nor Pangocare is a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder. Pangocare
models  MSKP4001  and  MSKP4002  are  not  NIOSH  approved.  N95®  is  a  registered
certification mark owned by HHS. Pangolin and Pangocare do not have permission to
use this mark because this is not a NIOSH Approved respirator. (12/3/2020)  This is an
example  of  a  misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  approval.  Model  TY  0424  is  not  NIOSH
approved. Xiantao Fushi Protective Products Co., Ltd. is not a NIOSH approval holder or
a private label holder. N95 is a registered certification mark owned by HHS.  Xiantao
Fushi Protective Products Co., Ltd. do not have permission to use this mark because this
is  not  a  NIOSH  Approved  respirator.  (11/5/2020)   This  is  an  example  of  a
misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  approval.  DUKAL  is  not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a
private label holder. (10/22/2020)
*UPDATE  —  Shanghai  Dasheng  Health  Products  Manufacture  Co.,  Ltd  issued  a  user
notice for select lots of the DUKALTM N95 respirator. (12/18/2020)  This is an example
of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH approved product. Products labeled as ECO Solutions
NIOSH  N95  are  NOT  NIOSH  approved.  (9/29/2020)   NIOSH  received  notice  of  a
misrepresentation of NIOSH approval for Valmy model VRN95. This model has not been
NIOSH approved since 2017. This product is no longer compliant to the NIOSH approval.
(8/25/2020)  This is an example of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH approval. INSAFE is
not a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder. (8/25/20)  This is an example of a
misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  Approved  product.  Products  labeled  as  DermaCare  or
Espomega,  with  model  numbers  HY8710,  HY8812,  and  HY8816,  are  NOT  NIOSH
approved. (8/7/2020)  This is an example of a misrepresentation of a NIOSH approval.
Intech  Safety  Pvt.  Ltd.  is  not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a  private  label  holder.
(8/7/2020)   NIOSH  received  notice  of  websites  selling  and  misrepresenting  Safe  Life
model B130 and model B150 as NIOSH approved. These models have not been NIOSH
approved since 2015. This product is no longer compliant to the NIOSH approval and
sold without Safe Life Corporation’s permission. (7/24/2020)  NIOSH received notice of
websites  selling  and  misrepresenting  SAS  model  8617A  as  NIOSH  approved  under
TC-84A-4276.  This  is  no  longer  a  valid  NIOSH  approval  number.  SAS  allowed  private
labeling  for  this  model  until  SAS  voluntarily  rescinded  the  NIOSH  approval  in  2014.
Additionally,  SAS  did  not  give  permission  for  the  manufacturing  or  selling  of  this
product.  (7/16/2020)   This  is  an  example  of  counterfeit  respirators.  This  counterfeit
respirator  uses  NIOSH  approval  holder  Shining  Star  Electronic  Technology’s  NIOSH
approval  number  (TC-84A-8125,  model  SS6001-N95)  without  their  permission.  The
counterfeit box is glossy and primarily green, and the package contains 2 stacks of 10
units.  TC-84A-8125  is  a  valid  NIOSH  approval  number.  However,  please  take  extra
precautions when purchasing to ensure you receive the authentic product and not the
counterfeit version. (7/10/2020)     NIOSH has not issued any letters to Foshan Flying
Medical Products Co., Ltd. Alterations to this letter made it appear that Foshan Flying
Medical  Products  was  the  recipient.  Any  N95  filtering  facepiece  respirators  for  sale
accompanied by this letter are NOT NIOSH approved. (6/3/2020)   Translation of letter:
“Makrite Hubei Industrial Co., Ltd has not signed any purchase contracts or agreement
with any company or issued any distribution authorization. Anyone claiming that they
have  authorization  or  a  purchase  contract  with  Makrite  Hubei  Industrial  Co.,  Ltd  is
forgery  and  infringement.  In  case  of  any  business  or  individual  claiming  to  have  the
authorization letter or certification from Makrite Hubei Industrial Co., Ltd, please report
to the police immediately.”
______________________________ Makrite Hubei Industrial Co., Ltd is a subsidiary of NIOSH
approval  holder  Makrite  Industries  Inc.  They  issued  a  notice  to  alert  customers  of  a
product potentially manufactured without the permission of Makrite. This product may
also appear as a misrepresentation of NIOSH approval. (5/15/2020)  This is an example
of  a  misrepresentation  of  a  NIOSH  approved  product.  Products  made  by  Jiangyin
Chang-hung Industrial or labeled GRANDE are not NIOSH approved. The numbers listed
on  the  packaging,  TC-84A-4503,  -84A-4639,  -84A-4643,  and  -84A-4646,  are  not  valid
NIOSH approval numbers. (5/14/2020)  The website, www.covidness.net, misrepresents
these  two  examples  of  respirators  as  NIOSH  approved.   The  website  lists  the
SEKURA-321  as  NIOSH  approved  with  approval  number  TC-84A-6660.  This  is  a  valid
NIOSH approval number issued to Makrite. However, the website is selling a counterfeit
respirator  and  using  Makrite’s  approval  number  without  their  permission.  The  second
example is MIUTON. The website misrepresents it as NIOSH certified but is not NIOSH
approved. (5/13/2020)  This is an example of a counterfeit respirator. The counterfeit
respirator  uses  Shanghai  Dasheng  Health  Products  Manufacture  Co.  Ltd’s  NIOSH
approval  number,  TC  84A-4335,  without  their  permission.  SOUND  is  not  a  NIOSH
approval holder or a private label holder. (4/28/2020) NIOSH did not issue this letter and
test report to Shenzhen Ende Medical Technology Co., Ltd. Although they appear to be
from NIOSH, these documents include alterations and false information. Shenzhen Ende
Medical Technology Co., Ltd. is not a NIOSH approval holder. Any N95 filtering facepiece
respirators  from  Shenzhen  Ende  claiming  NIOSH  approval  or  accompanied  by  these
documents  are  not  NIOSH  approved.(4/27/2020)  These  are  examples  of  counterfeit
respirators.  The  counterfeit  respirators  use  Shanghai  Dasheng  Health  Products
Manufacture Co. Ltd’s NIOSH approval numbers without their permission. These models
include,  but are not limited  to,  models:  Note that any  SDH  respirators  with  ear loops
are not NIOSH approved. (4/17/2020)  This is an example of a misrepresentation of a
NIOSH  approval.  G  &  F  Products  is  not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a  private  label
holder. (4/9/2020)  Any respirators sold as Maskin are no longer NIOSH approved. They
are counterfeit, or they are no longer compliant to the NIOSH approval. (4/9/2020)  This
is an example of a counterfeit respirator. Medicos is selling an N95 respirator using the
Moldex approval number and label without Moldex’s permission. Medicos is not a NIOSH
approval  holder  or  private  label  holder.  (3/12/2020)   This  is  an  example  of  a
misrepresentation  of  the  NIOSH  approval.  Yark  is  not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder  or  a
private  label  holder.  Additionally,  respirators  from  the  box  include  the  CE  (European)
approval mark and NIOSH N95. This is not an acceptable format for a NIOSH approved
respirator.  (3/5/2020)    The  Guangzhou  Weini  Technology  &  Development  Co.,  Ltd.
(GWT)  respirator  with  model  number  K320  is  not  NIOSH  approved.  NIOSH  rescinded
GWT respirator approvals in 2009. Please refer to our user notice for more information.
GWT  respirators  bearing  any  NIOSH  approval  number  listed  on  the  user  notice
is not NIOSH approved. (2/10/2020) There are no markings on the face of the respirator.
(11/6/2019)  NIOSH  does  not  approve  any  type  of  respiratory  protection  for  kids.
(11/6/2019)  There  are  no  markings  on  the  face  of  the  respirator.  (11/6/2019)  This
product is not NIOSH approved. Look at the markings on the front. The logo is wrong,
there  is  no  approval  number  (TC-84A-xxxx).  (11/6/2019)  This  product  is  not  NIOSH
approved. No NIOSH logo or approval number on the face of the product. (11/6/2019)
This product is not NIOSH approved. No NIOSH logo or approval number on the face of
the product. (11/6/2019) Images here are examples of counterfeit respirators and sold
as  if  they  are  NIOSH  approved.  However,  the  manufacturer,  Anhui  Tongcheng  YaGe
Health Materials, Co., Ltd, is not a NIOSH approval holder. Nor are they a private label
holder. (10/23/2019)  This is an example of misrepresentation of the NIOSH-approval.
Vogmask® is not a NIOSH approval holder. The wording on their website is misleading
and not accurate.  (10/07/19)  This is an example of two counterfeit respirators. Valpro
Safety uses 3M’s approval number (TC-84A-0007) to sell  the Ranger 821 and Ranger
821V  respirators.  3M  did  not  give  Valpro  Safety  permission  to  use  their  approval
number or label.  (6/19/19)  This is an example of a counterfeit respirator. Pacifico Salud
SAC  is  selling  units  using  Suzhou  Sanical  Protection  (SSP)  approval  number
(TC-84A-6766) and label without SSP’s permission. Additionally, there are two errors on
the  respirator  package.  The  first  error  is  that  they  claim  the  N95  respirator  is  96%
efficient. The bottom right corner of the package includes the second error. It states the
respirator  is  manufactured  by  Benehal  China,  who  is  not  a  NIOSH  approval  holder.  
(1/4/2019)   This  counterfeit  respirator,  NT-V2  Nano  Bi-Directional  respirator,  is
advertised  as  a  NIOSH  approved,  using  a  NIOSH  approval  number.  The  counterfeit
respirator uses a 3M TC number (TC 84A-0427) without 3M’s permission. Additionally,
the  TC  number  belongs  to  a  3M  full  facepiece  respirator  with  cartridges.  Pasture
Pharma did not manufacture this counterfeit respirator.  This respirator is not a NIOSH
Approved respirator. FitSeal, is not a NIOSH approval holder or a private label holder.
(2/19/2019)   This  is  an  example  of  misrepresentation  of  the  NIOSH  approval.  NIOSH
rescinded all approvals for Wein Products (WPI) in 2011. However, the manufacturer’s
website continues to state the ViraMask N99ESC is NIOSH certified. View the user notice
announcing the rescission.  NIOSH received notice of a counterfeit N95 Respirator. The
TC number and private label holder are valid. However, note the misspelling of NIOSH
on the front of the respirator.     These are examples of counterfeit respirators and sold
as  if  they  are  NIOSH  approved.  However,  the  manufacturer,  Zubi-Ola,  is  not  a  NIOSH
approval  holder  or  a  private  label  holder.   If  you  suspect  you  have  a  counterfeit  or
misrepresented respirator, contact NIOSH at ppeconcerns@cdc.gov. Please provide the
following details with your email: The NIOSH stylized logos (shown below), N99, N100,
R95,  P95,  P100,  PAPR100-N,  PAPR100-P,  and  HE  are  certification  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) registered in the United States.  N95
and  NIOSH  Approved  are  certification  marks  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and
Human  Services  (HHS)  registered  in  the  United  States  and  several  international
jurisdictions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/usernotices/counterfeitResp.html
