Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  June  4,  2021  /  70(22);807–810  Duncan  Chanda,
MBChB1; Peter A. Minchella, PhD2; Davies Kampamba, MPH1; Megumi Itoh, MD2; Jonas
Z.  Hines,  MD2;  Sombo  Fwoloshi,  MMed1;  Mary  Adetinuke  Boyd,  MD2;  Kalongo
Hamusonde,  MSc2;  Lameck  Chirwa,  MSc1;  Kotey  Nikoi1;  Robert  Chirwa1;  Mpanji
Siwingwa, MPH1; Suilanji Sivile, MMed1; Khozya D. Zyambo, MMed1; Aggrey Mweemba,
MMed1;  Nyuma  Mbewe,  MBChB1;  Katongo  H.  Mutengo,  MMed1;  Kennedy  Malama,
MBChB1;  Simon  Agolory,  MD2;  Lloyd  B.  Mulenga,  MD,  PhD1  (View  author  affiliations)
What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?  The  effect  of  HIV  infection  on  COVID-19
outcomes  is  unclear.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  HIV  infection  was  not  associated
with  poor  outcomes  among  patients  hospitalized  for  COVID-19  in  Zambia.  However,
HIV-positive  patients  with  severe  HIV  disease  were  more  likely  to  develop  severe
COVID-19  or  die  of  COVID-19.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?
Ensuring  that  persons  maintain  HIV  disease  control,  including  by  maintaining  ART
treatment  continuity  and  adherence,  achieving  viral  suppression,  and  addressing
underlying  medical  conditions,  could  help  reduce  COVID-19–associated  morbidity  and
mortality in sub-Saharan Africa. Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Table 1
Table 2 The effect of HIV infection on COVID-19 outcomes is unclear. Studies in South
Africa (1) and the United Kingdom (2) found an independent association between HIV
infection and COVID-19 mortality; however, other studies have not found an association
between  poor  COVID-19  outcomes  and  either  HIV  status  among  hospitalized  patients
(3–5) or HIV-associated factors such as CD4 count, viral load, or type of antiretroviral
therapy (ART) (6). The effect of HIV infection on COVID-19 outcomes remains an urgent
question  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  where  many  countries  are  experiencing  dual  HIV  and
COVID-19 epidemics, and capacity to treat severe COVID-19 is limited. Using data from
patients  with  probable  or  confirmed  COVID-19  admitted  to  specialized  treatment
centers during March–December 2020 in Zambia, the Zambian Ministry of Health and
CDC  assessed  the  relationship  between  HIV  infection  and  severe  COVID-19  and
COVID-19–associated death. Among 443 patients included in the study, 122 (28%) were
HIV-positive, and of these, 91 (89%) were receiving ART at the time of hospitalization.
HIV status alone was not significantly associated with severe COVID-19 at admission or
during hospitalization or with COVID-19–associated death. However, among HIV-positive
persons, those with severe HIV disease were more likely to develop severe COVID-19
and  were  at  increased  risk  for  COVID-19–associated  death.  Ensuring  that  persons
maintain  HIV  disease  control,  including  maintaining  ART  continuity  and  adherence,
achieving  viral  suppression,  and  addressing  and  managing  underlying  medical
conditions,  could  help  reduce  COVID-19–associated  morbidity  and  mortality  in
sub-Saharan  Africa.  Zambia  is  a  landlocked  country  in  southeastern  Africa,  with  an
estimated  population  of  17.4  million*  and  a  generalized  HIV/AIDS  epidemic  with  HIV
prevalence  among  persons  aged  ≥15  years  of  12.1%  (7).  Beginning  in  March  2020,
patients with a diagnosis of probable or laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 in Zambia were
admitted  to  one  of  five  Zambia  Ministry  of  Health  specialized  COVID-19  treatment
centers  located  in  the  capital  city  of  Lusaka  (two  treatment  centers)  and  in  Ndola,
Kabwe,  and  Livingstone.  Confirmed  cases  were  those  with  positive  reverse
transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction  or  rapid  antigen  test  results  for  SARS-CoV-2,
the virus that causes COVID-19. Patients with diagnosed probable cases had radiologic
evidence suggestive of COVID-19 with acute respiratory symptoms. Treatment centers
have  specifically  designated  isolation  and  treatment  units  staffed  by  clinicians  and
nurses  trained  in  COVID-19  clinical  management.  All  patients  who  received  medical
care  for  COVID-19  in  these  centers  during  March–December  2020  and  who  provided
verbal  consent  to  receive  treatment  were  enrolled  in  the  COVID-19  clinical  outcomes
study.  Patient  demographic,  clinical,  and  survival  time  data  were  collected  during
hospitalization  until  patients  died  or  were  discharged.  Data  were  primarily  collected
electronically in real time by trained staff members using a standardized case record
form†;  among  patients  who  had  received  COVID-19  care  before  the  start  of  data
collection,  medical  records  were  reviewed  and  abstracted  into  the  case  record  form.
Study  staff  members  contacted  discharged  patients  by  telephone  28  days  after
admission to determine their health status. Severe COVID-19 was defined as having an
oxygen  saturation  <90%,  respiratory  rate  >30  breaths/minute,  or  a  need  for  oxygen
therapy.§ COVID-19 severity was assessed at admission and during hospitalization. HIV
status  was  self-reported,  and  patients  with  unknown  status  or  deemed  eligible  and
consented  for  testing  were  tested  at  admission.  Underlying  medical  conditions  were
self-reported  and  included  cardiac  disease,  hypertension,  diabetes,  other  pulmonary
disease,  active  tuberculosis  (TB),  previous  TB,  asthma,  kidney  disease,  liver  disease,
neurologic disorder, asplenia, malignant neoplasm, and current smoking. The number
of underlying conditions was summed for each patient. Patients with severe HIV disease
were defined as those meeting one or more of the following criteria: 1) severely anemic
(hemoglobin <8.0 g/dL); 2) CD4 <200 cells/μL; 3) active TB, including patients taking
anti-TB  medication;  or  4)  underweight  (body  mass  index  [BMI]  <18.5  kg/m2).
HIV-positive patients who did not meet any of the conditions were considered to have
controlled  HIV  infection.  The  three  primary  outcomes  assessed  in  the  study  were  1)
severe COVID-19 at admission; 2) severe COVID-19 during hospitalization; and 3) death.
Mixed-effects  logistic  regression  models  were  used  to  assess  associations  between
exposure variables (age, sex, number of underlying conditions, and HIV status) and the
two severe COVID-19 outcomes (at admission and during hospitalization). Mixed-effects
Cox  proportional  hazards  regression  models  were  used  to  examine  time  to
COVID-19–associated  death  in  relation  to  exposure  variables.  All  models  included  a
random-effects  term  for  treatment  center,  and  other  covariates  were  sex,  age,  and
number of underlying health conditions. Cox models were also adjusted for COVID-19
severity  at  admission.  Similar  mixed-effects  logistic  regression  and  mixed-effects  Cox
proportional  hazards  models  were  used  to  assess  COVID-19  outcomes  among
HIV-positive  persons  stratified  by  HIV  infection  control  status;  covariates  in  these
models  included  sex,  age,  and  treatment  center  (random  effects  term).  Data  were
analyzed  using  R  (version  4.0.2;  R  Foundation).  An  alpha  level  of  0.05  was  used  to
assess  statistical  significance.  The  study  protocol  was  approved  by  the  University  of
Zambia  Biomedical  Research  Ethics  Committee,  reviewed  by  CDC,  and  conducted
consistent  with  applicable  federal  law  and  CDC  policy.¶  Among  612  hospitalized
patients  who  were  eligible  for  the  study,  443  (72%)  had  HIV  status  recorded.  Among
those patients, 122 (28%) were HIV-positive, and among the 102 HIV-positive persons
who  provided  information  on  ART  status,  91  (89%)  were  receiving  ART  (Table  1).
Although sex and mean age did not differ by HIV status, among HIV-negative patients,
the proportion of those aged ≥60 years was higher than the proportion of those aged
<60  years  (p  =  0.002).  HIV-positive  patients  also  were  more  likely  to  be  anemic
(defined as hemoglobin [Hb] <12 g/dL for women and Hb <13 g/dL for men) (p<0.001)
or  severely  anemic  (Hb  <8  g/dL)  (p  =  0.004)  and  to  report  having  two  or  more
underlying  medical  conditions  than  were  HIV-negative  patients  (p  =  0.017).  Age  ≥60
years  and  having  two  or  more  underlying  medical  conditions  were  associated  with
severe COVID-19; however, HIV status alone was not associated with severe COVID-19
at admission or during hospitalization (Table 2). Similarly, male sex, age ≥60 years, and
reporting two or more underlying medical conditions were significantly associated with
COVID-19–associated  death,  but  HIV  status  was  not.  However,  among  HIV-infected
patients,  compared  with  patients  with  controlled  HIV,  severe  HIV  disease  was
associated with severe COVID-19 at admission (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 3.91; 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.69–9.69) or during hospitalization (aOR = 4.42; 95% CI =
1.83–11.66)  and  with  increased  COVID-19–associated  death  (aOR  =  3.27;  1.21–8.79).
Top  HIV  infection  was  not  independently  associated  with  worse  outcomes  among
patients  hospitalized  for  COVID-19  in  Zambia.  This  finding  is  consistent  with  results
from smaller studies among hospitalized patients in North America (3), Europe (4), and
South Africa (5). However, among HIV-positive patients hospitalized for COVID-19, those
with  severe  HIV  disease  were  more  likely  to  develop  severe  COVID-19  or  to  die  of
COVID-19 compared with those with controlled HIV disease. Ensuring that HIV-positive
persons  maintain  disease  control,  including  sustaining  ART  continuity  and  adherence,
achieving  viral  suppression  (<1,000  copies  of  HIV  RNA  per  mL),  and  addressing
underlying  medical  conditions,  could  reduce  COVID-19–associated  morbidity  and
mortality in sub-Saharan Africa, including Zambia. The relationship between severe HIV
disease and poor COVID-19 outcomes underscores the importance of Zambia’s progress
toward  ending  the  HIV  epidemic  and  of  efforts  to  maintain  HIV  services  during  the
COVID-19 pandemic. As of June 2020, approximately 90% of an estimated 1.2 million
HIV-positive  Zambians  were  receiving  ART,  and  nearly  90%  of  those  patients  were
virally  suppressed  (7).  In  addition,  since  2019,  approximately  350,000  HIV-positive
Zambians  have  completed  a  course  of  TB  preventive  treatment.**  Since  the  first
COVID-19 cases were detected in Zambia in March 2020, the national HIV program has
made  a  concerted  effort  to  continue  to  identify  persons  with  new  HIV  infections  and
initiate  ART  as  part  of  routine  HIV  case  management.  To  ensure  that  all  patients
receiving ART have safe and uninterrupted access to treatment, the national program
also  took  steps  to  accelerate  dispensation  of  multimonth  ART  prescriptions  for  stable
patients  (K  Mweebo,  CDC,  unpublished  data,  2021).  These  efforts  might  have  helped
some HIV-positive patients adhere to ART and possibly avoid more severe COVID-19 as
well  as  complications  from  HIV.  However,  there  is  still  much  that  remains  unknown
about the impact of COVID-19 on persons living with HIV infection. The findings in this
report are subject to at least three limitations. First, the small sample size might have
contributed  to  the  absence  of  a  significant  association  between  HIV  status  and
COVID-19 outcomes. Whereas cohort studies with larger populations in South Africa (1)
and the United Kingdom (2) reported that HIV-positive persons were at increased risk
for COVID-19–associated death, smaller studies among hospitalized patients (including
the current study) have not (3–5).  Second,  differences  in  findings  between  these two
types of studies might also be attributable to collider bias (wherein HIV and COVID-19
might  independently  lead  to  hospitalization,  distorting  the  association  between  the
conditions)  (8),  which  might  also  limit  the  generalizability  of  these  findings  beyond
hospitalized  patients.  Finally,  as  with  many  studies  conducted  during  emergency
responses, data completeness was a limitation because clinicians who were responsible
for  data  collection  were  also  responding  to  other  urgent  demands  at  the  COVID-19
treatment centers. Approximately one quarter of eligible patients were excluded from
the study because critical information about them was missing; moreover, some data,
including  CD4  counts  and  HIV  viral  load  testing  results,  were  sparse  among  included
patients. The findings from this study indicate that HIV-positive persons with severe HIV
disease appear to be more likely to develop severe COVID-19 and die of COVID-19 than
those with controlled HIV infections. In Zambia and other sub-Saharan African countries
with  high  HIV  prevalence  and  limited  capacity  to  treat  severe  COVID-19,  continued
efforts  to  ensure  that  HIV-positive  persons  maintain  control  of  their  HIV  infections
through retention in care and adherence to ART and by addressing and managing their
underlying  medical  conditions,  could  help  limit  COVID-19–associated  morbidity  and
mortality and HIV-associated morbidity. Larger studies that include more robust data on
CD4  counts  and  viral  loads  might  provide  a  more  nuanced  picture  of  the  potential
impact  of  HIV  disease  status  on  COVID-19–associated  morbidity  and  mortality.  Top
Study  participants,  hospital  management,  and  staff  members  at  Levy  Mwanawasa
Teaching  Hospital,  University  Teaching  Hospital,  Kabwe  General  Hospital,  Ndola
Teaching Hospital, and Livingstone General Hospital. Top Corresponding author: Peter
A.  Minchella,  klf9@cdc.gov.  Top  1Zambian  Ministry  of  Health,  Lusaka,  Zambia;  2CDC,
Lusaka,  Zambia.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International
Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of
interest.
 No
 potential
 conflicts
 of
 interest
 were
 disclosed.
 Top
 *
https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/static/16a49aca1982c8b59274c8eb0cf6ff0b/ZA-
summary.pdf
 †
https://www.who.int/teams/health-care-readiness-clinical-unit/covid-19/data-platform
 §
https://apps.who.int/iris/rest/bitstreams/1328457/retrieve  ¶ 45 C.F.R. part 46.102(l)(2),
21 C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a; 44 U.S.C. Sect. 3501 et
seq.  **  U.S.  President’s  Emergency  Plan  for  AIDS  Relief  data  for  Zambia.
https://data.pepfar.gov/
 Top
 Top
 Abbreviations:
 ART
 =
 antiretroviral
 therapy;
BMI
 =
 body
 mass
 index;
 CRP
 =
 C-reactive
 protein;
 Hb
 =
 hemoglobin;
IQR = interquartile range; IU = international units; N/A = not applicable; SD = standard
deviation; TB = tuberculosis; VL = viral load; WBC = white blood cell count.* Reported
as number (%) unless indicated otherwise. Denominator is total number by HIV status
unless indicated otherwise. HIV status was self-reported and confirmed by HIV test at
hospital admission (if the patient specifically consented to an HIV test).† P-values <0.05
were considered statistically significant. Comparison of proportions was via chi-square
test,  comparison  of  normally  distributed  variables  was  via  Welch’s  two  sample  t-test,
and comparison of nonnormally distributed variables was via Wilcoxon test. P-values for
age ≥60 years and two or more comorbidities are for binary variables (i.e., <60 versus
≥60 years and less than two versus two or more comorbidities).§ COVID-19 cases were
confirmed  via  SARS-CoV-2  reverse  transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction  or
SARS-CoV-2  antigen  detecting  rapid  diagnostic  test.  Probable  cases  had  acute
respiratory  symptoms  with  radiological  evidence  that  was  suggestive  of  COVID-19.¶
ART  status  was  self-reported.**  Denominator  was  less  than  the  total  number  by  HIV
status.†† Anemia was defined as Hb <12 g/dL for women and Hb <13 g/dL for men.§§
Severe anemia was defined as Hb <8 g/dL.¶¶ Comorbidities composite term is based on
the  number  of  self-reported  comorbidities.  Eligible  comorbidities  included  chronic
cardiac  disease,  hypertension,  pulmonary  disease,  active  TB,  previous  TB,  asthma,
kidney disease, liver disease, neurologic disorder, diabetes, current smoking, asplenia,
and malignant neoplasm. Conditions commonly linked to COVID-19 severity (diabetes
and  hypertension)  and  related  to  HIV  (active  TB)  are  listed  in  the  table.***  Severe
COVID-19  was  defined  as  one  or  more  of  the  following  conditions:  oxygen  saturation
<90%,  respiratory  rate  >30  breaths/minute,  and  need  for  oxygen  therapy.  Top
Abbreviations:  aHR  =  adjusted  hazard  ratio;  aOR  =  adjusted  odds  ratio;  BMI  =  body
mass  index;  CI  =  confidence  interval;  Ref  =  referent;  TB  =  tuberculosis.*  Underlying
medical conditions included cardiac disease, hypertension, diabetes, other pulmonary
disease,  active  TB,  previous  TB,  asthma,  kidney  disease,  liver  disease,  neurologic
disorder,  asplenia,  malignant  neoplasm,  and  current  smoking.†  Oxygen  saturation
<90%, respiratory rate >30 breaths/minute, or need for oxygen therapy.§ Mixed-effects
logistic  regression  models  were  used  for  severe  COVID-19  outcomes.  Models  were
adjusted for sex, age (<60 and ≥60 years), comorbidities (fewer than two and two or
more), and treatment center (random effects term). Cox proportional hazards models
were used for COVID-19–associated death outcome. Models were adjusted for sex, age
(<60 and ≥60 years), underlying medical conditions (fewer than two and two or more),
COVID-19  severity  at  admission  (mild  and  severe)  and  treatment  center  (random
effects  term).  Reference  categories  for  exposure  variables  in  all  models  were  female
sex,  age  <60  years,  fewer  than  two  underlying  medical  conditions,  and  HIV-negative
status.¶ HIV-positive patients were classified as having severe HIV disease if they met
one  or  more  of  the  following  conditions:  severely  anemic  (<8.0  g/dL),  CD4  <200
cells/μL, active TB, and underweight (BMI <18.5 kg/m2). Top Suggested citation for this
article:  Chanda  D,  Minchella  PA,  Kampamba  D,  et  al.   COVID-19  Severity  and
COVID-19–Associated Deaths Among Hospitalized Patients with HIV Infection — Zambia,
March–December  2020.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2021;70:807–810.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7022a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/wr/mm7022a2.htm
