Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / October 1, 2021 / 70(39);1374–1376 On September
24, 2021, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Sharyn E. Parks,
PhD1; Nicole Zviedrite, MPH1; Samantha E. Budzyn, MPH1,2; Mark J. Panaggio, PhD3;
Emma  Raible3;  Marc  Papazian4;  Jake  Magid,  MEng4;  Faruque  Ahmed,  PhD1;  Amra
Uzicanin, MD1; Lisa C. Barrios, DrPH1 (View author affiliations) Views equals page views
plus  PDF  downloads  Beginning  in  January  2021,  the  U.S.  government  prioritized
ensuring continuity of learning for all students during the COVID-19 pandemic (1). To
estimate  the  extent  of  COVID-19–associated  school  disruptions,  CDC  and  the  Johns
Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory used a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (2)
statistical  approach  to  estimate  the  most  likely  actual  learning  modality  based  on
patterns  observed  in  past  data,  accounting  for  conflicting  or  missing  information  and
systematic Internet searches (3) for COVID-19–related school closures. This information
was used to assess how many U.S. schools were open, and in which learning modalities,
during  August  1–September  17,  2021.  Learning  modalities  included  1)  full  in-person
learning,  2)  a  hybrid  of  in-person  and  remote  learning,  and  3)  full  remote  learning.
Multiple data sources were combined to estimate the learning modality for public and
public charter school districts in the United States using HMM; sources included Burbio,*
MCH  Strategic  Data,†  American  Enterprise  Institute–Return  to  Learn,§  and  state
dashboards.¶ Weekly learning modalities (full in-person, hybrid, and full remote) during
August 1, 2020–July 31, 2021 were used to select the optimal weights for each reported
modality in order to infer the most likely actual learning modality. The trained HMM was
applied weekly during August 1–September 17, 2021. In addition to using HMM, since
February 2020, CDC has also tracked district and individual public and private school
closures  attributed  to  COVID-19  and  estimated  the  number  of  students  and  teachers
affected  by  these  closures.  School  closure  data  were  obtained  via  daily  systematic
Internet  searches,  as  described  previously  (3),  which  identified  publicly  announced
COVID-19–related closures lasting ≥1 day. School or district closure was defined as a
transition from being open to being closed for in-person instruction. Fully in-person and
hybrid  (i.e.,  latter  includes  both  in-person  and  remote)  learning  modalities  were
classified as open; fully remote learning modalities (if stated as offered during closure)
were  classified  as  closed.  Closure  dates  and  reasons  were  recorded  and  linked  to
publicly  available  education  data.**  HMM  was  fitted  using  the  Pomegranate  module
(version  0.14.3)  for  Python  (version  3.7.6).  COVID-SC  data  were  imported  into  SAS
(version  9.4;  SAS  Institute)  for  analysis.  These  activities  were  reviewed  by  CDC  and
were conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC policy.†† For the week
ending September 17, 2021, HMM data were available for 73% of kindergarten through
grade  12  public  school  students  in  8,700  districts  nationwide  and  varied  by  state
(Supplementary Figure, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/109969). Among these districts,
8,343  (96%)  were  offering  full  in-person  learning,  322  (4%)  were  offering  hybrid
learning,  and  35  (0.4%)  were  offering  full  remote  learning.  The  largest  number  of
districts with full remote learning (14) were in the West Census Region, followed by the
South  (11).  Seven  Midwest  and  two  Northeast  districts  offered  full  remote  learning.
During  August  2–September  17,  2021,  systematic  Internet  searches  identified
announcements of 248 public districtwide closures and 384 individual school closures
for  ≥1  day  attributable  to  COVID-19.  Closures  affected  1,801  schools  (1.5%  of  all
schools), 933,913 students, and 59,846 teachers in 44 states (Figure). The number of
closures was highest in the South. The findings in this report are subject to at least five
limitations.  First,  both  HMM  and  daily  Internet  searches  were  informed  by  passive
collection  of  available  information  obtained  through  school  and  district  surveys,
public-facing website pages, and media reports; therefore, they are likely not inclusive
of  all  school  districts  nationwide.  Second,  HMM  did  not  account  for  the  possibility  of
serial errors in sources (i.e., sources that are incorrect week after week). Third, districts
included in HMM were larger than those excluded, thus limiting generalizability. Fourth,
HMM  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  probabilities  for  subsequent  weeks  are
determined exclusively by the modality for the current week with no change in these
probabilities  over  time  or  from  district  to  district,  both  of  which  might  not  always  be
true. The results do not speak directly to level of impact because districts and schools
may  have  different  thresholds  for  closure  or  change  in  modality.  Finally,  regional
differences  must  be  interpreted  cautiously.  The  timing  of  return  to  school  likely
accounts for some regional variation in school closures because longer in-session time
increases opportunities for COVID-19 cases to appear in schools. Many districts in the
South returned to school in early August compared with late August or early September
return  dates  in  other  regions  (4).  Federal  public  health  and  education  agencies  are
using HMM model information and systematic Internet searches to identify districts and
schools  most  affected  by  COVID-19–related  disruptions.  Examination  of  prevention
activities in those with and without disruption can suggest modifications to COVID-19
prevention activities. CDC is currently making findings from these activities available to
state  and  local  public  health  and  education  agencies.  Most  (96%)  public  and  private
schools have remained open for full in-person learning. However, an estimated 1,800
schools  have  had  school  closures  attributable  to  COVID-19  outbreaks,  affecting  the
education  and  well-being  of  933,000  students.  To  prevent  COVID-19  outbreaks  in
schools,
 CDC
 recommends
 multicomponent
 prevention
 strategies,
 including
vaccination,  universal  indoor  masking,  screening  testing,  and  physical  distancing  (5).
Top  Corresponding  author:  Sharyn  E.  Parks,  Sparks@cdc.gov.  Top  1CDC  COVID-19
Response  Team;  2Booz  Allen  Hamilton,  McLean,  Virginia;  3Johns  Hopkins  University
Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Maryland; 4Palantir Technologies, Denver, Colorado.
Top All authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  https://cai.burbio.com/school-opening-tracker/  †
https://www.mchdata.com/covid19/schoolclosings
 §
https://www.returntolearntracker.net/  ¶  Colorado,  Connecticut,  Hawaii,  Idaho,  Illinois,
Louisiana,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  New  Mexico,  North  Carolina,  Ohio,  Oregon,  South
Carolina,
 Tennessee,
 Vermont,
 Virginia,
 and
 Washington.
 **
https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/districtsearch/ †† 45 C.F.R. part 46, 21 C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C.
Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a; 44 U.S.C. Sect. 3501 et seq. Top Top Top Suggested
citation  for  this  article:  Parks  SE,  Zviedrite  N,  Budzyn  SE,  et  al.  COVID-19–Related
School Closures and Learning Modality Changes — United States, August 1–September
17,
 2021.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2021;70:1374–1376.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7039e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/wr/mm7039e2.htm
