Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,
 secure
 websites.
 Facilities
 eligible
 to
 report
 data
 to
 NHSN’s
 LTCF
COVID-19/Respiratory  Pathogens  Module  include  nursing  homes/skilled  nursing,
Intermediate  Care  Facilities  for  individuals  with  Intellectual  disability  (ICF/ID),  and
assisted  living  facilities.  CDC’s  NHSN  provides  healthcare  facilities,  such  as  long-term
care  facilities  (LTCFs),  with  a  secure  reporting  platform  for  reporting  outcomes  and
process measures in a systematic way. Reported data are immediately available for use
in  strengthening  local  and  national  surveillance,  monitoring  trends  in  infection  rates,
assisting  in  identifying  resource  insecurities,  and  informing  progress  toward  infection
prevention goals. The NHSN Long-term Care Facility Component supports the nation’s
COVID-19  response  through  the  LTCF  COVID-19/Respiratory  Pathogens  Module.
Facilities  eligible  to  report  data  to  NHSN’s  LTCF  COVID-19/Respiratory  Pathogens
Module  include  nursing  homes/skilled  nursing,  Intermediate  Care  Facilities  for
individuals  with  Intellectual  disability  (ICF/ID),  and  assisted  living  facilities.  Data
reported into the LTCF COVID-19/Respiratory Pathogens Module Surveillance Reporting
Pathways  facilitate  assessment  of  the  impact  of  COVID-19  and  other  Respiratory
Pathogens through facility reported surveillance data. Examples of data reported in the
pathways include: The Point-of-Care (POC) Test Reporting Tool is a separate reporting
option  for  LTCFs  to  report  SARS-CoV-2  test  results  provided  by  a  POC  device.  NHSN
routes reported POC laboratory test result data to the public health agency at the local
or  state  level  with  jurisdictional  authority  and  responsibility  for  receiving  those  data.
Important: the reporting of POC test result data in this tool does not take the place of
answering  POC  related  questions  in  the  Resident  Impact  and  Facility  Capacity
surveillance  reporting  pathway.  Weekly  reporting  of  COVID-19/Respiratory  Pathogens
Vaccination data for residents and healthcare personnel is another option available to
LTCFs. Additional information about surveillance and vaccination reporting, please visit
the  Weekly  HCP  &  Resident  COVID-19  Vaccination  webpage.  LTCF  data  submission
options include manual data entry, CSV file submission by individual facilities or bulk
CSV  file  upload  for  multiple  facilities,  and/or  NHSN  DIRECT  CDA  Automation  for  the
Point-of-Care (POC) Test Reporting Tool. Information about the Direct protocol can be
found  here.  Send  questions  to  NHSNCDA@CDC.GOV  with  Subject  line  “Direct
Submissions
 for
 POC
 data.”
 For
 additional
 information
 about
 the
 LTCF
COVID-19/Respiratory Pathogens Module, reporting options, data collection forms, form
instructions,  archived  and  upcoming  trainings,  and  future  updates,  please  review  the
resources  on  this  page.  Get  the  latest  information  from  the  CDC  about  COVID-19
Through  the  Quality  Improvement  Organization  (QIO)  Program,  the  Centers  for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) On-Demand Trainings are provided to Long-Term
Care  Facilities  for  infection  control  processes  needed  in  nursing  homes  to  manage
COVID-19.  To  review  a  list  of  archived  trainings  and  recordings,  as  well  as  view  and
register  for  upcoming  trainings,  please  visit:  CMS-CDC  Fundamentals  of  COVID-19
Prevention. Facilities looking to upload their data by working directly with a vendor will
need to work with the vendor directly to provide their OrgID and establish the process.
Vendors (e.g., EHR providers, EOC providers, etc.) intending to provide COVID-19 CSV
uploads on behalf of NHSN facilities please submit an inquiry to NHSN@cdc.gov with the
title  “Vendor  Support  for  NHSN  COVID-19  Facility  Reporting.”  NHSN  will  follow  up  to
confirm procedural details as the process may differ by vendor.  
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/ltc/covid19/index.html
