Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / October 30, 2020 / 69(43);1569–1570 On October
21,  2020,  this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Julia  C.  Pringle,
PhD1,2;  Jillian  Leikauskas,  MPH2;  Sue  Ransom-Kelley3;  Benjamin  Webster3;  Samuel
Santos3; Heidi Fox, MSN3; Shannon Marcoux3; Patsy Kelso, PhD2; Natalie Kwit, DVM2
(View author affiliations) Views equals page views plus PDF downloads On August 11,
2020, a confirmed case of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a male correctional
facility  employee  (correctional  officer)  aged  20  years  was  reported  to  the  Vermont
Department  of  Health  (VDH).  On  July  28,  the  correctional  officer  had  multiple  brief
encounters  with  six  incarcerated  or  detained  persons  (IDPs)*  while  their  SARS-CoV-2
test  results  were  pending.  The  six  asymptomatic  IDPs  arrived  from  an  out-of-state
correctional facility on July 28 and were housed in a quarantine unit. In accordance with
Vermont  Department  of  Corrections  (VDOC)  policy  for  state  prisons,  nasopharyngeal
swabs were collected from the six IDPs on their arrival date and tested for SARS-CoV-2,
the virus that causes COVID-19, at the Vermont Department of Health Laboratory, using
real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On July 29, all six
IDPs  received  positive  test  results.  VDH  and  VDOC  conducted  a  contact  tracing
investigation†  and  used  video  surveillance  footage  to  determine  that  the  correctional
officer  did  not  meet  VDH’s  definition  of  close  contact  (i.e.,  being  within  6  feet  of
infectious persons for ≥15 consecutive minutes)§,¶; therefore, he continued to work. At
the end of his shift on August 4, he experienced loss of smell and taste, myalgia, runny
nose,  cough,  shortness  of  breath,  headache,  loss  of  appetite,  and  gastrointestinal
symptoms;  beginning  August  5,  he  stayed  home  from  work.  An  August  5
nasopharyngeal specimen tested for SARS-CoV-2 by real-time RT-PCR at a commercial
laboratory was reported as positive on August 11; the correctional officer identified two
contacts outside of work, neither of whom developed COVID-19. On July 28, seven days
preceding his illness onset, the correctional officer had multiple brief exposures to six
IDPs who later tested positive for SARS-CoV-2; available data suggests that at least one
of  the  asymptomatic  IDPs  transmitted  SARS-CoV-2  during  these  brief  encounters.
Subsequently, VDH and facility staff members reviewed July 28 quarantine unit video
surveillance  footage  and  standard  correctional  officer  shift  duty  responsibilities  to
approximate the frequency and duration of interactions between the correctional officer
and infectious IDPs during the work shift (Table). Although the correctional officer never
spent  15  consecutive  minutes  within  6  feet  of  an  IDP  with  COVID-19,  numerous  brief
(approximately 1-minute) encounters that cumulatively exceeded 15 minutes did occur.
During  his  8-hour  shift  on  July  28,  the  correctional  officer  was  within  6  feet  of  an
infectious IDP an estimated 22 times while the cell door was open, for an estimated 17
total  minutes  of  cumulative  exposure.  IDPs  wore  microfiber  cloth  masks  during  most
interactions with the correctional officer that occurred outside a cell; however, during
several  encounters  in  a  cell  doorway  or  in  the  recreation  room,  IDPs  did  not  wear
masks.  During  all  interactions,  the  correctional  officer  wore  a  microfiber  cloth  mask,
gown, and eye protection (goggles). The correctional officer wore gloves during most
interactions.  The  correctional  officer’s  cumulative  exposure  time  is  an  informed
estimate;  additional  interactions  might  have  occurred  that  were  missed  during  this
investigation. The correctional officer reported no other known close contact exposures
to  persons  with  COVID-19  outside  work  and  no  travel  outside  Vermont  during  the  14
days preceding illness onset. COVID-19 cumulative incidence in his county of residence
and  where  the  correctional  facility  is  located  was  relatively  low  at  the  time  of  the
investigation (20 cases per 100,000 persons), suggesting that his most likely exposures
occurred  in  the  correctional  facility  through  multiple  brief  encounters  (not  initially
considered  to  meet  VDH’s  definition  of  close  contact  exposure)  with  IDPs  who  later
received a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result. Among seven employees with exposures to
the infectious IDPs that did meet the VDH close contact definition, one person received
a positive test result. Among thirteen employees (including the correctional officer) with
exposures  to  the  infectious  IDPs  that  did  not  meet  the  VDH  close  contact  definition
during contact tracing, only the correctional officer received a positive SARS-CoV-2 test
result.  Data  are  limited  to  precisely  define  “close  contact”;  however,  15  minutes  of
close exposure is used as an operational definition for contact tracing investigations in
many  settings.  Additional  factors  to  consider  when  defining  close  contact  include
proximity,  the  duration  of  exposure,  whether  the  infected  person  has  symptoms,
whether  the  infected  person  was  likely  to  generate  respiratory  aerosols,  and
environmental factors such as adequacy of ventilation and crowding. A primary purpose
of contact tracing is to identify persons with higher risk exposures and therefore higher
probabilities  of  developing  infection,  which  can  guide  decisions  on  quarantining  and
work restrictions. Although the initial assessment did not suggest that the officer had
close contact exposures, detailed review of video footage identified that the cumulative
duration  of  exposures  exceeded  15  minutes.  In  correctional  settings,  frequent
encounters  of  ≤6  feet  between  IDPs  and  facility  staff  members  are  necessary;  public
health  officials  should  consider  transmission-risk  implications  of  cumulative  exposure
time  within  such  settings.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Julia  C.  Pringle,  pgx1@cdc.gov.
Top  1Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,  CDC;  2Vermont  Department  of  Health;  3Vermont
Department  of  Corrections.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the
International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  For  the
purposes  of  this  report,  “IDP”  refers  to  a  person  held  in  a  prison.  †  This  activity  was
reviewed  by  CDC  and  was  conducted  consistent  with  applicable  federal  law  and  CDC
policy: 45 C.F.R. part 46, 21 C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a;
44
 U.S.C.
 Sect.
 3501
 et
 seq.
 §
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/public-health-recommendations.html.
¶
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/contact-tracing/contact-tracing-plan/ap
pendix.html#contact. Top Abbreviation: COVID-19 = coronavirus disease 2019.
* Standard shift duties and surveillance footage from the quarantine unit were used to
characterize  routine  opportunities  for  employees  and  IDPs  to  have  close  (within  6  ft)
interactions. Observed encounters between the correctional officer and IDPs and typical
encounter  durations  were  used  to  estimate  the  ill  employee’s  cumulative  exposure
time. One correctional staff member is assigned to the quarantine unit per shift and is
responsible for performing the tasks described in the table.
†  IDPs  are  not  required  to  wear  masks  while  inside  cells.  During  health  checks  and
medication  dispensing  interactions  when  cell  doors  were  open  but  IDPs  remained
inside, IDPs did not wear masks despite being within 6 ft of employees without the door
as a physical barrier.
§  These  activities  were  observed  during  the  course  of  the  correctional  officer’s  shift
because these IDPs were new arrivals to the facility.
¶  Surveillance  footage  was  used  to  estimate  the  number  of  encounters  between  the
correctional  officer  and  the  six  quarantined  IDPs  pending  SARS-CoV-2  test  results  on
July 28. Top Suggested citation for this article: Pringle JC, Leikauskas J, Ransom-Kelley S,
et al.  COVID-19 in a Correctional Facility Employee Following Multiple Brief Exposures
to Persons with COVID-19 — Vermont, July–August 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2020;69:1569–1570. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6943e1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6943e1.htm
