Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  COVID-19  Overview  and  Infection  Prevention  and  Control
Priorities  in  non-US  Healthcare  Settings  [PPT  –  5  MB]  This  overview  was  created  for
healthcare  workers  in  non-U.S.  healthcare  settings  and  government  officials  at
ministries of health working on the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) response. The
information  in  this  document  draws  from  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC)  and  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  guidance  documents  and
Infection  Prevention  and  Control  (IPC)  priorities  for  the  response  to  COVID-19  in
healthcare settings and includes information that can be used in non-U.S. contexts. This
overview is organized by first presenting a background on coronaviruses. It then briefly
describes  the  emergence,  transmission,  symptoms,  prevention,  and  treatment  of
COVID-19.  The  rest  of  the  document  reviews  COVID-19  IPC  priorities,  in  non-U.S.
healthcare settings. Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that can cause illness in
animals  or  humans.  In  humans  there  are  several  known  coronaviruses  that  cause
respiratory  infections.  These  coronaviruses  range  from  the  common  cold  to  more
severe  diseases  such  as  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS),  Middle  East
respiratory syndrome (MERS), and COVID-19. COVID-19 was identified in Wuhan, China
in December 2019. COVID-19 is caused by the virus severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus  2  (SARS-CoV-2),  a  new  virus  in  humans  causing  respiratory  illness  which
can  be  spread  from  person-to-person.  Early  in  the  outbreak,  many  patients  were
reported to have a link to a large seafood and live animal market; however, later cases
with  no  link  to  the  market  confirmed  person-to-person  transmission  of  the  disease.
Additionally,  travel-related  exportation  of  cases  occurred.  There  are  three  main  ways
that COVID-19 can spread: The droplets that contain the SARS-CoV-2 virus are released
when someone with COVID-19 sneezes, coughs, or talks. Infectious droplets can land in
the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs. A
physical  distance  of  at  least  1  meter  (3  ft)  between  persons  is  recommended  by  the
WHO to avoid infection,1 whereas CDC recommends maintaining a physical distance of
at  least  1.8  meters  (6ft)  between  persons.  Respiratory  droplets  can  land  on  hands,
objects, or surfaces around the person when they cough or talk, and people can then
become infected with COVID-19 from touching hands, objects or surfaces with droplets
and then touching their eyes, nose, or mouth. Additionally, transmission can occur from
those  with  mild  symptoms  or  from  those  who  do  not  feel  ill.  There  are  certain
circumstances  that  can  increase  the  risk  of  infection  for  COVID-19  such  as  poorly
ventilated  space.  In  indoor  spaces  with  poor  ventilation,  the  concentration  of  virus
particles  is  often  higher  than  outdoors.2,3  Other  factors  that  are  associated  with
increased COVID-19 risk include prolonged exposure to those infected with COVID-19,
close contact with infected persons, and any other activity that leads to exposure to a
greater  amount  of  respiratory  droplets  and  particles.  A  wide  range  of  symptoms  for
COVID-19  have  been  reported.4  These  symptoms  include:  The  estimated  incubation
period is between 2 and 14 days with a median of 5 days. It is important to note that
some people become infected and do not develop any symptoms or feel ill. COVID-19 is
a  relatively  new  disease;  therefore,  additional  risk  factors  for  severe  COVID-19  may
continue to be identified. In some cases, people who get COVID-19 can develop severe
complications,  including  difficulty  breathing,  causing  a  need  for  hospitalization  and
intensive  care.  5  These  severe  complications  often  lead  to  death.  The  risk  of  severe
disease increases steadily as people age. Additionally, those of all ages with underlying
medical conditions, including but not limited to heart disease, diabetes or lung disease,
are   at  higher  risk  to  develop  severe  COVID-19  compared  to  those  without  these
conditions.5  Those  at  higher  risk  for  severe  illness  should  be  prioritized  for
vaccination.6  COVID-19  can  be  prevented  through  pharmaceutical  (i.e.,  vaccination)
and  non-pharmaceutical  interventions  (e.g.,  masking,  physical  distancing,  hand
hygiene). All of these preventative measures are important to protect individuals from
acquiring and transmitting the SARS-CoV-2 virus and should be done in conjunction with
one  another.  Getting  vaccinated  is  a  preventative  measure  that  people  can  take  to
avoid getting sick with COVID-19 and to avoid infecting others. While safe and effective
vaccines are a great tool for prevention, it is important to continue other preventative
actions  such  as  wearing  masks,  performing  hand  hygiene,  physically  distancing  from
others,  and  avoiding  crowded  spaces  and  spaces  with  poor  ventilation.7   There  are
several vaccine candidates, and many have been listed under WHO’s emergency use.
Wearing  masks  is  another  important  preventative  action  for  COVID-19  that  should
continue to be performed. When selecting a mask, there are many factors to consider.8
Masks should It is also important to choose and wear the proper type of mask based on
your  setting.  For  example,  in  a  community  setting,  cloth  masks  should  be  worn,
whereas during aerosol generating procedures in a healthcare setting, should be worn.
Even  with  the  introduction  of  vaccinations  as  a  tool  for  prevention  against  COVID-19
and  the  proper  use  of  masks,  CDC  recommends  the  following  key  COVID-19
preventative  activities:  7—  avoiding  crowded  spaces  or  spaces  that  have  poor
ventilation or wear a mask in these spaces; performing proper hand hygiene; keeping
high  touch  surfaces  clean;  monitoring  symptoms;  and  getting  tested  if  ill.  Infection
prevention  and  control  (IPC)  is  the  practice  of  preventing  or  stopping  the  spread  of
infections from the delivery of healthcare services in facilities like hospitals, outpatient
clinics,  dialysis  centers,  long-term  care  facilities,  or  traditional  practitioners.  IPC  is  a
critical part of health system strengthening and must be a priority to protect patients
and  healthcare  workers.  In  the  context  of  COVID-19,  the  IPC  goal  is  to  support  the
maintenance  of  essential  healthcare  services  by  containing  and  preventing  COVID-19
transmission  within  healthcare  facilities  to  keep  patients  and  healthcare  workers
healthy  and  safe.  As  safe  and  effective  COVID-19  vaccines  continue  to  be  delivered,
there  are  certain  recommendations  and  principles  that  should  be  implemented  and
considered for vaccine administration. Consultations and consensus between WHO, the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the ad hoc WHO COVID-19 IPC Guidance
Development Group have led to the development of a document that outlines key IPC
principles  and  recommended  proper  precautions  for  safe  administration  of  COVID-19
vaccines. Consult the Infection prevention and control (IPC) principles and procedures
for COVID-19 vaccination activities document when preparing for vaccine deployment.
10  The  key  IPC  principles  for  COVID-19  vaccine  deployment  set  out  in  the  document
include: Standard precautions are a set of practices that apply to the care of patients in
all  healthcare  settings  at  all  times.  Standard  precautions  remain  the  cornerstone  of
infection  prevention  and  control.  Application  of  these  precautions  depends  on  the
nature of the healthcare worker-patient interaction and the anticipated exposure to a
known infectious agent. Standard precautions include: Transmission-based precautions
are a set of practices specific for patients with known or suspected infectious agents
that require additional control measures to prevent transmission. These precautions are
used in addition to standard precautions. Current WHO guidance for healthcare workers
caring for suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients recommends the use of contact
and  droplet  precautions  in  addition  to  standard  precautions  unless  an  aerosol
generated  procedure  is  being  performed,  in  which  case  airborne  precautions  are
needed.1 Disposable or dedicated patient care equipment, such as stethoscopes, blood
pressure  cuffs,  should  be  used.  If  equipment  needs  to  be  shared  among  patients,  it
should  be  cleaned  and  disinfected  between  use  for  each  patient  using  products
containing  ethyl  alcohol  of  at  least  70%.  Also,  adequately  ventilated  single  rooms  or
wards  are  suggested.  For  general  ward  rooms  with  natural  ventilation,  adequate
ventilation  for  COVID-19  patients  is  considered  to  be  60  L/s  per  patient.  When  single
rooms are not available, suspected COVID-19 patients should be grouped together with
beds  at  least  1  meter  (3ft)  apart  based  on  WHO’s  recommendations,  although  some
member  states,  including  the  United  States,  have  recommended  maintaining  greater
distances whenever possible. COVID-19 isolation rooms or wards should have dedicated
bathrooms, which should be cleaned and disinfected at least twice daily. Additionally,
healthcare  facilities  can  also  consider  designating  healthcare  workers  to  care  for
patients  with  COVID-19  and  restricting  the  number  of  visitors  allowed  in  the  facility.
Transportation  of  patients  with  COVID-19  should  be  avoided  unless  medically
necessary. If transportation is deemed medically necessary, a mask should be placed
on the suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patient. Healthcare workers should also wear
the appropriate PPE when transporting patients. Contact and droplet precaution PPE are
recommended  for  healthcare  workers  before  entering  the  room  of  suspected  or
confirmed COVID-19 patients. Healthcare workers should be trained on the correct use
of PPE, including how to put it on and remove it. Extended use and re-use of certain PPE
items  such  as  masks  and  gowns  can  be  considered  when  there  are  supply
shortages. Healthcare workers should: There is a higher risk of self-contamination when
removing  PPE.  Please  see  instructions  for  putting  on  and  removing  PPE  [2.9  MB,  3
pages]  for  guidance.  For  healthcare  workers  performing  any  of  the  following  aerosol
generating  procedures  on  patients  with  COVID-19,  it  is  recommended  that  a  fitted
respirator  mask  (surgical  N95  respirators,  FFP2  or  equivalent)  is  used  as  opposed  to
surgical/medical  masks.  In  addition  to  wearing  a  fitted  respirator  mask,  healthcare
workers should also wear appropriate PPE, including gloves, a gown and eye protection.
Although there is a difference in determination on which procedures generate infectious
aerosol,  the  current  WHO  list  of  Aerosol  Generating  Procedures  includes:1  To  receive
email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/non-us-settings/overview/index.html
