Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Hospitalization related infections grew 15% from 2019 to 2020
For Immediate Release: Tuesday, July 12, 2022
Contact: Media Relations
(404)  639-3286   The  COVID-19  pandemic  pushed  back  years  of  progress  made
combating  antimicrobial  resistance  (AR)  in  the  United  States.  The  report  from  the
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC),  COVID-19:  U.S.  Impact  on
Antimicrobial  Resistance,  Special  Report  2022,  concludes  that  the  threat  of
antimicrobial-resistant  infections  is  not  only  still  present  but  has  gotten  worse—with
resistant hospital-onset infections and deaths both increasing at least 15% during the
first  year  of  the  pandemic.  “This  setback  can  and  must  be  temporary.  The  COVID-19
pandemic has unmistakably shown us that antimicrobial resistance will not stop if we
let  down  our  guard;  there  is  no  time  to  waste,”  said  Michael  Craig,  MPP,  Director  of
CDC’s  Antibiotic  Resistance  Coordination  &  Strategy  Unit.  “The  best  way  to  avert  a
pandemic caused by an antimicrobial-resistant pathogen is to identify gaps and invest
in  prevention  to  keep  our  nation  safe.”  In  the  report,  CDC  analyzed  the  state  of
antimicrobial resistance in the United States immediately following the 2020 peaks of
the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The  data  show  an  alarming  increase  in  resistant  infections
starting during hospitalization, growing an overall 15% from 2019 to 2020 among seven
pathogens. Increases in specific pathogens included: Antifungal-resistant threats rose in
2020, too, including Candida auris—which increased 60% overall—and Candida species
(excluding  Candida  auris),  with  a  26%  increase  in  infections  in  hospitals.  By
comparison,  in  a  2019  report,  significant  national  reductions  in  hospitals  were
celebrated,  where  antimicrobial-resistant  infections  fell  by  27%  2012  to  2017;  data
show these reductions continued in hospitals until the pandemic began. Clostridioides
difficile is the only healthcare-associated pathogen to improve in 2020, likely driven in
part  by  changes  in  healthcare-seeking  behavior.  In  U.S.  hospitals,  CDC  data  show
significant  surges  in  antibiotic  use  and  difficulty  in  following  infection  prevention  and
control  guidance,  which  are  key  to  preventing  antimicrobial-resistant  infections  and
their  spread.  During  the  pandemic,  hospitals  experienced  personal  protective
equipment  supply  challenges,  staffing  shortages,  and  longer  patient  stays.  Hospitals
also  treated  sicker  patients  who  required  more  frequent  and  longer  use  of  medical
devices like catheters and ventilators. The impact of the pandemic likely resulted in an
increase  of  healthcare-associated,  antimicrobial-resistant  infections.  During  the  first
year  of  the  pandemic,  more  than  29,400  people  died  from  antimicrobial-resistant
infections commonly associated with healthcare. Of these, nearly 40% got the infection
while they were in the hospital. The total national burden of deaths from AR may be
much  higher,  but  data  gaps  caused  by  the  pandemic  hinder  that  analysis.  CDC  has
limited data for the spread of antimicrobial-resistant infections in the community; many
clinics  and  healthcare  facilities  had  limited  services,  served  fewer  patients,  or  closed
their  doors  entirely  in  the face of  challenges  from  COVID-19.  Data  are unavailable or
delayed for nine of the 18 pathogens listed in CDC’s 2019 Antibiotic Resistance Threats
Reports.  In  the  2019  report,  the  last  year  comprehensive  healthcare  and  community
data  were  available  to  calculate,  CDC  estimated  that  more  than  2.8  million
antimicrobial-resistant  infections  occur  in  the  U.S.  each  year,  with  more  than  35,000
people dying as a result. Historic progress made in antibiotic prescribing was reversed
as well during the pandemic. Antibiotics were often the first option given to treat those
who  presented  with  pneumonia-like  symptoms  of  fever  and  shortness  of  breath  even
though this often represented the viral illness of COVID-19, for which antibiotics are not
effective. From March 2020 to October 2020, almost 80% of patients hospitalized with
COVID-19  received  an  antibiotic.  While  some  of  this  prescribing  can  be  appropriate
when  risks  for  related  bacterial  or  fungal  infections  are  unknown,  this  high  level  of
prescribing  can  also  put  patients  at  risk  for  side  effects  and  create  a  pathway  for
resistance to develop and spread. Despite the pandemic, in 2020, more than 90% of
U.S. hospitals had an antibiotic stewardship program aligned with CDC’s Core Elements
of  Hospital  Antibiotic  Stewardship—which  may  have  contributed  to  the  reduction  in
Clostridioides  difficile  infections.  During  the  pandemic,  many  antimicrobial  resistance
programs  contributed  to  stopping  the  spread  of  COVID-19.  For  example,  CDC’s  AR
Solutions Initiative provided infection control expertise to healthcare facilities, many of
them nursing homes, to perform more than 14,000 outbreak consultations; CDC’s AR
Lab Network sequenced more than 4,700 SAR-CoV-2 genomes; and CDC’s NHSN, which
drives  patient  safety  programs  by  tracking  antimicrobial-resistant  infections  and
antibiotic  use  in  healthcare,  provided  added  capabilities  to  support  COVID-19  data
collection  in  hospitals  and  nursing  homes.  “We  need  to  emphasize  and  expand  the
implementation of the effective prevention strategies that are already in CDC’s toolbox
to  all  healthcare  facilities,”  said  Denise  Cardo,  MD,  Director  of  CDC’s  Division  of
Healthcare  Quality  Promotion.  “The  2021  launch  of  the  Global  AR  Lab  and  Response
Network  and  the  Global  Action  in  Healthcare  Network  is  an  example  of  how
aggressively CDC is moving to combat antimicrobial resistance not only in the U.S., but
in  nearly  50  countries  across  the  world.  We  made  significant  progress  before  the
pandemic,  and  I’m  confident  that  we  will  make  significant  progress  going  forward.”
With prevention and preparedness as its top goal, CDC remains committed to the U.S.
National Action Plan for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria (CARB) and will move
forward by addressing gaps in the public health system and exploring investments in
U.S. healthcare infrastructure in the following key areas: CDC is and will remain at the
forefront of combating antimicrobial resistance. Though the pandemic reversed much of
the progress in the past decade on infection prevention and control, the fight will now
take on a renewed fervor in prevention-focused public health actions to keep the nation
safe. ###
U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  HEALTH  AND  HUMAN  SERVICES  CDC  works  24/7  protecting
America’s  health,  safety  and  security.  Whether  disease  start  at  home  or  abroad,  are
curable or preventable, chronic or acute, or from human activity or deliberate attack,
CDC  responds  to  America’s  most  pressing  health  threats.  CDC  is  headquartered  in
Atlanta and has experts located throughout the United States and the world.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2022/s0712-Antimicrobial-Resistance.html
