A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. The Cryptosporidiosis National Notifiable
Disease Surveillance System (NNDSS) Summary Report below provides an overview of
cryptosporidiosis  cases  by  region  and  jurisdiction  in  the  United  States  during  2019.
Cryptosporidiosis  is  a  gastrointestinal  illness  caused  by  protozoa  of  the  genus
Cryptosporidium, the leading cause of U.S. waterborne disease outbreaks (1) and the
third  leading  cause  of  U.S.  zoonotic  enteric  illness  (2).  An  estimated  823,000
cryptosporidiosis cases occur annually; this means <2% of cases are nationally notified
(3).
 Cryptosporidium
 infection
 can
 be
 symptomatic
 or
 asymptomatic.
Immunocompetent  patients  can  experience  frequent,  non-bloody,  watery  diarrhea
typically  lasting  up  to  2–3  weeks  (4).  Additional  symptoms  can  include  vomiting,
nausea,
 abdominal
 pain,
 fever,
 anorexia,
 fatigue,
 and
 weight
 loss.
Immunocompromised patients can experience profuse watery diarrhea lasting weeks to
months  or  even  life-threatening  malnutrition  and  wasting.  Cryptosporidiosis  is  a
nationally notifiable disease; the first full year of reporting was 1995. National data are
collected  through  passive  surveillance.  Healthcare  providers  and  laboratories  that
diagnose  cryptosporidiosis  are  mandated  to  report  cases  to  the  local  or  state  health
department. The 50 state, District of Columbia (DC), New York City (NYC), and territorial
public  health  agencies,  in  turn,  voluntarily  notify  CDC  of  cases  via  the  National
Notifiable  Disease  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS).  Some  states  conduct  enhanced
molecular  surveillance  of  cryptosporidiosis  through  participation  in  CryptoNet;
CryptoNet  data  are  not  presented  here.  State,  DC,  NYC,  U.S.  territory,  and  freely
associated  state  public  health  agencies  voluntarily  notify  CDC  of  cryptosporidiosis
outbreaks  via  the  National  Outbreak  Reporting  System  (NORS).  NORS  data  are  not
presented  here;  however,  summaries  of  data  on  waterborne  disease  outbreaks  are
reported elsewhere. The definition of a confirmed case of cryptosporidiosis has changed
over  time.  The  first  national  case  definition  was  published  in  1995;  the  current  case
definition was published in 2012. The pre-2011 case definitions classified a case with
any  laboratory  evidence  of  Cryptosporidium  infection  as  a  confirmed  case.  The  2012
confirmed  case  definition  requires  evidence  of  Cryptosporidium  organisms  or  DNA  in
stool, intestinal fluid, tissue samples, biopsy specimens, or other biological sample by
certain laboratory methods with a high positive predictive value (e.g., direct fluorescent
antibody [DFA] test, polymerase chain reaction [PCR], enzyme immunoassay [EIA], or
light microscopy of stained specimen). A probable case of cryptosporidiosis is defined
as 1) having supportive laboratory test results for Cryptosporidium spp. infection using
a screening test method, such as immunochromatographic card or rapid card test, or a
laboratory test of unknown method or 2) meeting clinical criteria (i.e., diarrhea and one
or  more  of  the  following:  diarrhea  duration  of  >72  hours,  abdominal  cramping,
vomiting,  or  anorexia)  and  being  epidemiologically  linked  to  a  confirmed  case.  A
suspect case is defined as having a diarrheal illness and being epidemiologically linked
to  a  probable  case.  Cases  not  classified  as  confirmed,  probable,  or  suspect  are
classified  as  unknown.  National  cryptosporidiosis  surveillance  data  for  2019  were
analyzed  using  R  version  4.0.3.  Data  cleaning  processes  included  case  deduplication
and the verification of case status (confirmed, nonconfirmed). Numbers, percentages,
and  incidence  (cases  per  100,000  population)  of  cryptosporidiosis  were  calculated  in
aggregate for the United States and separately for each reporting jurisdiction. Incidence
was calculated by dividing the number of cryptosporidiosis cases by mid-year census
estimates (5) and multiplying by 100,000. U.S. Census Bureau data were obtained using
their Application Programming Interface and the R censusapi package (6–7). In addition
to analyzing data nationally and by reporting jurisdiction, data were analyzed by region
(Northeast, Midwest, South, and West regions), as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau
(8).  To  account  for  differences  in  the  seasonal  use  of  recreational  water,  the  West
region  was  further  subdivided  into  Northwest  and  Southwest.  To  examine  reporting
over  time,  cryptosporidiosis  incidence  was  calculated  by  year  (2010–2019)  and  case
status.  Average  annual  cryptosporidiosis  incidence  was  calculated  by  demographic
variables (e.g., age and sex). Incidence was not calculated for race, ethnicity, or month
of onset, due to large proportion of missing data for these variables (i.e., 16.4%, 24.9%,
and 20.2%, respectively). One case reported by Puerto Rico for 2016 was excluded from
analysis,  because  detailed  demographic  census  data  are  not  available  to  calculate
incidence by age and sex. The authors thank the Surveillance and Data Branch, Division
of  Health  Informatics  and  Surveillance,  Center  for  Surveillance,  Epidemiology,  and
Laboratory  Services;  Office  of  Public  Health  Scientific  Services,  Centers  for  Disease
Control  and  Prevention  for  preparing  and  aggregating  state-based  NNDSS  data  for
dissemination. Download Data [XLS – 225 B] * Cases per 100,000 population per year §
Probable,  suspect,  or  unknown  cases  During  the  last  decade,  incidence  of
cryptosporidiosis has increased 47.2%. This continues a marked increase of 241% since
2004.  This  increase  could  be  related  to  increased  testing  for  Cryptosporidium  due  to
increasing use of diagnostic multiplex PCR panels for gastrointestinal illness. This could
also  reflect  true  increases  in  cryptosporidiosis  incidence.  The  consistently  increased
incidence  of  reported  nonconfirmed  cases  after  2010  likely  reflects  changes  in  the
national  case  definition.  Download  Data  [XLS  –  1  KB]  *  Percentages  might  not  total
100% because of rounding § Cases per 100,000 population ¶ New York State and New
York City data are mutually exclusive By jurisdiction, incidence ranged from 19.2 per
100,000 population in South Dakota through 0.6 per 100,000 population in Hawaii. As a
region, the Midwest has the greatest overall incidence of 6.7 per 100,000 population.
This  coincides  with  this  region  having  some  of  the  highest  incidence  by  jurisdiction.
Differences in incidence might reflect differences in risk factors or mode of transmission
of  Cryptosporidium;  the  magnitude  of  outbreaks;  or  the  capacity  or  requirements  to
detect, investigate, and report cases. Download Data [XLS – 964 B] * Cases per 100,000
population  ¶  New  York  State  and  New  York  City  data  are  mutually  exclusive
Cryptosporidiosis  is  geographically  widespread  across  the  United  States.  Although
incidence appears to be consistently higher in the northern Midwest states, differences
in  incidence  might  reflect  differences  in  risk  factors  or  modes  of  transmission  of
Cryptosporidium;  the  magnitude  of  outbreaks;  or  the  capacity  or  requirements  to
detect, investigate, and report cases. Download Data [XLS – 327 B] * Percentages might
not  total  100%  because  of  rounding  More  than  half  (7,088  [51.1%])  of  patients  for
whom  gender  was  reported  were  female.  Of  the  11,689  patients  for  whom  race  was
reported, 79.2% were white. Of the 10,501 patients for whom ethnicity was reported,
13.8% were Hispanic. Download Data [XLS – 214 B] * Cases per 100,000 population §
Age  data  missing  for  55  patients  The  incidence  of  reported  cryptosporidiosis,  by  age
group, was highest among patients ages <5 years (7.6 cases per 100,000 population),
25–29 years (5.4), 30–34 years (5.1), and 20–24 years (4.9). This might reflect young
children becoming infected and ill and their caregivers subsequently becoming infected
after  changing  diapers  of  young  children  or  helping  them  with  toileting.  *  Cases  per
100,000 population § Age or sex data missing for 171 patients The highest incidence of
cryptosporidiosis, by sex and age group, was among males ages <5 years (9.0 cases
per  100,000  population)  and  females  ages  25–29  years  (6.0  cases  per  100,000).
Incidence for females were higher than for males for all age groups >19 years, except
those 40–44 years and 80–84 years. The incidence is essentially the same for females
and  males  ages  45–54  years.  Differences  in  age-specific  incidence  might  be  due  to
age-specific differences in risk factors or modes of transmission of Cryptosporidium. For
example,  compared  with  males,  females  might  be  more  likely  to  change  diapers  of
young  children  or  help  them  with  toileting,  and  thus,  more  likely  to  be  exposed  to
Cryptosporidium.  Additionally,  compared  with  males,  females  might  be  more  likely  to
seek  healthcare,  and  thus,  more  likely  to  have  illness  diagnosed  and  reported  as
cryptosporidiosis. Download Data [XLS – 163 B] * Age data missing for 2,822 patients
The number of cryptosporidiosis cases was greatest in August (N=1,770) and lowest in
February (N=498). The number of cases, by month of symptom onset, reflects seasonal
differences in exposure, such as summertime swimming. Download Data [XLS – 410 B]
* Cases per 100,000 population per year § Probable, suspect, or unknown cases ¶ First
full  year  of  national  reporting  Cryptosporidiosis  NNDSS  Summary  Report  for  2018
Waterborne disease and outbreak surveillance provides important information on how
germs,  chemicals,  or  toxins  spread,  and  which  types  of  water  are  linked  to  people
getting sick. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/healthy-water-data/documentation/cryptosporidiosis-nndss-summary-report-for-201
9.html
