Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. This information is intended mainly for federal, state, and local
public health practitioners working in food service. It may also be helpful to food service
vendors and others seeking to offer more foods that not only meet nutrition standards
but  are  culturally  preferred  by  the  populations  they  serve.  This  information  was
developed to: Customers choose foods for a variety of reasons. Their decisions may be
based  on  their  preferences  for:  The  term  “culturally  preferred  foods”  is  used  here  to
describe safe and nutritious foods that meet the diverse tastes and needs of customers
based on their cultural identity. For example, people who identify with Muslim or Jewish
religious traditions may want foods that are Halal or Kosher, respectively. Culture has
many influences, and it’s important to keep in mind that one person does not represent
their entire culture*. Learn more about culture and food. Offering affordable, culturally
preferred food options that meet the Dietary Guidelines for Americans allows customers
to choose foods that meet their cultural and dietary needs. This expands opportunities
for customers to select familiar and healthier foods they prefer. Improved diet quality
may  positively  impact  the  health  of  customers.  In  addition,  other  customers  have  a
chance  to  learn  about  cuisines  that  are  different  than  their  own  and  become  more
culturally aware. * “Culture can be defined by group membership such as racial, ethnic,
linguistic  or  geographic  group,  or  as  a  collection  of  beliefs,  values,  customs,  ways  of
thinking, communication, and behaving to a specific group.” (1). You can draw on the
expertise of your food service guidelines team, including the food service vendors and
staff, organizational leadership, and worksite wellness staff. Food service vendors and
staff  are  especially  important  to  your  food  service  guideline  team.  They  may  ensure
buy-in and feasibility for including diverse food offerings. If your food service guidelines
team  does  not  already  represent  the  diversity  of  your  customers,  consider  how  to
include these perspectives. This is a critical step, but keep in mind that the opinions of
one person do not necessarily represent a specific culture (2). Discuss with your food
service  guidelines  team  the  importance  of  adding  culturally  diverse  foods  in  various
venues, such as cafeterias and vending, to get their support. Food service guidelines
team  members  may  help  with:  External  partners,  such  as  professional  organizations,
can  also  provide  resources,  help  with  sourcing  cultural  foods,  and  conduct  other
activities to help achieve your goal. Conduct a comprehensive baseline assessment to
identify  the  cultural  background  of  your  customer  base.  You  may  be  able  to  gather
sociodemographic characteristics of customers from the human resources department.
Next,  work  with  your  food  service  guidelines  team  to  carry  out  the  appropriate
qualitative  assessment(s)  on  your  customers  food  preferences.  Depending  on  your
setting  and  capacity  level,  you  may  choose  to  conduct  observational  assessments,
surveys, informal interviews, and/or focus groups with customers from diverse cultures
to  determine  their  perceptions  of  cultural  food  offerings  and  their  food  preferences.
These  assessments  should  identify  key  facilitators  and  barriers  to  offering  culturally
preferred  food  options  in  your  setting.  The  food  service  vendor  may  conduct  the
assessments as part of their current contractual scope of work, so work with them to
avoid  duplication  of  effort.  Consider  gathering  data  from  food  service  managers  and
potential  new  customers,  such  as  employees  who  don’t  currently  frequent  the  food
service venue. Assessments can be conducted routinely, as needed. Define the goal of
your  assessment  with  your  food  service  guideline  team  before  determining  survey
questions for your assessment.  For example, your primary goal may be to identify the
top  foods  enjoyed  by  the  specific  cultural  groups  of  your  population  to  encourage
vendors  and  food  service  staff  to  add  them  into  the  menu  rotations.  Make  sure  that
your questions lead you to attaining your goal. Questions can be multiple choice, scaled
(such  as  Likert),  or  open-ended  and  can  be  qualitative,  quantitative,  or  any
combination. Work with your food service guidelines team to identify the appropriate
dissemination  plan.  You  may  choose  to  collect  surveys  using  pen  and  paper  or  a
web-based platform. If using web-based, consider including a quick response (QR) code
for  customer  convenience.  Consider  asking  customers  questions  around  the  following
themes: Examine your setting’s menu cycles to determine if the foods offered represent
the  views  and  culture  of  customers.  This  allows  you  to  see  where  opportunities  for
improvements  exist.  If  your  food  vendor  is  not  bound  by  contract  to  add  culturally
diverse  foods,  you  can  ask  them  if  it  would  be  feasible  to  do  so.  Any  changes  would
need to be within the scope of their contract and budget, without incurring additional
cost.  Consider  asking  the  food  vendor  questions  around  the  following  themes:  If  you
included  sourcing  culturally  diverse  foods  in  your  vendor  contracts,  the  vendor  may
conduct the assessments voluntarily or as stipulated by contract. Otherwise, you may
want  to  conduct  and  share  assessment  findings  with  your  food  vendor.  Of  those
cuisines identified in the customer assessments, suggest that the vendor consider a few
common  ingredients.  For  example,  rice,  beans,  and  corn  are  popular  staple  foods
across  many  cultures  that  are  inexpensive,  easy  to  find,  and  likely  already  being
purchased and used. Offering dishes that use these ingredients may be a cost-effective
approach, especially if the vendor has limited access to specialty food items. Consider
what  is  easiest  for  your  vendor  to  implement  and  start  with  that.  You  can  ask  the
vendor  to  add  other  menu  items  later.  The  vendor  may  want  to  experiment  with  the
fusion  of  flavors  to  create  new  cuisines  that  are  appealing  across  cultures.  Fusion
cuisine combines the flavors of two or more cultures to create interesting and familiar
dishes.  The  vendor  may  choose  to  review  existing  recipes  to  identify  where
substitutions can be made without incurring additional costs. For example, if the recipe
calls for cream, the vendor can use coconut milk instead to develop Thai flavors. Spices,
herbs, and oils can be used to infuse dishes with the desired cultural flavors. Although
fusion  foods  (such  as  bulgogi  tacos  or  spaghetti  and  curry  meatballs)  may  offer
familiarity to a culture, they are still different and should not be considered “traditional”
or  representative  of  the  culture.  You  or  the  vendor  can  add  an  assessment  question
about  customer  receptivity  to  fusion  foods  to  determine  if  customers  would  consider
that as an acceptable alternative. Offering food stations or bars are another way to add
variety to a menu. They give customers the autonomy to select their preferred foods
while still encouraging them to try the foods of other cultures. Explore using food bars
to offer familiar, healthy, and culturally diverse foods. Examples include taco, ramen, or
pho  bars.  Encourage  customers  to  try  these  foods  by  using  creative  naming,  taste
testing, alterations to the food display, and other behavioral design strategies. This will
facilitate customer purchase and venue profit. As stated in the previous question, the
vendor may want to use staple ingredients that are common across culturally preferred
cuisines  because  they  may  be  relatively  inexpensive  and  readily  sourced.   However,
keep in mind that some cultures may have specific preferences about growing practices
and  sourcing.  For  example,  American  Indians  in  the  Midwest  may  prefer  wild  rice
sourced from farms owned by American Indians, and members of Southwest American
Indian  tribes  may  prefer  products  from  blue  corn  instead  of  yellow  corn.  South  Asian
cultures may prefer basmati or long grain rice, whereas East Asian cultures may find
short grain or sticky rice more acceptable. Spices can be used to infuse a dish with the
flavors of a culture. If the distributor does not have specific spices or flavorings needed
for  a  cultural  cuisine,  the  vendor  can  check  with  local  ethnic  markets  or  ask  local
restaurants where to source specialty ingredients. The following sample language can
be  used  to  support  cultural  food  goals  in  an  organization’s  official  RFP  or  solicitation
process for food vendors: “This solicitation seeks to obtain bids from qualified vendors
who  can  ensure  that  food  service  offerings  are  culturally  desired  and  have  been
adapted  to  meet  regional  and  client-centered  preferences.  In  addition,  vendor
adaptations must still meet the specified food and nutrient requirements included in the
2017 Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities [PDF-3.34MB] for prepared foods and
packaged snacks at the standard or innovative level of implementation.” For meats and
produce, the vendor can buy from local growers, if feasible, to reduce the supply chain
time. When possible, vendors can consider buying from farmers and ranchers who use
desired cultural practices and techniques when processing meats and growing produce.
To ensure cultural food goals are met, you may want to add a cultural food standard to
your organization’s food service guidelines policy, such as: “All onsite food vendors are
encouraged to offer a variety of foods related to the cultural heritages of customers and
meet  the  Dietary  Guidelines  for  Americans.”  Alternatively,  your  organization  could
officially  solicit  food  vendors,  via  the  Request  for  Proposals  (RFP)  process,  that  are
willing to assess cultural food preferences of customers and include cultural foods in the
menu cycles. Once you’ve reviewed bids and selected a qualified vendor, make sure all
cultural  food  standards  are  included  as  stipulated  in  the  final  contract  language  and
vendor’s  scope  of  work.  To  find  more  general  information  on  including  food  service
guidelines standards in vendor contracts, RFPs, and organizational policies, please refer
to the policy section of the Food Service Guidelines Implementation Toolkit. 1Centers
for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Health  Literacy.  US  Dept  of  Health  and  Human
Services;  2021.  Accessed  March  22,  2022.  2California  Department  of  Social
Services.  Cultural  Considerations  in  Nutrition  and  Food  Preparation.  [PDF-2326KB]
Accessed March 22, 2022. To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email
address.
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/food-service-guidelines/strategize-and-act/cultural-food-preferences.html
