Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Although  occupational
transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) and other bloodborne pathogens to health-care workers
from   patients   has   been  well  documented,   data   on   HIV
seroprevalence in health-care  workers  are  limited. This report
summarizes preliminary findings from a voluntary,  anonymous  HIV
serosurvey   among  orthopedic  surgeons,  conducted  by  CDC  in
cooperation with  the  American  Academy  of Orthopaedic Surgeons
(AAOS), at the AAOS annual meeting in Anaheim, California, during
March 6--12, 1991.  All orthopedic surgeons registered for  the meeting who were
in   postgraduate  orthopedic  surgical  training  programs,   in
practice, or retired from practice in the United States or Canada
were  invited   to  participate.  Participants  received  pretest
counseling, provided  verbal  informed  consent, and completed an
epidemiologic questionnaire to ascertain demographic and clinical
practice   characteristics,   as   well   as  the   presence   of
nonoccupational risk factors for HIV infection.*  Names  or other
personal  identifiers  were  not  collected. Blood specimens were
screened for HIV antibody by enzyme  immunoassay (EIA); specimens
repeatedly reactive by EIA were evaluated  by Western blot within
48  hours.  HIV  results  and posttest counseling  were  provided
anonymously to participants at the serosurvey site.  To assess the representativeness
of serosurvey participants,
characteristics of this group  were  compared  with  those of all
orthopedic  surgeons  who  had  completed a questionnaire  survey
(``Orthopaedic Surgeon Survey'') administered by AAOS in November
1990.   This  survey  of  demographic   and   clinical   practice
characteristics  was  mailed  to  the  20,625 orthopedic surgeons
known to AAOS to be in training, in prac  tice,  or  retired from
practice in the United States and Canada; responses were received
from  10,411  (50%)  (AAOS,  unpublished  data).   Of   7121  orthopedists  attending  the
AAOS annual meeting  who
were eligible  for the serosurvey, 3420 (48%) participated. Based
on the self-administered  questionnaire,  most  participants were
male (97%) and aged 30--54 years (75%). Compared with findings of
the AAOS Orthopaedic Surgeon Survey, serosurvey participants were
more  likely to be in residency or fellowship training  (18%  vs.
14%); have  trained  or practiced in one or more geographic areas
of  high acquired immunodeficiency  syndrome  (AIDS)  incidence**
since  1977  (75% vs. 69%); have operated on one or more patients
with known HIV  infection  (49%  vs.  43%);  have had a patient's
blood contact their skin in the previous month (87% vs. 83%); and
have sustained a percutaneous injury (e.g., needlestick  or  cut)
from  a  sharp  object contaminated with a patient's blood in the
previous month (39%  vs.  34%).  Fifty-one  percent of serosurvey
participants  had  been  tested  previously  for  HIV.   Of    the    3420   serosurvey  
participants,  two   were   HIV
seropositive  (0.06%,   upper   limit   95%  confidence  interval
(CI)=0.18%). In addition, eight specimens  were  reactive  by EIA
but  indeterminate  by Western blot; based on further testing  at
CDC with investigational peptide EIAs and recombinant DNA antigen
assays  for HIV antibody,  seven  of  the  eight  specimens  were
classified  as  HIV-antibody  negative  and  one  as  indeterminate.   Each   of   the   two  
HIV-seropositive  participants  reported
nonoccupational risk factors for HIV infection; therefore,  among
the  108 surgeons reporting such risk factors, HIV seroprevalence
was 1.9%  (upper  limit  95% CI=5.7%). In comparison, of the 3267
participants not reporting nonoccupational HIV risk factors, none
were  HIV  positive  (upper  limit   95%  CI=0.09%).  Of  the  45
participants who did not respond to the question on risk factors,
none  were  HIV  positive.  The one surgeon  whose  serum  tested
indeterminate for HIV antibody  did  not report a nonoccupational
risk.***  Both  of  the HIV-seropositive participants  were  male  and
reported having  performed  surgery on patients with risk factors
for HIV infection. One of the  two  surgeons  reported performing
surgery  on patients with known HIV infection or  AIDS.  Although
they had both  sustained  percutaneous  injuries  in the previous
year, neither reported an injury from a sharp object contaminated
with the blood of a patient known to have HIV infection  or AIDS.
The  surgeon  with an indeterminate result, a man who had retired
from clinical practice,  reported  never  having  operated  on  a
patient  with  known  HIV  infection or AIDS or on a patient with
risk  factors  for  HIV  infection  or  AIDS.   Although  HIV  testing  of  the  serosurvey
participants has been
completed,  testing  for markers  of  hepatitis  B  and  C  virus
infection  is  in  progress.   Additional   analyses   to  assess
representativeness of serosurvey participants and to characterize
the nature and frequency of their occupational contact with blood
are also under way.
Reported  by: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Serosurvey
Study Committee.  AIDS Activity, Hospital Infections Program, and
Laboratory  Investigations   Br,  Div  of  HIV/AIDS,  Center  for
Infectious Diseases, CDC.  Editorial Note:The findings of  this  HIV  serosurvey  assist  in
evaluating  the risk for occupationally acquired HIV infection in
a subset of health-care  workers with frequent occupational blood
contact, including percutaneous  injuries  (4--6). Although these
results may not be generalizable to all orthopedic  surgeons, the
findings do not indicate a high rate of previously undetected HIV
infection among a large group of these surgeons, including  those
who trained or practiced in areas of high HIV/AIDS incidence.  This  serosurvey  has  at 
least  three  limitations. First,
orthopedic  surgeons  who  attended the AAOS annual  meeting  and
participated in this study may  not  have  been representative of
all   orthopedic   surgeons   in  the  United  States.   However,
preliminary analysis suggests that the likelihood of occupational
HIV exposure was at least as high  for serosurvey participants as
for  the  more  than  10,000  surgeons  responding  to  the  AAOS
Orthopaedic Surgeon Survey. Second, HIV seroprevalence  may  have
been underestimated if orthopedic surgeons who knew they were HIV
positive   declined   to  participate.  Third,  the  reliance  on
self-reporting may have  affected  the  accuracy  of  the data on
nonoccupational  risk  factors  for  HIV  infection.   The  frequency  of  occupational  blood
contact and percutaneous
injury  reported  by serosurvey participants and AAOS Orthopaedic
Surgeon Survey respondents  emphasizes  the  need  for orthopedic
surgeons  and  other  health-care  workers  who  are  potentially
exposed  to blood and body fluids to continue to take appropriate
precautions  to  prevent  infection with HIV and other bloodborne
pathogens. As previously recommended  by CDC, such workers should
receive  hepatitis B vaccine, employ universal  precautions,  and
receive appropriate  counseling  and follow-up after occupational
exposure to HIV or hepatitis B virus  (7--10). AAOS has developed
additional recommendations for the prevention of HIV transmission
during  orthopedic surgery (11--13); copies  are  available  from
AAOS, 222 South Prospect Avenue, Park Ridge, IL 60068.  References  
    CDC.  HIV/AIDS surveillance report. Atlanta: US Department of  Health and  Human 
Services, Public Health Service, CDC, December
1990:1--18.  2. CDC. Interpretation  and  use  of  the Western blot assay for
serodiagnosis of human immunodeficiency  virus type 1 infections.
MMWR 1989;38(no. S-7).  3. Dock NL, Kleinman SH, Rayfield MA, Schable  CA,  Williams
AE,
Dodd RY. Human immunodeficiency virus infection and indeterminate
Western  blot  patterns.  Arch  Intern  Med  1991;151:525--30.   4.  Panlilio  AL,  Foy  DR,
Edwards JR, et al. Blood contacts during
surgical procedures. JAMA 1991;265:1533--7.  5.  Tokars  JI, Marcus R, Culver DH, Bell
DM, Cooperative  Study
Group.  Blood contacts  during  surgical  procedures  (Abstract).
Program and  abstracts  of  the  30th  Interscience Conference on
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Washington,  DC:  American
Society for Microbiology, 1990:246.  6. Gerberding JL, Littell C, Tarkington A, Brown A,
Schecter WP.
Risk of exposure of surgical personnel to patients' blood  during
surgery   at  San  Francisco  General  Hospital.  N  Engl  J  Med
1990;322:1788--93.  7. CDC. Recommendations  for  prevention  of HIV transmission in
health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36(no. 2S).  8.   CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions
 for  prevention   of
transmission of human immuno deficiency virus, hepatitis B virus,
and other  bloodborne  pathogens  in  health-care  settings. MMWR
1988;37:377--82,387--8.  9.  CDC.  Public  Health  Service  statement  on  management 
of
occupational exposure to human immunodeficiency virus,  including
considerations   regarding   zidovudine  postexposure  use.  MMWR
1990;39(no. RR-1).
10. ACIP. Protection against viral  hepatitis: recommendations of
the  Immunization  Practices  Advisory  Committee   (ACIP).  MMWR
1990;39(no.  RR-2).   11.  American  Academy  of  Orthopaedic  Surgeons  Task  Force   on
AIDS
and  Orthopaedic  Surgery. Recommendations for the prevention  of
human immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV) transmission in the practice
of orthopaedic surgery. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons, 1989.
12. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons/National Association
of Orthopaedic Nurses. Reducing  the  risk of blood-borne disease
transmission in orthopaedic surgery (Videotape and booklet). Park
Ridge, Illinois: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 1991.
13. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Advisory statement:
HIV-infected orthopaedic surgeons. Park Ridge, Illinois: American
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 1991.
*Including  receipt  of  blood  transfusion   during  1978--1985;
receipt of clotting factor concentrate since 1977  for  treatment
of  hemophilia  or  other  coagulation disorder; male-male sexual
contact at any time since 1977;  intravenous-drug use since 1977;
birth in Haiti or in central or east  Africa;  or  sexual contact
since 1977 with someone in one of the above groups.  Participants
were  not  asked  which  specific  risk  factor(s)  applied  to  them.   **One   of   26   U.S.  
metropolitan  areas  reporting  the highest
cumulative  number  of  AIDS  cases  (1)  or  in  Africa  or  the
Caribbean.  ***In  general,  among  persons  who  are  indeterminate for HIV
antibody but without HIV risk factors, subsequent evaluation does
not confirm HIV infection (2,3). 
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.**Questions  or  messages
regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001986.htm
