A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Water guidelines from the Guidelines for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).  Moist  environments
and aqueous solutions in health-care settings have the potential to serve as reservoirs
for  waterborne  microorganisms.  Under  favorable  environmental  circumstances  (e.g.,
warm temperature and the presence of a source of nutrition), many bacterial and some
protozoal  microorganisms  can  either  proliferate  in  active  growth  or  remain  for  long
periods  in  highly  stable,  environmentally  resistant  (yet  infectious)  forms.  Modes  of
transmission for waterborne infections include The first three modes of transmission are
commonly  associated  with  infections  caused  by  gram-negative  bacteria  and
nontuberculous
 mycobacteria
 (NTM).
 Aerosols
 generated
 from
 water
 sources
contaminated with Legionella spp. often serve as the vehicle for introducing legionellae
to  the  respiratory  tract.394  Legionellosis  is  a  collective  term  describing  infection
produced  by  Legionella  spp.,  whereas  Legionnaires  disease  is  a  multi-system  illness
with pneumonia.395 The clinical and epidemiologic aspects of these diseases (Table 11)
are  discussed  extensively  in  another  guideline.3  Although  Legionnaires  disease  is  a
respiratory
 infection,
 infection-control
 measures
 intended
 to
 prevent
healthcare–associated cases center on the quality of water—the principal reservoir for
Legionella  spp.  Modes  of  transmission  Causative  agent  Source  of  exposure  Clinical
syndromes and diseases Patient populations at greatest risk Occurrence Mortality rate
Legionella  spp.  are  commonly  found  in  various  natural  and  man-made  aquatic
environments446,  447  and  can  enter  health-care  facility  water  systems  in  low  or
undetectable  numbers.448,  449  Cooling  towers,  evaporative  condensers,  heated
potable  water  distribution  systems,  and  locally-produced  distilled  water  can  provide
environments  for  multiplication  of  legionellae.450–454  In  several  hospital  outbreaks,
patients have been infected through exposure to contaminated aerosols generated by
cooling  towers,  showers,  faucets,  respiratory  therapy  equipment,  and  room-air
humidifiers.401–410,  455  Factors  that  enhance  colonization  and  amplification  of
legionellae  in  man-made  water  environments  include  The  bacteria  multiply  within
single-cell  protozoa  in  the  environment  and  within  alveolar  macrophages  in  humans.
Other  gram-negative  bacteria  present  in  potable  water  also  can  cause  health-care
associated infections. Clinically important, opportunistic organisms in tap water include
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas spp., Burkholderia cepacia, Ralstonia pickettii,
Stenotrophomonas  maltophilia,  and  Sphingomonas  spp.  (Tables  12  and  13).
Immunocompromised  patients  are  at  greatest  risk  of  developing  infection.  Medical
conditions  associated  with  these  bacterial  agents  range  from  colonization  of  the
respiratory  and  urinary  tracts  to  deep,  disseminated  infections  that  can  result  in
pneumonia and bloodstream bacteremia. Colonization by any of these organisms often
precedes the development of infection. The use of tap water in medical care (e.g., in
direct patient care, as a diluent for solutions, as a water source for medical instruments
and  equipment,  and  during  the  final  stages  of  instrument  disinfection)  therefore
presents a potential risk for exposure. Colonized patients also can serve as a source of
contamination,  particularly  for  moist  environments  of  medical  equipment  (e.g.,
ventilators). In addition to Legionella spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas
spp.  are  among  the  most  clinically  relevant,  gram-negative,  health-care  associated
pathogens  identified  from  water.  These  and  other  gram-negative,  non-fermentative
bacteria  have  minimal  nutritional  requirements  (i.e.,  these  organisms  can  grow  in
distilled water) and can tolerate a variety of physical conditions. These attributes are
critical  to  the  success  of  these  organisms  as  health-care  associated  pathogens.
Measures  to  prevent  the  spread  of  these  organisms  and  other  waterborne,
gram-negative  bacteria  include  hand  hygiene,  glove  use,  barrier  precautions,  and
eliminating  potentially  contaminated  environmental  reservoirs.464,  465  Modes  of
transmission Clinical syndromes and diseases Environmental sources of pseudomonads
in  healthcare  settings  Environmental  sources  of  pseudomonads  in  the  community
Patient populations at greatest risk Two additional gram-negative bacterial pathogens
that can proliferate in moist environments are Acinetobacter spp. and Enterobacter spp.
571, 572 Members of both genera are responsible for healthcare–associated episodes of
colonization,  bloodstream  infections,  pneumonia,  and  urinary  tract  infections  among
medically compromised patients, especially those in ICUs and burn therapy units.566,
572–583  Infections  caused  by  Acinetobacter  spp.  represent  a  significant  clinical
problem. Average infection rates are higher from July through October compared with
rates
 from
 November
 through
 June.584
 Mortality
 rates
 associated
 with
Acinetobacterbacteremia are 17%–52%, and rates as high as 71% have been reported
for  pneumonia  caused  by  infection  with  either  Acinetobacter  spp.  or  Pseudomonas
spp.Multi-drug resistance, especially in third generation cephalosporins for Enterobacter
spp.,  contributes  to  increased  morbidity  and  mortality.569,  572  Patients  and
health-care  workers  contribute  significantly  to  the  environmental  contamination  of
surfaces  and  equipment  with  Acinetobacter  spp.  and  Enterobacter  spp.,  especially  in
intensive care areas, because of the nature of the medical equipment (e.g., ventilators)
and the moisture associated with this equipment.549, 571, 572, 585 Hand carriage and
hand  transfer  are  commonly  associated  with  health-care–  associated  transmission  of
these organisms and for S. marcescens. 586 Enterobacter spp. are primarily spread in
this  manner  among  patients  by  the  hands  of  health-care  workers.567,  587
Acinetobacter  spp.  have  been  isolated  from  the  hands  of  4%–33%  of  health-care
workers  in  some  studies,585–590  and  transfer  of  an  epidemic  strain  of  Acinetobacter
from
 patients'
 skin
 to
 health-care
 workers'
 hands
 has
 been
 demonstrated
experimentally.591 Acinetobacter infections and outbreaks have also been attributed to
medical  equipment  and  materials  (e.g.,  ventilators,  cool  mist  humidifiers,  vaporizers,
and mist tents) that may have contact with water of uncertain quality (e.g., rinsing a
ventilator circuit in tap water).549– 556 Strict adherence to hand hygiene helps prevent
the  spread  of  both  Acinetobacter  spp.  and  Enterobacter  spp.577,  592  Acinetobacter
spp. have also been detected on dry environmental surfaces (e.g., bed rails, counters,
sinks, bed cupboards, bedding, floors, telephones, and medical charts) in the vicinity of
colonized or infected patients; such contamination is especially problematic for surfaces
that  are  frequently  touched.557–564  In  two  studies,  the  survival  periods  of
Acinetobacter
 baumannii
 and
 Acinetobacter
 calcoaceticus
 on
 dry
 surfaces
approximated that for S. aureus (e.g., 26–27 days).593, 594Because Acinetobacter spp.
may  come  from  numerous  sources  at  any  given  time,  laboratory  investigation  of
health-care associated Acinetobacter infections should involve techniques to determine
biotype, antibiotype, plasmid profile, and genomic fingerprinting (i.e., macrorestriction
analysis)  to  accurately  identify  sources  and  modes  of  transmission  of  the
organism(s).595 NTM are acid-fast bacilli (AFB) commonly found in potable water. NTM
include  both  saprophytic  and  opportunistic  organisms.  Many  NTM  are  of  low
pathogenicity, and some measure of host impairment is necessary to enhance clinical
disease.596 The four most common forms of human disease associated with NTM are
Person-to-person  acquisition  of  NTM  infection,  especially  among  immunocompetent
persons,  does  not  appear  to  occur,  and  close  contacts  of  patients  are  not  readily
infected,  despite  the  high  numbers  of  organisms  harbored  by  such  patients.596,
598–600  NTM  are  spread  via  all  modes  of  transmission  associated  with  water.  In
addition  to  health-care  associated  outbreaks  of  clinical  disease,  NTM  can  colonize
patients in health-care facilities through consumption of contaminated water or ice or
through
 inhalation
 of
 aerosols.601–605
 Colonization
 following
 NTM
 exposure,
particularly of the respiratory tract, occurs when a patient's local defense mechanisms
are  impaired;  overt  clinical  disease  does  not  develop.606  Patients  may  have  positive
sputum  cultures  in  the  absence  of  clinical  disease.  Using  tap  water  during  patient
procedures and specimen collection and in the final steps of instrument reprocessing
can result in pseudo-outbreaks of NTM contamination.607– 609 NTM pseudo-outbreaks
of  Mycobacterium  chelonae,  M.  gordonae,and  M.  xenopi  have  been  associated  with
both  bronchoscopy  and  gastrointestinal  endoscopy  when  Table  14a.  Infections  or
colonizations Table 14b. Pseudo-outbreaks NTM can be isolated from both natural and
man-made  environments.  Numerous  studies  have  identified  632  Some  NTM  species
(e.g., Mycobacterium xenopi) can survive in water at 113°F (45°C), and can be isolated
from hot water taps, which can pose a problem for hospitals that lower the temperature
of their hot water systems.627 Other NTM (e.g., Mycobacterium kansasii, M. gordonae,
M. fortuitum, and M. chelonae) cannot tolerate high temperatures and are associated
more often with cold water lines and taps.629 NTM have a high resistance to chlorine;
they can tolerate free chlorine concentrations of 0.05–0.2 mg/L (0.05–0.2 ppm) found at
the tap.598, 633, 634 They are 20–100 times more resistant to chlorine compared with
coliforms;  slow-growing  strains  of  NTM  (e.g.,  Mycobacterium  avium  and  M.  kanasii)
appear to be more resistant to chorine inactivation compared to fast-growing NTM.635
Slow-growing  NTM  species  have  also  demonstrated  some  resistance  to  formaldehyde
and  glutaraldehyde,  which  has  posed  problems  for  reuse  of  hemodialyzers.31  The
ability of NTM to form biofilms at fluid-surface interfaces (e.g., interior surfaces of water
pipes) contributes to the organisms' resistance to chemical inactivation and provides a
microenvironment  for  growth  and  proliferation.636,  637  Cryptosporidium  parvum  is  a
protozoan  parasite  that  causes  self-limiting  gastroenteritis  in  normal  hosts  but  can
cause
 severe,
 life-threatening
 disease
 in
 immunocompromised
 patients.
 First
recognized  as  a  human  pathogen  in  1976,  C.  parvumcan  be  present  in  natural  and
finished waters after fecal contamination from either human or animal sources.638–641
The  health  risks  associated  with  drinking  potable  water  contaminated  with  minimal
numbers  of  C.  parvum  oocysts  are  unknown.642  It  remains  to  be  determined  if
immunosuppressed  persons  are  more  susceptible  to  lower  doses  of  oocysts  than  are
immunocompetent  persons.  One  study  demonstrated  that  a  median  50%  infectious
dose (ID50) of 132 oocysts of calf origin was sufficient to cause infection among healthy
volunteers.643  In  a  second  study,  the  same  researchers  found  that  oocysts  obtained
from infected foals (newborn horses) were infectious for human volunteers at median
ID50 of 10 oocysts, indicating that different strains or species of Cryptosporidium may
vary in their infectivity for humans.644 In a small study population of 17 healthy adults
with pre-existing antibody to C. parvum, the ID50 was determined to be 1,880 oocysts,
more  than  20-fold  higher  than  in  seronegative  persons.645  These  data  suggest  that
pre-existing immunity derived from previous exposures to Cryptosporidium offers some
protection from infection and illness that ordinarily would result from exposure to low
numbers  of  oocysts.645,  646  Oocysts,  particularly  those  with  thick  walls,  are
environmentally  resistant,  but  their  survival  under  natural  water  conditions  is  poorly
understood. Under laboratory conditions, some oocysts remain viable and infectious in
cold (41°F [5°C]) for months.641 The prevalence of Cryptosporidium in the U.S. drinking
water  supply  is  notable.  Two  surveys  of  approximately  300  surface  water  supplies
revealed that 55%–77% of the water samples contained Cryptosporidium oocysts.647,
648 Because the oocysts are highly resistant to common disinfectants (e.g., chlorine)
used to treat drinking water, filtration of the water is important in reducing the risk of
waterborne  transmission.  Coagulation-floculation  and  sedimentation,  when  used  with
filtration, can collectively achieve approximately a 2.5 log10 reduction in the number of
oocysts.649 However, outbreaks have been associated with both filtered and unfiltered
drinking water systems (e.g., the 1993 outbreak in Milwaukee, Wisconsin that affected
400,000 people).641, 650–652 The presence of oocysts in the water is not an absolute
indicator that infection will occur when the water is consumed, nor does the absence of
detectable  oocysts  guarantee  that  infection  will  not  occur.  Health-care  associated
outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis primarily have been described among groups of elderly
patients  and  immunocompromised  persons.653  Treated  municipal  water  enters  a
health-care facility via the water mains and is distributed throughout the building(s) by
a network of pipes constructed of galvanized iron, copper, and polyvinylchloride (PVC).
The pipe runs should be as short as is practical. Where recirculation is employed, the
pipe  runs  should  be  insulated  and  long  dead  legs  avoided  in  efforts  to  minimize  the
potential  for  water  stagnation,  which  favors  the  proliferation  of  Legionella  spp.  and
NTM. In high-risk applications (e.g., PE areas for severely immunosuppressed patients),
insulated  recirculation  loops  should  be  incorporated  as  a  design  minimal  loss.  Each
water service main, branch main, riser, and branch (to a group of fixtures) has a valve
and a means to reach the valves via an access panel.120 Each fixture has a stop valve.
Valves  permit  the  isolation  of  a  portion  of  the  water  system  within  a  facility  during
repairs or maintenance. Vacuum breakers and other similar devices in the lines prevent
water  from  back-flowing  into  the  system.  All  systems  that  supply  water  should  be
evaluated  to  determine  risk  for  potential  back  siphonage  and  cross  connections.
Health-care  facilities  generate  hot  water  from  municipal  water  using  a  boiler  system.
Hot water heaters and storage vessels for such systems should have a drainage facility
at the lowest point, and the heating element should be located as close as possible to
the  bottom  of  the  vessel  to  facilitate  mixing  and  to  prevent  water  temperature
stratification.  Those  hot  or  cold  water  systems  that  incorporate  an  elevated  holding
tank  should  be  inspected  and  cleaned  annually.  Lids  should  fit  securely  to  exclude
foreign  materials.  The  most  common  point-of-use  fixtures  for  water  in  patient-care
areas  are  sinks,  faucets,  aerators,  showers,  and  toilets;  eye-wash  stations  are  found
primarily  in  laboratories.  The  potential  for  these  fixtures  to  serve  as  a  reservoir  for
pathogenic  microorganisms  has  long  been  recognized  (Table  15).509,  654–656  Wet
surfaces  and  the  production  of  aerosols  facilitate  the  multiplication  and  dispersion  of
microbes. The level of risk associated with aerosol production from point-of-use fixtures
varies. Aerosols from shower heads and aerators have been linked to a limited number
of  clusters  of  gram-negative  bacterial  colonizations  and  infections,  including
Legionnaires  disease,  especially  in  areas  where  immunocompromised  patients  are
present (e.g., surgical ICUs, transplant units, and oncology units).412, 415, 656–659 In
one report, clinical infection was not evident among immunocompetent persons (e.g.,
hospital staff) who used hospital showers when Legionella pneumophila was present in
the  water  system.660  Given  the  infrequency  of  reported  outbreaks  associated  with
faucet  aerators,  consensus  has  not  been  reached  regarding  the  disinfection  of  or
removal  of  these  devices  from  general  use.  If  additional  clusters  of  infections  or
colonizations  occur  in  high-risk  patient-care  areas,  it  may  be  prudent  to  clean  and
decontaminate the aerators or to remove them.658, 659 ASHRAE recommends cleaning
and monthly disinfection of aerators in high-risk patient-care areas as part of Legionella
control measures.661 Although aerosols are produced with toilet flushing,662, 663 no
epidemiologic  evidence  suggests  that  these  aerosols  pose  a  direct  infection  hazard.
Although not considered a standard point-of-use fixture, decorative fountains are being
installed  in  increasing  numbers  in  health-care  facilities  and  other  public  buildings.
Aerosols  from  a  decorative  fountain  have  been  associated  with  transmission  of
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 infection to a small cluster of older adults.664 This
hotel  lobby  fountain  had  been  irregularly  maintained,  and  water  in  the  fountain  may
have  been  heated  by  submersed  lighting,  all  of  which  favored  the  proliferation  of
Legionella  in  the  system.664  Because  of  the  potential  for  generations  of  infectious
aerosols,  a  prudent  prevention  measure  is  to  avoid  locating  these  fixtures  in  or  near
high-risk  patient-care  areas  and  to  adhere  to  written  policies  for  routine  fountain
maintenance.120  Low:  few  well-described  outbreaks  Minimal:  actual  infections  not
demonstrated. *Modified from reference 654 and used with permission of the publisher
(Slack, Inc.) Hot water temperature is usually measured at the point of use or at the
point  at  which  the  water  line  enters  equipment  requiring  hot  water  for  proper
operation.120 Generally, the hot water temperature in hospital patient-care areas is no
greater than a temperature within the range of 105°F–120°F (40.6°C– 49°C), depending
on  the  AIA  guidance  issued  at  the  year  in  which  the  facility  was  built.120  Hot  water
temperature in patient-care areas of skilled nursing-care facilities is set within a slightly
lower range of 95°F–110°F (35°C–43.3°C) depending on the AIA guidance at the time of
facility  construction.120  Many  states  have  adopted  a  temperature  setting  in  these
ranges  into  their  health-care  regulations  and  building  codes.  ASHRAE,  however,  has
recommended higher settings.661 Steam jets or booster heaters are usually needed to
meet the hot water temperature requirements in certain service areas of the hospital
(e.g., the kitchen [120°F (49°C)] or the laundry [160°F (71°C)]).120 Additionally, water
lines may need to be heated to a particular temperature specified by manufacturers of
specific hospital equipment. Hot-water distribution systems serving patient-care areas
are generally operated under constant recirculation to provide continuous hot water at
each hot-water outlet.120 If a facility is or has a hemodialysis unit, then continuously
circulated, cold treated water is provided to that unit.120 To minimize the growth and
persistence  of  gram-negative  waterborne  bacteria  (e.g.,  thermophilic  NTM  and
Legionellaspp.),627, 703–709 cold water in health-care facilities should be stored and
distributed at temperatures below 68°F (20°C); hot water should be stored above 140°F
(60°C) and circulated with a minimum return temperature of 124°F (51°C),661 or the
highest  temperature  specified  in  state  regulations  and  building  codes.  If  the  return
temperature  setting  of  124°F  (51°C)  is  permitted,  then  installation  of  preset
thermostatic  mixing  valves  near  the  point-of-use  can  help  to  prevent  scalding.  Valve
maintenance  is  especially  important  in  preventing  valve  failure,  which  can  result  in
scalding. New shower systems in large buildings, hospitals, and nursing homes should
be designed to permit mixing of hot and cold water near the shower head. The warm
water  section  of  pipe  between  the  control  valve  and  shower  head  should  be
self-draining. Where buildings can not be retrofitted, other approaches to minimize the
growth of Legionella spp. include Systems should be inspected annually to ensure that
thermostats are functioning properly. Adequate water pressure ensures sufficient water
supplies  for  Maintaining  adequate  pressure  also  helps  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  the
piping system. Corrective measures for water-system failures have not been studied in
well-designed experiments; these measures are instead based on empiric engineering
and  infection-control  principles.  Health-care  facilities  can  occasionally  sustain  both
intentional cut-offs by the municipal water authority to permit new construction project
tie-ins and unintentional disruptions in service when a water main breaks as a result of
aging  infrastructure  or  a  construction  accident.  Vacuum  breakers  or  other  similar
devices  can  prevent  backflow  of  water  in  the  facility's  distribution  system  during
water-disruption emergencies.11 To be prepared for such an emergency, all health-care
facilities  need  contingency  plans  that  identify  Detailed,  up-to-date  plans  for  hot  and
cold  water  piping  systems  should  be  readily  available  for  maintenance  and  repair
purposes  in  case  of  system  problems.  Opening  potable  water  systems  for  repair  or
construction  and  subjecting  systems  to  water-pressure  changes  can  result  in  water
discoloration and dramatic increases in the concentrations of Legionella spp. and other
gram-negative bacteria. The maintenance of a chlorine residual at all points within the
piping system also offers some protection from entry of contamination to the pipes in
the  event  of  inadvertent  cross-connection  between  potable  and  non-potable  water
lines. As a minimum preventive measure, ASHRAE recommends a thorough flushing of
the system.661High-temperature flushing or hyperchlorination may also be appropriate
strategies  to  decrease  potentially  high  concentrations  of  waterborne  organisms.  The
decision to pursue either of these remediation strategies, however, should be made on
a  case-by-case  basis.  If  only  a  portion  of  the  system  is  involved,  high  temperature
flushing or chlorination can be used on only that portion of the system.661 When shock
decontamination  of  hot  water  systems  is  necessary  (e.g.,  after  disruption  caused  by
construction and after cross-connections), the hot water temperature should be raised
to 160°F–170°F (71°C–77°C) and maintained at that level while each outlet around the
system  is  progressively  flushed.  A  minimum  flush  time  of  5  minutes  has  been
recommended;3the  optimal  flush  time  is  not  known,  however,  and  longer  flush  times
may  be  necessary.714  The  number  of  outlets  that  can  be  flushed  simultaneously
depends  on  the  capacity  of  the  water  heater  and  the  flow  capability  of  the  system.
Appropriate  safety  procedures  to  prevent  scalding  are  essential.  When  possible,
flushing  should  be  performed  when  the  fewest  building  occupants  are  present  (e.g.,
during  nights  and  weekends).  When  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  shock
chlorination  may  serve  as  an  alternative  method.661  Experience  with  this  method  of
decontamination  is  limited,  however,  and  high  levels  of  free  chlorine  can  corrode
metals.  Chlorine  should  be  added,  preferably  overnight,  to  achieve  a  free  chlorine
residual  of  at  least  2  mg/L  (2  ppm)  throughout  the  system.661  This  may  require
chlorination of the water heater or tank to levels of 20–50 mg/L (20–50 ppm). The pH of
the
 water
 should
 be
 maintained
 at
 7.0–8.0.661
 After
 completion
 of
 the
decontamination, recolonization of the hot water system is likely to occur unless proper
temperatures  are  maintained  or  a  procedure  such  as  continuous  supplemental
chlorination  is  continued.  Interruptions  of  the  water  supply  and  sewage  spills  are
situations  that  require  immediate  recovery  and  remediation  measures  to  ensure  the
health and safety of patients and staff.715 When delivery of potable water through the
municipal distribution system has been disrupted, the public water supplier must issue
a "boil water" advisory if microbial contamination presents an immediate public health
risk  to  customers.  The  hospital  engineer  should  oversee  the  restoration  of  the  water
system in the facility and clear it for use when appropriate. Hospitals must maintain a
high  level  of  surveillance  for  waterborne  disease  among  patients  and  staff  after  the
advisory is lifted.642 Flooding from either external (e.g., from a hurricane) or internal
sources  (e.g.,  a  water  system  break)  usually  results  in  property  damage  and  a
temporary  loss  of  water  and  sanitation.716–718  JCAHO  requires  all  hospitals  to  have
plans  that  address  facility  response  for  recovery  from  both  internal  and  external
disasters.713, 719 The plans are required to discuss The basic principles of structural
recovery  from  flooding  are  similar  to  those  for  recovery  from  sewage  contamination
(Box 9 and 10). Following a major event (e.g., flooding), facilities may elect to conduct
microbial sampling of water after the system is restored to verify that water quality has
been returned to safe levels (<500 CFU/mL, heterotrophic plate count). This approach
may  help  identify  point-of-use  fixtures  that  may  harbor  contamination  as  a  result  of
design or engineering features.720 Medical records should be allowed to dry and then
either  photocopied  or  placed  in  plastic  covers  before  returning  them  to  the  record.
Moisture meters can be used to assess water-damaged structural materials. If porous
structural  materials  for  walls  have  a  moisture  content  of  >20%  after  72  hours,  the
affected
 material
 should
 be
 removed.266,
 278,
 313
 The
 management
 of
water-damaged structural materials is not strictly limited to major water catastrophes
(e.g.,  flooding  and  sewage  intrusions);  the  same  principles  are  used  to  evaluate  the
damage from leaking roofs, point-of-use fixtures, and equipment. Additional sources of
moisture include condensate on walls from boilers and poorly engineered humidification
in HVAC systems. Potable water disruptions Sewage spills/malfunction *Material in this
box is compiled from references 266, 278, 315, 713, 716–719, 721–729. An exception
to  these  recommendations  is  made  for  hemodialysis  units  where  water  is  further
treated  either  by  portable  water  treatment  or  large-scale  water  treatment  systems
usually involving reverse osmosis (RO). In the United States, >97% of dialysis facilities
use  RO  treatment  for  their  water.721  However,  changing  pre-treatment  filters  and
disinfecting  the  system  to  prevent  colonization  of  the  RO  membrane  and  microbial
contamination down-stream of the pre-treatment filter are prudent measures. General
emergency  preparedness  Staffing  Patterns  Regional  planning  among  are  facilities  for
disaster management Medical services and infection control Climate control *Material in
this box was compiled from references 713, 716–719. In addition to using supplemental
treatment methods as remediation measures after inadvertent contamination of water
systems, health-care facilities sometimes use special measures to control waterborne
microorganisms  on  a  sustained  basis.  This  decision  is  most  often  associated  with
outbreaks  of  legionellosis  and  subsequent  efforts  to  control  legionellae,722although
some  facilities  have  tried  supplemental  measures  to  better  control  thermophilic
NTM.627  The  primary  disinfectant  for  both  cold  and  hot  water  systems  is  chlorine.
However,  chlorine  residuals  are  expected  to  be  low,  and  possibly  nonexistent,  in  hot
water  tanks  because  of  extended  retention  time  in  the  tank  and  elevated  water
temperature.  Flushing,  especially  that  which  removes  sludge  from  the  bottom  of  the
tank,  probably  provides  the  most  effective  treatment  of  water  systems.  Unlike  the
situation  for  disinfecting  cooling  towers,  no  equivalent  recommendations  have  been
made  for  potable  water  systems,  although  specific  intervention  strategies  have  been
published.403, 723 The principal approaches to disinfection of potable systems are heat
flushing using temperatures 160°F–170°F (71°– 77°C), hyperchlorination, and physical
cleaning of hot-water tanks.3, 403, 661 Potable systems are easily recolonized and may
require continuous intervention (e.g., raising of hot water temperatures or continuous
chlorination).403, 711 Chlorine solutions lose potency over time, thereby rendering the
stocking  of  large  quantities  of  chlorine  impractical.  Some  hospitals  with  hot  water
systems  identified  as  the  source  of  Legionella  spp.  have  performed  emergency
decontamination
 of
 their
 systems
 by
 pulse
 (i.e.,
 one-time)
 thermal
disinfection/superheating or hyperchlorination.711, 714, 724, 725 After either of these
procedures,  hospitals  either  maintain  their  heated  water  with  a  minimum  return
temperature of 124°F (51°C) and cold water at <68°F (<20°C) or chlorinate their hot
water  to  achieve  1–2  mg/L  (1–2  ppm)  of  free  residual  chlorine  at  the  tap.26,  437,
709–711,  726,  727  Additional  measures  (e.g.,  physical  cleaning  or  replacement  of
hot-water storage tanks, water heaters, faucets, and shower heads) may be required to
help  eliminate  accumulations  of  scale  and  sediment  that  protect  organisms  from  the
biocidal effects of heat and chlorine.457, 711 Alternative methods for controlling and
eradicating  legionellae  in  water  systems  (e.g.,  treating  water  with  chlorine  dioxide,
heavy metal ions [i.e., copper/silver ions], ozone, and UV light) have limited the growth
of legionellae under laboratory and operating conditions.728–742 Further studies on the
long-term  efficacy  of  these  treatments  are  needed  before  these  methods  can  be
considered  standard  applications.  Renewed  interest  in  the  use  of  chloramines  stems
from  concerns  about  adverse  health  effects  associated  with  disinfectants  and
disinfection  by-products.743  Monochloramine  usage  minimizes  the  formation  of
disinfection
 by-products,
 including
 trihalomethanes
 and
 haloacetic
 acids.
Monochloramine can also reach distal points in a water system and can penetrate into
bacterial  biofilms  more  effectively  than  free  chlorine.744  However,  monochloramine
use  is  limited  to  municipal  water  treatment  plants  and  is  currently  not  available  to
health-care  facilities  as  a  supplemental  water-treatment  approach.  A  recent  study
indicated  that  90%  of  Legionnaires  disease  outbreaks  associated  with  drinking  water
could have been prevented if monochloramine rather than free chlorine has been used
for  residual  disinfection.745  In  a  retrospective  comparison  of  health-care  associated
Legionnaires  disease  incidence  in  central  Texas  hospitals,  the  same  research  group
documented  an  absence  of  cases  in  facilities  located  in  communities  with
monochloramine-treated municipal water.746Additional data are needed regarding the
effectiveness of using monochloramine before its routine use as a disinfectant in water
systems  can  be  recommended.  No  data  have  been  published  regarding  the
effectiveness  of  monochloramine  installed  at  the  level  of  the  health-care  facility.
Additional filtration of potable water systems is not routinely necessary. Filters are used
in water lines in dialysis units, however, and may be inserted into the lines for specific
equipment  (e.g.,  endoscope  washers  and  disinfectors)  for  the  purpose  of  providing
bacteria-free  water  for  instrument  reprocessing.  Additionally,  an  RO  unit  is  usually
added  to  the  distribution  system  leading  to  PE  areas.  The  primary  and  secondary
environmental  infection-control  strategies  described  in  this  section  on  the  guideline
pertain  to  health-care  facilities  without  transplant  units.  Infection-control  measures
specific to PE or transplant units (i.e., patient-care areas housing patients at the highest
risk  for  morbidity  and  mortality  from  Legionella  spp.  infection)  are  described  in  the
subsection  titled  Preventing  Legionnaires  Disease  in  Protective  Environments.
Health-care  facilities  use  at  least  two  general  strategies  to  prevent  health-care
associated legionellosis when no cases or only sporadic cases have been detected. The
first  is  an  environmental  surveillance  approach  involving  periodic  culturing  of  water
samples  from  the  hospital's  potable  water  system  to  monitor  for  Legionella  spp.
747–750  If  any  sample  is  culture-positive,  diagnostic  testing  is  recommended  for  all
patients  with  health-care  associated  pneumonia.748,  749  In-house  testing  is
recommended  for  facilities  with  transplant  programs  as  part  of  a  comprehensive
treatment/management  program.  If  ≥30%  of  the  samples  are  culture-positive  for
Legionella spp., decontamination of the facility's potable water system is warranted.748
The premise for this approach is that no cases of health-care associated legionellosis
can  occur  if  Legionellaspp.  are  not  present  in  the  potable  water  system,  and,
conversely,  cases  of  health-care  associated  legionellosis  could  potentially  occur  if
Legionella spp. are cultured from the water.26, 751 Physicians who are informed that
the  hospital's  potable  water  system  is  culture-positive  for  Legionella  spp.  are  more
likely  to  order  diagnostic  tests  for  legionellosis.  A  potential  advantage  of  the
environmental  surveillance  approach  is  that  periodic  culturing  of  water  is  less  costly
than  routine  laboratory  diagnostic  testing  for  all  patients  who  have  health-care
associated  pneumonia.  The  primary  argument  against  this  approach  is  that,  in  the
absence of cases, the relationship between water-culture results and legionellosis risk
remains  undefined.3  Legionnella  spp.  can  be  present  in  the  water  systems  of
buildings752 without being associated with known cases of disease.437, 707, 753 In a
study of 84 hospitals in Québec, 68% of the water systems were found to be colonized
with  Legionella  spp.,  and  26%  were  colonized  at  >30%  of  sites  sampled;  cases  of
Legionnaires  disease,  however,  were  infrequently  reported  from  these  hospitals.707
Other  factors  also  argue  against  environmental  surveillance.  Interpretation  of  results
from periodic water culturing might be confounded by differing results among the sites
sampled in a single water system and by fluctuations in the concentration of Legionella
spp. at the same site.709, 754 In addition, the risk for illness after exposure to a given
source might be influenced by several factors other than the presence or concentration
of organisms, including Thus, data are insufficient to assign a level of disease risk even
on the basis of the number of colony-forming units detected in samples from areas for
immunocompetent  patients.  Conducting  environmental  surveillance  would  obligate
hospital  administrators  to  initiate  water-decontamination  programs  if  Legionella  spp.
are identified. Therefore, periodic monitoring of water from the hospital's potable water
system and from aerosol-producing devices is not widely recommended in facilities that
have not experienced cases of health-care associated legionellosis.661, 758 The second
strategy  to  prevent  and  control  health-care  associated  legionellosis  is  a  clinical
approach,  in  which  providers  maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  legionellosis  and
order  appropriate  diagnostic  tests  (i.e.,  culture,  urine  antigen,  and  direct  fluorescent
antibody [DFA] serology) for patients with health-care associated pneumonia who are at
high  risk  for  legionellosis  and  its  complications.437,  759,  760  The  testing  of  autopsy
specimens  can  be  included  in  this  strategy  should  a  death  resulting  from
healthcare–associated  pneumonia  occur.  Identification  of  one  case  of  definite  or  two
cases  of  possible  healthcare–associated  Legionnaires  disease  should  prompt  an
epidemiologic investigation for a hospital source of Legionella spp., which may involve
culturing the facility's water for Legionella. Routine maintenance of cooling towers, and
use  of  sterile  water  for  the  filling  and  terminal  rinsing  of  nebulization  devices  and
ventilation  equipment  can  help  to  minimize  potential  sources  of  contamination.
Circulating potable water temperatures should match those outlined in the subsection
titled Water Temperature and Pressure, as permitted by state code. The indications for
a full-scale environmental investigation to search for and subsequently decontaminate
identified  sources  of  Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  without  transplant  units
have not been clarified; these indications would likely differ depending on the facility.
Case  categories  for  health-care  associated  Legionnaires  disease  in  facilities  without
transplant units include definite cases (i.e., laboratory-confirmed cases of legionellosis
that occur in patients who have been hospitalized continuously for ≥10 days before the
onset of illness) and possible cases (i.e., laboratory-confirmed infections that occur 2–9
days after hospital admission).3 In settings in which as few as one to three health-care
associated  cases  are  recognized  over  several  months,  intensified  surveillance  for
Legionnaires  disease  has  frequently  identified  numerous  additional  cases.405,  408,
432, 453, 739, 759, 760 This finding suggests the need for a low threshold for initiating
an  investigation  after  laboratory  confirmation  of  cases  of  health-care  associated
legionellosis.  When  developing  a  strategy  for  responding  to  such  a  finding,  however,
infection-control personnel should consider the level of risk for health-care– associated
acquisition of, and mortality from, Legionella spp. infection at their particular facility. An
epidemiologic  investigation  conducted  to  determine  the  source  of  Legionella  spp.
involves  several  important  steps  (Box  11).  Laboratory  assessment  is  crucial  in
supporting  epidemiologic  evidence  of  a  link  between  human  illness  and  a  specific
environmental  source.761  Strain  determination  from  subtype  analysis  is  most
frequently used in these investigations.410, 762–764 Once the environmental source is
established  and  confirmed  with  laboratory  support,  supplemental  water  treatment
strategies  can  be  initiated  as  appropriate.  The  decision  to  search  for  hospital
environmental  sources  of  Legionella  spp.  and  the  choice  of  procedures  to  eradicate
such  contamination  are  based  on  several  considerations,  as  follows:  This  subsection
outlines  infection-control  measures  applicable  to  those  health-care  facilities  providing
care to severely immunocompromised patients. Indigenous microorganisms in the tap
water  of  these  facilities  may  pose  problems  for  such  patients.  These  measures  are
designed  to  prevent  the  generation  of  potentially  infectious  aerosols  from  water  and
the  subsequent  exposure  of  PE  patients  or  other  immunocompromised  patients  (e.g.,
transplant  patients)  (Table  17).  Infection-control  measures  that  address  the  use  of
water with medical equipment (e.g., ventilators, nebulizers, and equipment humidifiers)
are  described  in  other  guidelines  and  publications.3,  455  If  one  case  of
laboratory-confirmed,  health-care  associated  Legionnaires  disease  is  identified  in  a
patient in a solid-organ transplant program or in PE (i.e., an inpatient in PE for all or part
of the 2–10 days prior to onset of illness) or if two or more laboratory-confirmed cases
occur  among  patients  who  had  visited  an  outpatient  PE  setting,  the  hospital  should
report  the  cases  to  the  local  and  state  health  departments.  The  hospital  should  then
initiate  a  thorough  epidemiologic  and  environmental  investigation  to  determine  the
likely  environmental  sources  of  Legionella  spp.9  The  source  of  Legionellashould  be
decontaminated  or  removed.  Isolated  cases  may  be  difficult  to  investigate.  Because
transplant  recipients  are  at  substantially  higher  risk  for  disease  and  death  from
legionellosis compared with other hospitalized patients, periodic culturing for Legionella
spp. in water samples from the potable water in the solid-organ transplant and/or PE
unit can be performed as part of an overall strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in
PE  units.9,  431,  710,  769  The  optimal  methodology  (i.e.,  frequency  and  number  of
sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in PE units has not been determined, and
the  cost-effectiveness  of  this  strategy  has  not  been  evaluated.  Because  transplant
recipients are at high risk for Legionnaires disease and because no data are available to
determine a safe concentration of legionellae organisms in potable water, the goal of
environmental  surveillance  for  Legionella  spp.  should  be  to  maintain  water  systems
with  no  detectable  organisms.9,  431  Culturing  for  legionellae  may  be  used  to  assess
the  effectiveness  of  water  treatment  or  decontamination  methods,  a  practice  that
provides  benefits  to  both  patients  and  health-care  workers.767,  770  Protecting
patient-care devices and instruments from inadvertent tap water contamination during
room  cleaning  procedures  is  also  important  in  any  immunocompromised  patient-care
area.  In  a  recent  outbreak  of  gram-negative  bacteremias  among  open-heart-surgery
patients,  pressure-monitoring  equipment  that  was  assembled  and  left  uncovered
overnight prior to the next day's surgeries was inadvertently contaminated with mists
and  splashing  water  from  a  hose-disinfectant  system  used  for  cleaning.771  Modern
health-care  facilities  maintain  indoor  climate  control  during  warm  weather  by  use  of
cooling towers (large facilities) or evaporative condensers (smaller buildings). A cooling
tower  is  a  wet-type,  evaporative  heat  transfer  device  used  to  discharge  to  the
atmosphere  waste  heat  from  a  building's  air  conditioning  condensers  (Figure  5).772,
773 Warm water from air-conditioning condensers is piped to the cooling tower where it
is  sprayed  downward  into  a  counter-  or  cross-current  air  flow.  To  accelerate  heat
transfer to the air, the water passes over the fill, which either breaks water into droplets
or  causes  it  to  spread  into  a  thin  film.772,  773  Most  systems  use  fans  to  move  air
through the tower, although some large industrial cooling towers rely on natural draft
circulation  of  air.  The  cooled  water  from  the  tower  is  piped  back  to  the  condenser,
where  it  again  picks  up  heat  generated  during  the  process  of  chilling  the  system's
refrigerant. The water is cycled back to the cooling tower to be cooled. Closed-circuit
cooling towers and evaporative condensers are also evaporative heat-transfer devices.
In these systems, the process fluid (e.g., water, ethylene glycol/water mixture, oil, or a
condensing refrigerant) does not directly contact the cooling air, but is contained inside
a coil assembly.661 Water temperatures are approximate and may differ substantially
according  to  system  use  and  design.  Warm  water  from  the  condenser  (or  chiller)  is
sprayed downward into a counter- or cross-current air flow. Water passes over the fill (a
component of the system designed to increase the surface area of the water exposed
to air), and heat from the water is transferred to the air. Some of the water becomes
aerosolized during this process, although the volume of aerosol discharged to the air
can  be  reduced  by  the  placement  of  a  drift  eliminator.  Water  cooled  in  the  tower
returns  to  the  heat  source  to  cool  refrigerant  from  the  air  conditioning  unit.  Cooling
towers  and  evaporative  condensers  incorporate  inertial  stripping  devices  called  drift
eliminators  to  remove  water  droplets  generated  within  the  unit.  Although  the
effectiveness  of  these  eliminators  varies  substantially  depending  on  design  and
condition, some water droplets in the size range of <5 μm will likely leave the unit, and
some larger droplets leaving the unit may be reduced to ≤5 μm by evaporation. Thus,
even with proper operation, a cooling tower or evaporative condenser can generate and
expel respirable water aerosols. If either the water in the unit's basin or the make-up
water  (added  to  replace  water  lost  to  evaporation)  contains  Legionella  spp.  or  other
waterborne  microorganisms,  these  organisms  can  be  aerosolized  and  dispersed  from
the unit.774 Clusters of both Legionnaires disease and Pontiac fever have been traced
to  exposure  to  infectious  water  aerosols  originating  from  cooling  towers  and
evaporative  condensers  contaminated  with  Legionella  spp.  Although  most  of  these
outbreaks have been community-acquired episodes of pneumonia,775–782 health-care
associated Legionnaires disease has been linked to cooling tower aerosol exposure.404,
405 Contaminated aerosols from cooling towers on hospital premises gained entry to
the buildings either through open windows or via air handling system intakes located
near  the  tower  equipment.  Cooling  towers  and  evaporative  condensers  provide  ideal
ecological  niches  for  Legionella  spp.  The  typical  temperature  of  the  water  in  cooling
towers  ranges  from  85°F–95°F  (29°C–35°C),  although  temperatures  can  be  above
120°F  (49°C)  and  below  70°F  (21°C)  depending  on  system  heat  load,  ambient
temperature,  and  operating  strategy.661  An  Australian  study  of  cooling  towers  found
that legionellae colonized or multiplied in towers with basin temperatures above 60.8°F
(16°C), and multiplication became explosive at temperatures above 73.4°F (23°C).783
Water  temperature  in  closed-circuit  cooling  towers  and  evaporative  condensers  is
similar  to  that  in  cooling  towers.  Considerable  variation  in  the  piping  arrangement
occurs. In addition, stagnant areas or dead legs may be difficult to clean or penetrate
with biocides. Several documents address the routine maintenance of cooling towers,
evaporative  condensers,  and  whirlpool  spas.661,  784–787  They  suggest  following
manufacturer's recommendations for cleaning and biocide treatment of these devices;
all health-care facilities should ensure proper maintenance for their cooling towers and
evaporative condensers, even in the absence of Legionella spp (Appendix C). Because
cooling towers and evaporative condensers can be shut down during periods when air
conditioning  is  not  needed,  this  maintenance  cleaning  and  treatment  should  be
performed  before  starting  up  the  system  for  the  first  time  in  the  warm  season.782
Emergency
 decontamination
 protocols
 describing
 cleaning
 procedures
 and
hyperchlorination for cooling towers have been developed for towers implicated in the
transmission
 of
 legionellosis.786,
 787
 Hemodialysis,
 hemofiltration,
 and
hemodiafiltration require special water-treatment processes to prevent adverse patient
outcomes  of  dialysis  therapy  resulting  from  improper  formulation  of  dialysate  with
water  containing  high  levels  of  certain  chemical  or  biological  contaminants.  The
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Medical  Instrumentation  (AAMI)  has  established
chemical  and  microbiologic  standards  for  the  water  used  to  prepare  dialysate,
substitution fluid, or to reprocess hemodialyzers for renal replacement therapy.788–792
The  AAMI  standards  address:  Water  treatment  systems  used  in  hemodialysis  employ
several physical and/or chemical processes either singly or in combination (Figure 6).
These systems may be portable units or large systems that feed several rooms. In the
United  States,  >97%  of  maintenance  hemodialysis  facilities  use  RO  alone  or  in
combination with deionization.793 Many acute-care facilities use portable hemodialysis
machines with attached portable water treatment systems that use either deionization
or RO. These machines were exempted from earlier versions of AAMI recommendations,
but given current knowledge about toxic exposures to and inflammatory processes in
patients new to dialysis, these machines should now come into compliance with current
AAMI recommendations for hemodialysis water and dialysate quality.788, 789 Previous
recommendations  were  based  on  the  assumption  that  acute-care  patients  did  not
experience the same degree of adverse effects from short-term, cumulative exposures
to  either  chemicals  or  microbiologic  agents  present  in  hemodialysis  fluids  compared
with the effects encountered by patients during chronic, maintenance dialysis.788, 789
Additionally,  JCAHO  is  reviewing  inpatient  practices  and  record-keeping  for  dialysis
(acute  and  maintenance)  for  adherence  to  AAMI  standards  and  recommended
practices. Neither the water used to prepare dialysate nor the dialysate itself needs to
be  sterile,  but  tap  water  can  not  be  used  without  additional  treatment.  Infections
caused  by  rapid-growing  NTM  (e.g.,  Mycobacterium  chelonae  and  M.  abscessus)
present  a  potential  risk  to  hemodialysis  patients  (especially  those  in  hemodialyzer
reuse  programs)  if  disinfection  procedures  to  inactivate  mycobacteria  in  the  water
(low-level
 disinfection)
 and
 the
 hemodialyzers
 (high-level
 disinfection)
 are
inadequate.31,  32,  633  Other  factors  associated  with  microbial  contamination  in
dialysis  systems  could  involve  the  water  treatment  system,  the  water  and  dialysate
distribution  systems,  and  the  type  of  hemodialyzer.666,  667,  794–799  Understanding
the various factors and their influence on contamination levels is the key to preventing
high levels of microbial contamination in dialysis therapy. In several studies, pyrogenic
reactions were demonstrated to have been caused by lipopolysaccharide or endotoxin
associated with gram-negative bacteria.794, 800–803 Early studies demonstrated that
parenteral exposure to endotoxin at a concentration of 1 ng/kg body weight/hour was
the threshold dose for producing pyrogenic reactions in humans, and that the relative
potencies  of  endotoxin  differ  by  bacterial  species.804,  805  Gram-negative  water
bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas spp.) have been shown to multiply rapidly in a variety of
hospital-associated  fluids  that  can  be  used  as  supply  water  for  hemodialysis  (e.g.,
distilled  water,  deionized  water,  RO  water,  and  softened  water)  and  in  dialysate  (a
balanced  salt  solution  made  with  this  water).806  Several  studies  have  demonstrated
that the attack rates of pyrogenic reactions are directly associated with the number of
bacteria in dialysate.666, 667, 807 These studies provided the rationale for setting the
heterotrophic  bacteria  standards  in  the  first  AAMI  hemodialysis  guideline  at  ≤2,000
CFU/mL in dialysate and one log lower (≤200 CFU/mL) for the water used to prepare
dialysate.668,  788  If  the  level  of  bacterial  contamination  exceeded  200  CFU/mL  in
water,  this  level  could  be  amplified  in  the  system  and  effectively  constitute  a  high
inoculum for dialysate at the start of a dialysis treatment.807, 808 Pyrogenic reactions
did not appear to occur when the level of contamination was below 2,000 CFU/mL in
dialysate unless the source of the endotoxin was exogenous to the dialysis system (i.e.,
present in the community water supply). Endotoxins in a community water supply have
been  linked  to  the  development  of  pyrogenic  reactions  among  dialysis  patients.794
Whether  endotoxin  actually  crosses  the  dialyzer  membrane  is  controversial.  Several
investigators  have  shown  that  bacteria  growing  in  dialysate-generated  products  that
could  cross  the  dialyzer  membrane.809,  810  Gram-negative  bacteria  growing  in
dialysate  have  produced  endotoxins  that  in  turn  stimulated  the  production  of
anti-endotoxin  antibodies  in  hemodialysis  patients;801,  811  these  data  suggest  that
bacterial endotoxins, although large molecules, cross dialyzer membranes either intact
or  as  fragments.  The  use  of  the  very  permeable  membranes  known  as  high-flux
membranes  (which  allow  large  molecules  [e.g.,  β2  microglobulin]  to  traverse  the
membrane)  increases  the  potential  for  passage  of  endotoxins  into  the  blood  path.
Several  studies  support  this  contention.  In  one  such  study,  an  increase  in  plasma
endotoxin  concentrations  during  dialysis  was  observed  when  patients  were  dialyzed
against  dialysate  containing  103  –104  CFU/mL  Pseudomonasspp.812  In  vitro  studies
using both radiolabeled lipopolysaccharide and biologic assays have demonstrated that
biologically  active  substances  derived  from  bacteria  found  in  dialysate  can  cross  a
variety of dialyzer membranes.802, 813–816 Patients treated with high-flux membranes
have  had  higher  levels  of  anti-endotoxin  antibodies  than  subjects  or  patients  treated
with  conventional  membranes.817  Finally,  since  1989,  19%–22%  of  dialysis  centers
have reported pyrogenic reactions in the absence of septicemia.818, 819 Investigations
of adverse outcomes among patients using reprocessed dialyzers have demonstrated a
greater risk for developing pyrogenic reactions when the water used to reprocess these
devices contained >6 ng/mL endotoxin and >104CFU/mL bacteria.820 In addition to the
variability in endotoxin assays, host factors also are involved in determining whether a
patient  will  mount  a  response  to  endotoxin.803  Outbreak  investigations  of  pyrogenic
reactions and bacteremias associated with hemodialyzer reuse have demonstrated that
pyrogenic  reactions  are  prevented  once  the  endotoxin  level  in  the  water  used  to
reprocess  the  dialyzers  is  returned  to  below  the  AAMI  standard  level.821  Reuse  of
dialyzers and use of bicarbonate dialysate, high-flux dialyzer membranes, or high-flux
dialysis may increase the potential for pyrogenic reactions if the water in the dialysis
setting does not meet standards.796–798 Although investigators have been unable to
demonstrate  endotoxin  transfer  across  dialyzer  membranes,803,  822,  823  the
preponderance  of  reports  now  supports  the  ability  of  endotoxin  to  transfer  across  at
least  some  high-flux  membranes  under  some  operating  conditions.  In  addition  to  the
acute risk of pyrogenic reactions, indirect evidence in increasingly demonstrating that
chronic exposure to low amounts of endotoxin may play a role in some of the long-term
complications of hemodialysis therapy. Patients treated with ultrafiltered dialysate for
5–6 months have demonstrated a decrease in serum β2 microglobulin concentrations
and a decrease in markers of an inflammatory response.824–826 In studies of longer
duration,  use  of  microbiologically  ultrapure  dialysate  has  been  associated  with  a
decreased  incidence  of  β2  microglobulin-associated  amyloidosis.827,  828  Although
patient benefit likely is associated with the use of ultrapure dialysate, no consensus has
been reached regarding the potential adoption of this as standard in the United States.
Debate  continues  regarding  the  bacterial  and  endotoxin  limits  for  dialysate.  As
advances in water treatment and hemodialysis processes occur, efforts are underway
to  move  improved  technology  from  the  manufacturer  out  into  the  user  community.
Cost-benefit studies, however, have not been done, and substantially increased costs to
implement  newer  water  treatment  modalities  are  anticipated.  To  reconcile  AAMI
documents  with  current  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  format,
AAMI has determined that its hemodialysis standards will be discussed in the following
four installments: RD 5 for hemodialysis equipment, RD 62 for product water quality, RD
47 for dialyzer reprocessing, and RD 52 for dialysate quality. The Renal Diseases and
Dialysis  Committee  of  AAMI  is  expected  to  finalize  and  promulgated  the  dialysate
standard pertinent to the user community (RD 52), adopting by reference the bacterial
and endotoxin limits in product water as currently outlined in the AAMI standard that
applies  to  systems  manufacturers  (RD  62).  At  present,  the  user  community  should
continue  to  observe  water  quality  and  dialysate  standards  as  outlined  in  AAMI  RD  5
(Hemodialysis  Systems,  1992)  and  AAMI  RD  47  (Reuse  of  Hemodialyzers,  1993)  until
the  new  RD  52  standard  becomes  available  (Table  18).789,  791  Table  18a.  Present
standard (colony forming units per milliliter) (endotoxin units per milliliter) Table 18b.
Proposed standard (colony forming units per milliliter) (endotoxin units per milliliter) **
Dialysate  for  hemodialysis,  RD  52,  under  development,  American  National  Standards
Institute,  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Medical  Instrumentation  (AAMI).  *  The
material in this table was compiled from references 789 and 791 (ANSI/AAMI standards
RD 5-1992 and ANSI/AAMI RD 47-1993). The current AAMI standard directed at systems
manufacturers  (RD  62  [Water  Treatment  Equipment  for  Hemodialysis  Applications,
2001]) now specifies that all product water used to prepare dialysate or to reprocess
dialyzers for multiple use should contain <2 endotoxin units per milliliter (EU/mL).792 A
level of 2 EU/mL was chosen as the upper limit for endotoxin because this level is easily
achieved  with  contemporary  water  treatment  systems  using  RO  and/or  ultrafiltration.
CDC has advocated monthly endotoxin testing along with microbiologic assays of water,
because  endotoxin  activity  may  not  correspond  to  the  total  heterotrophic  plate
counts.829  Additionally,  the  current  AAMI  standard  RD  62  for  manufacturers  includes
action  levels  for  product  water.  Because  48  hours  can  elapse  between  the  time  of
sampling  water  for  microbial  contamination  and  the  time  when  results  are  received,
and because bacterial proliferation can be rapid, action levels for microbial counts and
endotoxin concentrations are reported as 50 CFU/mL and 1 EU/mL, respectively, in this
revision  of  the  standard.792  These  recommendations  will  allow  users  to  initiate
corrective action before levels exceed the maximum levels established by the standard.
In hemodialysis, the net movement of water is from the blood to the dialysate, although
within the dialyzer, local movement of water from the dialysate to the blood through
the  phenomenon  of  back-filtration  may  occur,  particularly  in  dialyzers  with  highly
permeable  membranes.830  In  contrast,  hemofiltration  and  hemodiaflltration  feature
infusion of large volumes of electrolyte solution (20–70 L) into the blood. Increasingly,
this electrolyte solution is being prepared on-line from water and concentrate. Because
of  the  large  volumes  of  fluid  infused,  AAMI  considered  the  necessity  of  setting  more
stringent requirements for water to be used in this application, but this organization has
not  yet  established  these  because  of  lack  of  expert  consensus  and  insufficient
experience  with  on-line  therapies  in  the  United  States.  On-line  hemofiltration  and
hemodiafiltration  systems  use  sequential  ultrafiltration  as  the  final  step  in  the
preparation of infusion fluid. Several experts from AAMI concur that these point-of-use
ultrafiltration systems should be capable of further reducing the bacteria and endotoxin
burden  of  solutions  prepared  from  water  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  AAMI
standard to a safe level for infusion. The strategy for controlling massive accumulations
of  gram-negative  water  bacteria  and  NTM  in  dialysis  systems  primarily  involves
preventing  their  growth  through  proper  disinfection  of  water-treatment  systems  and
hemodialysis
 machines.
 Gram-negative
 water
 bacteria,
 their
 associated
lipopolysaccharides  (bacterial  endotoxins),  and  NTM  ultimately  come  from  the
community water supply, and levels of these bacteria can be amplified depending on
the  water  treatment  system,  dialysate  distribution  system,  type  of  dialysis  machine,
and method of disinfection (Table 19).634, 794, 831 Control strategies are designed to
reduce  levels  of  microbial  contamination  in  water  and  dialysis  fluid  to  relatively  low
levels  but  not  to  completely  eradicate  it.  Water  supply—Source  of  community  water
Water  treatment  at  the  dialysis  center  Water  treatment  devices  Water  and  dialysate
distribution  system  (Distribution  pipes)  Dialysis  machines  Two  components  of
hemodialysis  water  distribution  systems  –  pipes  (particularly  those  made  of  polyvinyl
chloride [PVC]) and storage tanks – can serve as reservoirs of microbial contamination.
Hemodialysis systems frequently use pipes that are wider and longer than are needed
to handle the required flow, which slows the fluid velocity and increases both the total
fluid  volume  and  the  wetted  surface  area  of  the  system.  Gram-negative  bacteria  in
fluids  remaining  in  pipes  overnight  multiply  rapidly  and  colonize  the  wet  surfaces,
producing  bacterial  populations  and  endotoxin  quantities  in  proportion  to  the  volume
and  surface  area.  Such  colonization  results  in  formation  of  protective  biofilm  that  is
difficult  to  remove  and  protects  the  bacteria  from  disinfection.832  Routine  (i.e.,
monthly), low-level disinfection of the pipes can help to control bacterial contamination
of  the  distribution  system.  Additional  measures  to  protect  pipes  from  contaminations
include Maintain a flow velocity of 3–5 ft/sec. A storage tank in the distribution system
greatly  increases  the  volume  of  fluid  and  surface  area  available  and  can  serve  as  a
niche  for  water  bacteria.  Storage  tanks  are  therefore  not  recommended  for  use  in
dialysis  systems  unless  they  are  frequently  drained  and  adequately  disinfected,
including  scrubbing  the  sides  of  the  tank  to  remove  bacterial  biofilm.  An  ultrafilter
should  be  used  distal  to  the  storage  tank.808,  833  Microbiologic  sampling  of  dialysis
fluids is recommended because gram-negative bacteria can proliferate rapidly in water
and dialysate in hemodialysis systems; high levels of these organisms place patients at
risk  for  pyrogenic  reactions  or  health-care  associated  infection.667,  668,  808
Health-care  facilities  are  advised  to  sample  dialysis  fluids  at  least  monthly  using
standard  microbiologic  assay  methods  for  waterborne  microorganisms.788,  793,  799,
834–836 Product water used to prepare dialysate and to reprocess hemodialyzers for
reuse on the same patient should also be tested for bacterial endotoxin on a monthly
basis.792, 829, 837 (See Appendix C for information about water sampling methods for
dialysis.)  Cross-contamination  of  dialysis  machines  and  inadequate  disinfection
measures can facilitate the spread of waterborne organisms to patients. Steps should
be  taken  to  ensure  that  dialysis  equipment  is  performing  correctly  and  that  all
connectors, lines, and other components are specific for the equipment, in good repair,
and properly in place. A recent outbreak of gram-negative bacteremias among dialysis
patients  was  attributed  to  faulty  valves  in  a  drain  port  of  the  machine  that  allowed
backflow of saline used to flush the dialyzer before patient use.838, 839 This backflow
contaminated  the  drain  priming  connectors,  which  contaminated  the  blood  lines  and
exposed the patients to high concentrations of gram-negative bacteria. Environmental
infection control in dialysis settings also includes low-level disinfection of housekeeping
surfaces and spot decontamination of spills of blood (see Environmental Services in Part
I  of  this  guideline  for  further  information).  Peritoneal  dialysis  (PD),  most  commonly
administered as continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) and continual cycling
peritoneal  dialysis  (CCPD),  is  the  third  most  common  treatment  for  end-stage  renal
disease  (ESRD)  in  the  United  States,  accounting  for  12%  of  all  dialysis  patients.840
Peritonitis is the primary complication of CAPD, with coagulase-negative staphylococci
the most clinically significant causative organisms.841 Other organisms that have been
found to produce peritonitis include Staphylococcus aureus, Mycobacterium fortuitum,
M.
 mucogenicum,
 Stenotrophomonas
 maltophilia,
 Burkholderia
 cepacia,
Corynebacterium  jeikeium,  Candida  spp.,  and  other  fungi.842–850  Substantial
morbidity is associated with peritoneal dialysis infections. Removal of peritoneal dialysis
catheters usually is required for treatment of peritonitis caused by fungi, NTM, or other
bacteria  that  are  not  cleared  within  the  first  several  days  of  effective  antimicrobial
treatment. Furthermore, recurrent episodes of peritonitis may lead to fibrosis and loss
of  the  dialysis  membrane.  Many  reported  episodes  of  peritonitis  are  associated  with
exit-site or tunneled catheter infections. Risk factors for the development of peritonitis
in PD patients include Concern has been raised about infection risk associated with the
use  of  automated  cyclers  in  both  inpatient  and  outpatient  settings;  however,  studies
suggest  that  PD  patients  who  use  automated  cyclers  have  much  lower  infection
rates.853  One  study  noted  that  a  closed-drainage  system  reduced  the  incidence  of
system-related peritonitis among intermittent peritoneal dialysis (IPD) patients from 3.6
to  1.5  cases/100  patient  days.854  The  association  of  peritonitis  with  management  of
spent dialysate fluids requires additional study. Therefore, ensuring that the tip of the
waste line is not submerged beneath the water level in a toilet or in a drain is prudent.
Microorganisms  may  be  present  in  ice,  ice-storage  chests,  and  ice-making  machines.
The two main sources of microorganisms in ice are the potable water from which it is
made and a transferral of organisms from hands (Table 20). Ice from contaminated ice
machines  has  been  associated  with  patient  colonization,  blood  stream  infections,
pulmonary and gastrointestinal illnesses, and pseudoinfections.602, 603, 683, 684, 854,
855 Microorganisms in ice can secondarily contaminate clinical specimens and medical
solutions  that  require  cold  temperatures  for  either  transport  or  holding.601,  620  An
outbreak of surgical-site infections was interrupted when sterile ice was used in place of
tap  water  ice  to  cool  cardioplegia  solutions.601  From  potable  water  From
fecally-contaminated water From hand-transfer of organisms In a study comparing the
microbial  populations  of  hospital  ice  machines  with  organisms  recovered  from  ice
samples gathered from the community, samples from 27 hospital ice machines yielded
low numbers (<10 CFU/mL) of several potentially opportunistic microorganisms, mainly
gram-negative  bacilli.859  During  the  survey  period,  no  health-care  associated
infections  were  attributed  to  the  use  of  ice.  Ice  from  community  sources  had  higher
levels  of  microbial  contamination  (75%–95%  of  194  samples  had  total  heterotrophic
plate counts <500 CFU/mL, with the proportion of positive cultures dependent on the
incubation temperature) and showed evidence of fecal contamination from the source
water.859Thus, ice machines in health-care settings are no more heavily contaminated
compared  with  ice  machines  in  the  community.  If  the  source  water  for  ice  in  a
health-care facility is not fecally contaminated, then ice from clean ice machines and
chests  should  pose  no  increased  hazard  for  immunocompetent  patients.  Some
waterborne  bacteria  found  in  ice  could  potentially  be  a  risk  to  immunocompromised
patients  if  they  consume  ice  or  drink  beverages  with  ice.  For  example,  Burkholderia
cepacia  in  ice  could  present  an  infection  risk  for  cystic  fibrosis  patients.859,  860
Therefore, protecting immunosuppressed and otherwise medically at-risk patients from
exposure to tap water and ice potentially contaminated with opportunistic pathogens is
prudent.9  No  microbiologic  standards  for  ice,  ice-making  machines,  or  ice  storage
equipment have been established, although several investigators have suggested the
need  for  such  standards.859,  866  Culturing  of  ice  machines  is  not  routinely
recommended, but it may be useful as part of an epidemiologic investigation.867–869
Sampling  might  also  help  determine  the  best  schedule  for  cleaning  open  ice-storage
chests. Recommendations for a regular program of maintenance and disinfection have
been  published.866–869  Health-care  facilities  are  advised  to  clean  ice-storage  chests
on  a  regular  basis.  Open  ice  chests  may  require  a  more  frequent  cleaning  schedule
compared  with  chests  that  have  covers.  Portable  ice  chests  and  containers  require
cleaning and low-level disinfection before the addition of ice intended for consumption.
Ice-making  machines  may  require  less  frequent  cleaning,  but  their  maintenance  is
important to proper performance. The manufacturer's instructions for both the proper
method  of  cleaning  and/or  maintenance  should  be  followed.  These  instructions  may
also recommend an EPA-registered disinfectant to ensure chemical potency, materials
compatibility,  and  safety.  In  the  event  that  instructions  and  suitable  EPA-registered
disinfectants  are  not  available  for  this  process,  then  a  generic  approach  to  cleaning,
disinfecting,  and  maintaining  ice  machines  and  dispensers  can  be  used  (Box  12).  Ice
and ice-making machines also may be contaminated via improper storage or handling
of  ice  by  patients  and/or  staff.684–686,  855–858,  870  Suggested  steps  to  avoid  this
means  of  contamination  include  *Material  in  this  box  is  adapted  from  reference  869.
+These  general  guidelines  should  be  used  only  where  manufacturer-recommended
methods  and  EPA-registered  disinfectants  are  not  available.  Hydrotherapy  equipment
(e.g., pools, whirlpools, whirlpool spas, hot tubs, and physiotherapy tanks) traditionally
has  been  used  to  treat  patients  with  certain  medical  conditions  (e.g.,  burns,871,  872
septic
 ulcers,
 lesions,
 amputations,873
 orthopedic
 impairments
 and
 injuries,
arthritis,874  and  kidney  lithotripsy).654  Wound-care  medicine  is  increasingly  moving
away  from  hydrotherapy,  however,  in  favor  of  bedside  pulsed-lavage  therapy  using
sterile solutions for cleaning and irrigation.492, 875–878Several episodes of health-care
associated  infections  have  been  linked  to  use  of  hydrotherapy  equipment  (Table  21).
Potential  routes  of  infection  include  incidental  ingestion  of  the  water,  sprays  and
aerosols,  and  direct  contact  with  wounds  and  intact  skin  (folliculitis).  Risk  factors  for
infection  include  Infection  control  for  hydrotherapy  tanks,  pools,  or  birthing  tanks
presents unique challenges because indigenous microorganisms are always present in
the water during treatments. In addition, some studies have found free living amoebae
(i.e.,  Naegleria  lovaniensis),  which  are  commonly  found  in  association  with  Naegleria
fowleri,  in  hospital  hydrotherapy  pools.890  Although  hydrotherapy  is  at  times
appropriate for patients with wounds, burns, or other types of non-intact skin conditions
(determined  on  a  case-by-case  basis),  this  equipment  should  not  be  considered
"semi-critical"  in  accordance  with  the  Spaulding  classification.891  Microbial  data  to
evaluate the risk of infection to patients using hydrotherapy pools and birthing tanks
are insufficient. Nevertheless, health-care facilities should maintain stringent cleaning
and disinfection practices in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and with
relevant  scientific  literature  until  data  supporting  more  rigorous  infection-control
measures become available. Factors that should be considered in therapy decisions in
this  situation  would  include  Hydrotherapy  tanks  (e.g.,  whirlpools,  Hubbard  tanks  and
whirlpool bath tubs) are shallow tanks constructed of stainless steel, plexiglass, or tile.
They are closed-cycle water systems with hydrojets to circulate, aerate, and agitate the
water. The maximum water temperature range is 50°F–104°F (10°C–40°C). The warm
water  temperature,  constant  agitation  and  aeration,  and  design  of  the  hydrotherapy
tanks provide ideal conditions for bacterial proliferation if the equipment is not properly
maintained,  cleaned,  and  disinfected.  The  design  of  the  hydrotherapy  equipment
should be evaluated for potential infection-control problems that can be associated with
inaccessible surfaces that can be difficult to clean and/or remain wet in between uses
(i.e.,  recessed  drain  plates  with  fixed  grill  plates).887  Associated  equipment  (e.g.,
parallel  bars,  plinths,  Hoyer  lifts,  and  wheelchairs)  can  also  be  potential  reservoirs  of
microorganisms,  depending  on  the  materials  used  in  these  items  (i.e.,  porous  vs.
non-porous materials) and the surfaces that may become wet during use. Patients with
active skin colonizations and wound infections can serve as sources of contamination
for the equipment and the water. Contamination from spilled tub water can extend to
drains,  floors,  and  walls.680–683  Health-care  associated  colonization  or  infection  can
result  from  exposure  to  endogenous  sources  of  microorganisms  (autoinoculation)  or
exogenous  sources  (via  cross-contamination  from  other  patients  previously  receiving
treatment  in  the  unit).  Although  some  facilities  have  used  tub  liners  to  minimize
environmental contamination of the tanks, the use of a tub liner does not eliminate the
need  for  cleaning  and  disinfection.  Draining  these  small  pools  and  tanks  after  each
patient  use,  thoroughly  cleaning  with  a  detergent,  and  disinfecting  according  to
manufacturers'  instructions  have  reduced  bacterial  contamination  levels  in  the  water
from 104 CFU/mL to <10 CFU/mL.892 A chlorine residual of 15 ppm in the water should
be obtained prior to the patient's therapy session (e.g., by adding 15 grams of calcium
hypochlorite  70%  [e.g.,  HTH®]  per  100  gallons  of  water).892  A  study  of  commercial
and  residential  whirlpools  found  that  superchlorination  or  draining,  cleaning,
disinfection,  and  refilling  of  whirlpools  markedly  reduced  densities  of  Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in whirlpool water.893 The bacterial populations were rapidly replenished,
however,  when  disinfectant  concentrations  dropped  below  recommended  levels  for
recreational use (i.e., chlorine at 3.0 ppm or bromine at 6.0 ppm). When using chlorine,
however,  knowing  whether  the  community  drinking-water  system  is  disinfected  with
chloramine is important, because municipal utilities adjust the pH of the water to the
basic side to enhance chloramine formation. Because chlorine is not very effective at
pH levels above 8, it may be necessary to re-adjust the pH of the water to a more acidic
level.894 A few reports describe the addition of antiseptic chemicals to hydrotherapy
tank water, especially for burn patient therapy.895–897 One study involving a minimal
number of participants demonstrated a reduction in the number of Pseudomonas spp.
and  other  gram-negative  bacteria  from  both  patients  and  equipment  surfaces  when
chloramine-T  ("chlorazene")  was  added  to  the  water.898  Chloramine-T  has  not,
however, been approved for water treatment in the United States. Hydrotherapy pools
typically  serve  large  numbers  of  patients  and  are  usually  heated  to  91.4°F–98.6°F
(31°C–37°C).  The  temperature  range  is  more  narrow  (94°F–96.8°F  [35°C–36°C])  for
pediatric  and  geriatric  patient  use.899  Because  the  size  of  hydrotherapy  pools
precludes  draining  after  patient  use,  proper  management  is  required  to  maintain  the
proper  balance  of  water  conditioning  (i.e.,  alkalinity,  hardness,  and  temperature)  and
disinfection. The most widely used chemicals for disinfection of pools are chlorine and
chlorine compounds – calcium hypochlorite, sodium hypochlorite, lithium hypochlorite,
chloroisocyanurates,  and  chlorine  gas.  Solid  and  liquid  formulations  of  chlorine
chemicals  are  the  easiest  and  safest  to  use.900  Other  halogenated  compounds  have
also  been  used  for  pool-water  disinfection,  albeit  on  a  limited  scale.  Bromine,  which
forms bactericidal bromamines in the presence of ammonia, has limited use because of
its association with contact dermatitis.901 Iodine does not bleach hair, swim suits, or
cause  eye  irritation,  but  when  introduced  at  proper  concentrations,  it  gives  water  a
greenish-yellowish  cast.892  In  practical  terms,  maintenance  of  large  hydrotherapy
pools  (e.g.,  those  used  for  exercise)  is  similar  to  that  for  indoor  public  pools  (i.e.,
continuous filtration, chlorine residuals no less than 0.4 ppm, and pH of 7.2–7.6).902,
903 Supply pipes and pumps also need to be maintained to eliminate the possibility of
this equipment serving as a reservoir for waterborne organisms.904Specific standards
for chlorine residual and pH of the water are addressed in local and state regulations.
Patients who are fecally incontinent or who have draining wounds should refrain from
using  these  pools  until  their  condition  improves.  The  use  of  birthing  tanks,  whirlpool
spas, and whirlpools is a recent addition to obstetrical practice.905 Few studies on the
potential risks associated with these pieces of equipment have been conducted. In one
study of 32 women, a newborn contracted a Pseudomonas infection after being birthed
in such a tank, the strain of which was identical to the organism isolated from the tank
water.906 Another report documented identical strains of P. aeruginosa isolates from a
newborn with sepsis and on the environmental surfaces of a tub that the mother used
for relaxation while in labor.907 Other studies have shown no significant increases in
the  rates  of  post-immersion  infections  among  mothers  and  infants.908,  909  Because
the water and the tub surfaces routinely become contaminated with the mother's skin
flora and blood during labor and delivery, birthing tanks and other tub equipment must
be drained after each patient use and the surfaces thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.
Health-care facilities are advised to follow the manufacturer's instructions for selection
of  disinfection  method  and  chemical  germicide.  The  range  of  chlorine  residuals  for
public  whirlpools  and  whirlpool  spas  is  2–5  ppm.910  Use  of  an  inflatable  tub  is  an
alternative solution, but this item must be cleaned and disinfected between patients if it
is  not  considered  a  single-use  unit.  Recreational  tanks  and  whirlpool  spas  are
increasingly  being  used  as  hydrotherapy  equipment.  Although  such  home  equipment
appears to be suitable for hydrotherapy, they are neither designed nor constructed to
function  in  this  capacity.  Additionally,  manufacturers  generally  are  not  obligated  to
provide the health-care facility with cleaning and disinfecting instructions appropriate
for medical equipment use, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not
evaluate  recreational  equipment.  Health-care  facilities  should  therefore  carefully
evaluate this "off-label" use of home equipment before proceeding with a purchase. The
automated endoscopic reprocessor (AER) is classified by the FDA as an accessory for
the  flexible  endoscope.654  A  properly  operating  AER  can  provide  a  more  consistent,
reliable method of decontaminating and terminal reprocessing for endoscopes between
patient  procedures  than  manual  reprocessing  methods  alone.911  An  endoscope  is
generally  subjected  to  high-level  disinfection  using  a  liquid  chemical  sterilant  or  a
high-level  disinfectant.  Because  the  instrument  is  a  semi-critical  device,  the  optimal
rinse fluid for a disinfected endoscope would be sterile water.3 Sterile water, however,
is expensive and difficult to produce in sufficient quantities and with adequate quality
assurance for instrument rinsing in an AER.912, 913 Therefore, one option to be used
for AERs is rinse water that has been passed through filters with a pore size of 0.1–0.2
μm  to  render  the  water  "bacteria-free."  These  filters  usually  are  located  in  the  water
line at or near the port where the mains water enters the equipment. The product water
(i.e.,  tap  water  passing  through  these  filters)  in  these  applications  is  not  considered
equivalent  in  microbial  quality  to  that  for  membrane-filtered  water  as  produced  by
pharmaceutical firms. Membrane filtration in pharmaceutical applications is intended to
ensure  the  microbial  quality  of  polished  product  water.  Water  has  been  linked  to  the
contamination  of  flexible  fiberoptic  endoscopes  in  the  following  two  scenarios:  In  the
latter instance, the machine's water reservoirs and fluid circuitry become contaminated
with  waterborne,  heterotrophic  bacteria  (e.g.,  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  and  NTM),
which  can  survive  and  persist  in  biofilms  attached  to  these  components.914–917
Colonization  of  the  reservoirs  and  water  lines  of  the  AER  becomes  problematic  if  the
required cleaning, disinfection, and maintenance are not performed on the equipment
as recommended by the manufacturer.669, 916, 917 Use of the 0.1–0.2-μm filter in the
water line helps to keep bacterial contamination to a minimum,670, 911, 917 but filters
may  fail  and  allow  bacteria  to  pass  through  to  the  equipment  and  then  to  the
instrument
 undergoing
 reprocessing.671–674,
 913,
 918
 Filters
 also
 require
maintenance for proper performance.670, 911, 912, 918, 919 Heightened awareness of
the proper disinfection of the connectors that hook the instrument to the AER may help
to further reduce the potential for contaminating endoscopes during reprocessing.920
An emerging issue in the field of endoscopy is that of the possible role of rinse water
monitoring  and  its  potential  to  help  reduce  endoscopy/bronchoscopyassociated
infections.918  Studies  have  linked  deficiencies  in  endoscope  cleaning  and/or
disinfecting processes to the incidence of post-endoscopic adverse outcomes.921–924
Several clusters have been traced to AERs of older designs and these were associated
with water quality.675, 914–916 Regardless of whether manual or automated terminal
reprocessing is used for endoscopes, the internal channels of the instrument should be
dried  before  storage.925  The  presence  of  residual  moisture  in  the  internal  channels
encourages  the  proliferation  of  waterborne  microorganisms,  some  of  which  may  be
pathogenic. One of the most frequently used methods employs 70% isopropyl alcohol
to  flush  the  internal  channels,  followed  by  forced  air  drying  of  these  channels  and
hanging the endoscope vertically in a protected cabinet; this method ensures internal
drying  of  the  endoscope,  lessens  the  potential  for  proliferation  of  waterborne
microorganisms,669,  913,  917,  922,  926,  927  and  is  consistent  with  professional
organization  guidance  for  endoscope  reprocessing.928  An  additional  problem  with
waterborne microbial contamination of AERs centers on increased microbial resistance
to  alkaline  glutaraldehyde,  a  widely  used  liquid  chemical  sterilant/high-level
disinfectant.669,  929  Opportunistic  waterborne  microorganisms  (e.g.,  Mycobacterium
chelonae,  Methylobacterium  spp.)  have  been  associated  with  pseudo-outbreaks  and
colonization; infection caused by these organisms has been associated with procedures
conducted  in  clinical  settings  (e.g.,  bronchoscopy).669,  913,  929–931  Increasing
microbial  resistance  to  glutaraldehyde  has  been  attributed  to  improper  use  of  the
disinfectant in the equipment, allowing the dilution of glutaraldehyde to fall below the
manufacturer's  recommended  minimal  use  concentration.929  Dental  unit  water  lines
(DUWLs)  consist  of  small-bore  plastic  tubing  that  delivers  water  used  for  general,
non-surgical  irrigation  and  as  a  coolant  to  dental  handpieces,  sonic  and  ultrasonic
scalers, and air-water syringes; municipal tap water is the source water for these lines.
The  presence  of  biofilms  of  waterborne  bacteria  and  fungi  (e.g.,  Legionella  spp.,
Pseudomonas  aeruginosa,  and  NTM)  in  DUWLs  has  been  established.636,  637,  694,
695,  932–  934  Biofilms  continually  release  planktonic  microorganisms  into  the  water,
the  titers  of  which  can  exceed  1H106  CFU/mL.694  However,  scientific  evidence
indicates  that  immunocompetent  persons  are  only  at  minimal  risk  for  substantial
adverse  health  effects  after  contact  with  water  from  a  dental  unit.  Nonetheless,
exposing  patients  or  dental  personnel  to  water  of  uncertain  microbiological  quality  is
not  consistent  with  universally  accepted  infection-control  principles.935  In  1993,  CDC
issued  guidelines  relative  to  water  quality  in  a  dental  setting.  These  guidelines
recommend  that  all  dental  instruments  that  use  water  (including  high-speed
handpieces) should be run to discharge water for 20–30 seconds after each patient and
for  several  minutes  before  the  start  of  each  clinic  day.936  This  practice  can  help  to
flush  out  any  patient  materials  that  many  have  entered  the  turbine,  air,  or
waterlines.937, 938 The 1993 guidance also indicated that waterlines be flushed at the
beginning of the clinic day. Although these guidelines are designed to help reduce the
number of microorganisms present in treatment water, they do not address the issue of
reducing  or  preventing  biofilm  formation  in  the  waterlines.  Research  published
subsequent  to  the  1993  dental  infection  control  guideline  suggests  that  flushing  the
lines at the beginning of the day has only minimal effect on the status of the biofilm in
the  lines  and  does  not  reliably  improve  the  quality  of  water  during  dental
treatment.939–941 Updated recommendations on infection-control practices for water
line use in dentistry will be available in late 2003.942 The numbers of microorganisms
in water used as coolant or irrigant for non-surgical dental treatment should be as low
as  reasonably  achievable  and,  at  a  minimum,  should  meet  nationally  recognized
standards for safe drinking water.935, 943 Only minimal evidence suggests that water
meeting  drinking  water  standards  poses  a  health  hazard  for  immunocompetent
persons.  The  EPA,  the  American  Public  Health  Association  (APHA),  and  the  American
Water Works Association (AWWA) have set a maximum limit of 500 CFU/mL for aerobic,
heterotrophic,  mesophilic  bacteria  in  drinking  water  in  municipal  distribution
systems.944,  945  This  standard  is  achievable,  given  improvements  in  water-line
technology.  Dentists  should  consult  with  the  manufacturer  of  their  dental  unit  to
determine the best equipment and method for maintaining and monitoring good water
quality.935,  946  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to
help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/water.html
