Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Richard  A.  Goodman,  James  W.  Buehler,  and  Joshua  A.  Mott
Although  epidemiologists  work  in  field  settings  in  different  contexts,  the  term  field
epidemiology  as  used  in  this  manual  describes  investigations  initiated  in  response  to
urgent  public  health  problems.  A  primary  goal  of  field  epidemiology  is  to  guide,  as
quickly as possible, the processes of selecting and implementing interventions to lessen
or  prevent  illness  or  death  when  such  problems  arise.  Despite  continuing  changes  in
the contexts within which epidemiologists operate, as well as the types and quantity of
information  that  epidemiologists  have  at  their  disposal,  the  core  principles  of  field
epidemiology  remain  largely  constant.  The  constellation  of  problems  faced  by
epidemiologists who investigate urgent public health problems shapes the definition of
field  epidemiology.  For  example,  consider  the  following  scenario:  At  8:30  am  on
Monday, August 2, 1976, Dr. Robert B. Craven, an Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS)
officer  assigned  to  the  Center  for  Disease  Control’s  (CDC)  Viral  Diseases  Division,
received  a  telephone  call  from  a  nurse  at  a  veterans’  hospital  in  Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. The nurse reported two cases of severe respiratory illness (including one
death)  in  persons  who  had  attended  the  recent  American  Legion  Convention  in
Philadelphia.  Subsequent  conversations  with  local  and  state  public  health  officials
revealed that 18 persons who had attended the convention during July 21–24 had died
during  July  26–August  2,  primarily  from  pneumonia.  By  the  evening  of  August  2,  an
additional 71 cases had been identified among Legionnaires. As a consequence of this
information,  a  massive  epidemiologic  investigation  was  immediately  initiated  that
involved local, state, and federal public health agencies. This problem became known
as  the  outbreak  of  Legionnaires’  disease,  and  the  investigation  of  the  problem  led
directly to discovery of the bacterial pathogen, Legionella pneumophila (1,2), enabling
further  studies  of  the  nature  and  modes  of  transmission  of  this  organism,  the
epidemiology,  and  natural  history  of  Legionella  infections,  as  well  as  more  precise
recommendations  for  prevention  and  treatment.  The  Legionnaires’  disease  outbreak
and  the  public  health  response  it  triggered  illustrate  the  raison  d’être  for  field
epidemiology. Using this epidemic as an example, we can define field epidemiology as
the application of epidemiology under the following general conditions: Although field
investigations of acute problems share many characteristics with prospectively planned
epidemiologic  studies,  they  differ  in  at  least  three  important  aspects.  Although  the
timing  of  acute  public  health  problems  that  prompt  field  investigations  is  typically
unexpected,  emergencies  often  unmask  latent  threats  to  health  that  had  gone
unrecognized  or  had  been  “waiting  to  happen.”  For  example,  sporadic  or  epidemic
illness might be inevitable if restaurants fail to adhere to food management guidelines,
if hospitals fail to properly sterilize instruments, if employers fail to maintain workplace
safety standards, or if members of social networks engage in unsafe sexual behaviors.
As  a  result,  field  investigations  can  prompt  both  immediate  interventions  and  longer
term recommendations, or they can identify problems that require further study after
the  immediate  problem  has  been  addressed.  Experiences  during  2014–2016  with  the
Ebola  virus  disease  (EVD)  outbreak  in  West  Africa  underscore  how  networks  of
professionals trained in the basics of field epidemiology can play key roles in mitigating
the health and economic effects of emerging disease threats, such as EVD. When left
unchecked in many locations in West Africa, the EVD outbreak resulted in more than
28,000 cases and 11,000 deaths (3,4). However, in July 2014, when a case of EVD was
introduced  into  Nigeria,  epidemiologists,  in  close  partnership  with  the  Ministry  of
Health,  nongovernmental  organizations,  and  other  community  members,  conducted
rapid field investigations to prevent further transmission (5). Given the population size
of  Nigeria,  timely  epidemiologic  response  might  have  helped  to  avert  a  considerably
larger  disaster.  The  concepts  and  methods  used  in  field  investigations  derive  from
clinical medicine, epidemiology, laboratory and behavioral sciences, decision theory, an
expanding  array  of  other  scientific  disciplines,  skill  in  communications,  and  common
sense. In this manual, the guidelines and approaches for conducting epidemiologic field
investigations  reflect  the  urgency  of  discovering  causative  factors,  use  of  evolving
multifaceted  methods,  and  need  to  make  timely  practical  recommendations.  Health
departments become aware of possible disease outbreaks or other acute public health
problems  in  different  ways.  Situations  might  gain  attention  because  astute  clinicians
recognize  unusual  patterns  of  disease  among  their  patients  and  alert  health
departments,  surveillance  systems  for  monitoring  disease  or  hazard  trends  detect
increases, the diagnosis of a single case of a rare disease heralds a broader problem or
potential threat, or members of the public are concerned and contact authorities. After
such  alerts,  the  first  step  is  to  decide  whether  to  conduct  a  field  investigation.  Initial
assessments  might  dispel  concerns  or  affirm  that  further  investigation  is  warranted.
After initiated, decisions must be made at successive stages about how far to pursue an
investigation. These decisions are necessary to make the most effective use of public
health  resources,  including  capacities  to  conduct  field  investigations  and  optimize
opportunities for disease prevention. In addition to the need to develop and implement
control  measures  to  end  threats  to  the  public’s  health,  such  as  the  Legionnaires’
disease and EVD outbreaks, other determinants that shape field investigations include
(1) epidemiologic, programmatic, and resource considerations; (2) public and political
considerations;  (3)  research  and  learning  opportunities;  (4)  legal  obligations;  and  (5)
training  needs.  Certain  disease  control  programs  at  national,  state,  and  local  levels
have specific and extensive requirements for epidemiologic investigation. For example,
as  part  of  the  measles  elimination  effort  in  the  United  States,  a  measles  outbreak  is
defined  as  a  chain  of  transmission  including  three  or  more  cases  linked  in  time  and
space  (6).  Accordingly,  every  case  of  measles  might  be  investigated  to  identify  and
vaccinate  susceptible  persons  and  to  evaluate  other  control  strategies,  such  as  the
exclusion  from  school  of  children  who  cannot  provide  proof  of  vaccination.  This
recommendation reflects the epidemiology of measles in the United States, where most
cases  result  from  travel-related  introduction  of  measles  into  the  country  and  where
vaccination  programs  have  dramatically  reduced  the  incidence  of  measles  although
pockets  of  vulnerability  to  transmission  remain.  Additional  situations  in  which
investigations are likely to be initiated after the diagnoses of individual cases include
the emergence of highly pathogenic infections, such as influenza A(H5N1) and A(H7N9)
in Asia and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Given past experiences with
influenza pandemics and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), detection of such
events  have  prompted  multiple  field  investigations.  The  diagnoses  of  individual
illnesses that might be associated with bioterrorism also should prompt investigations,
at least to the point of dismissing concerns that exposure resulted from an intentional
act.  For  example,  diagnosis  of  a  case  of  inhalation  anthrax  in  a  photo  editor  for  a
national  media  company  in  2001,  an  occupation  not  associated  with  exposure  to
naturally occurring anthrax, was the first of 22 cases of terrorism-related anthrax and
five  associated  deaths  that  were  exhaustively  investigated  (7)  and  led  to  massive
increases in investments in public health emergency preparedness in the United States.
The anthrax attacks and other bioterrorism-related concerns brought about a lowering
of  the  threshold  of  suspicion  necessary  for  triggering  a  full  field  investigation  (8,9).
Different  clinical,  laboratory,  and  surveillance  technologies  have  the  potential  to
enhance  recognition  of  situations  that  merit  investigation,  including  detection  of
individual  cases  of  disease  that  might  signal  a  larger  threat  to  public  health,  early
detection of disease outbreaks, or detection of environmental hazards that can result in
widespread disease. Conversely, the potential benefits of these technologies might be
offset by increasing the likelihood of detecting situations that do not represent public
health threats yet require time and resources to draw that conclusion. At the individual
level, the advent of multipathogen detection platforms also enables the simultaneous
detection  of  multiple  viruses  and  bacteria  in  a  single  clinical  specimen.  Although  this
technology  can  provide  important  clinical  health  benefits,  it  can  challenge  efforts  to
distinguish  pathogens  that  are  potentially  related  to  disease  outbreaks  versus
organisms that are merely commensal (10). At the outbreak level, the advent of highly
automated public health surveillance systems that incorporate statistical algorithms to
detect unusual trends can provide an early warning for the onset of outbreaks as well
as  statistical  aberrations  that  do  not  herald  substantial  threats  (11).  At  the  level  of
environmental  monitoring,  debates  surrounding  proposed  enhancements  in  the
pathogen  monitoring  capacities  of  the  US  BioWatch  system  for  detecting  airborne
biological  hazards  included  consideration  of  the  potential  for  more  frequent  alerts
resulting  from  the  detection  of  naturally  occurring  microbes  that  do  not  represent
substantial  public  health  threats  (12).  Global  disease  elimination  and  eradication
programs,  international  preparedness  and  coordination  for  emerging  threats,  and
advances in surveillance and laboratory technologies have helped to strengthen public
health.  However,  these  developments  also  place  new  pressures  on  epidemiology
program managers to prioritize resources. Any expenditure of public resources should
be judicious. Field investigations can be costly in personnel time and other resources
and  can  incur  opportunity  costs  by  detracting  from  other  public  health  activities.  In
addition, field investigations consume the time and effort of persons investigated and of
persons whose collaboration is often essential. Thus, the capacity to conduct field work
can  be  limited  not  only  by  the  resources  or  capacity  of  individual  public  health
agencies,  but  also  by  competing  demands  of  other  programs  within  an  agency  or  by
other situational demands. Resource constraints also might shape the extent to which
investigations are conducted. In the United States, state health departments might help
local governments when needed, and state or local health departments might request
assistance  from  the  CDC  when  their  capacities  are  exceeded  by  the  demands  of  an
event. Globally, the World Health Organization and its network of regional offices serve
as resources to national governments. Scrutiny from the public, political leaders, and
the media can occur at all stages of field investigations, including the stage when initial
assessments  are  conducted  to  determine  whether  a  field  investigation  is  warranted.
This scrutiny can affect the perceived urgency of a situation or the perceived need for
investigations. The importance that others attach to problems and the conclusions that
others  draw  from  initial  knowledge  of  situations  might  differ  from  or  align  with  the
positions of epidemiologists responsible for conducting field investigations or those of
more senior public health officials responsible for determining when field investigations
should  be  started.  In  certain  instances,  a  citizen’s  alert  can  lead  to  recognition  of  a
major public health problem, such as with Lyme disease in Lyme, Connecticut, in 1976
(13). In other cases, however, public concerns and attendant pressures might lead to
investigations  that  otherwise  are  premature  or  unlikely  to  be  fruitful  from  a  scientific
perspective but are critical in terms of community relations. Small clusters of disease
(e.g., leukemia or adverse fetal outcomes) are an example of problems that frequently
generate  substantial  public  concern.  Perceived  clusters  of  disease  might  prove  to
represent unrelated events after formal scrutiny; small clusters of disease might occur
by chance alone, and field investigations are often inconclusive and only occasionally
yield  new  information  about  etiologic  links  to  putative  exposures  (14).  However,
because community members might perceive a health threat, and certain clusters do
represent  specific  preventable  risks,  some  public  health  agencies  have  developed
standard  procedures  for  investigating  such  clusters  even  though  the  likelihood  of
identifying  a  remediable  cause  is  low  (15).  Determining  how  long  an  investigation
should be continued can become a matter of public controversy. A decision to postpone
interventions  pending  completion  of  thorough  epidemiologic  investigations  might  be
perceived as community experimentation or bureaucratic delay. For example, in a large
Escherichia coli enteric disease outbreak at Crater Lake National Park, Oregon, in 1975,
a 1-day delay in implementing control measures to obtain more definitive epidemiologic
data  resulted  in  a  Congressional  hearing  and  charges  of  a  cover-up  (16).  Because
almost all outbreaks are “natural experiments,” they present opportunities to address
questions of importance both to basic scientists and to persons in the applied science of
public health practice. Even when a clear policy exists for control of a specific problem,
investigation can still provide opportunities to identify new agents and risk factors for
infection or disease, define the clinical spectrum of disease, measure the effect of new
control  measures  or  clinical  interventions,  assess  the  usefulness  of  microbiologic  or
other biological markers, or evaluate the utility of new diagnostic tests. Recognition of
newly  emergent  or  reemerging  diseases  often  prompts  aggressive  investigations
because  of  the  potential  for  extensive,  life-threatening  illness.  Certain  diseases  are
initially  recognized  only  on  the  occasion  of  an  epidemic,  although  subsequent
investigations and studies enable retrospective diagnosis of earlier occurrences, as well
as  more  complete  characterization  of  the  spectrum  of  clinical  manifestations  and
epidemiology. For example, as referred to earlier, after L. pneumophilia was discovered
and  a  serologic  test  developed,  subsequent  studies  showed  that,  in  addition  to  the
severe  illness  manifest  in  the  1976  Philadelphia  outbreak,  Legionella  infection
commonly results in mild disease or asymptomatic infection. Often, when new diseases
are  detected,  they  are  recognized  in  their  most  severe  or  distinctive  stage,  followed
later by recognition of a broader spectrum of illness. The initial recognition of certain
other  problems—such  as  toxic  shock  syndrome,  influenza  A(H1N1)pdm09,  AIDS,
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, West Nile virus disease, and SARS—was followed by
aggressive investigations that enabled analogous understanding of the natural history
and disease spectrum of these infections. One caveat is that dramatic outbreaks and
investigations that identify previously unrecognized pathogens and that yield a wealth
of new scientific insights are unusual; more commonly, field investigations of outbreaks
identify familiar pathogens and modes of transmission. Yet, even for familiar diseases
and  modes  of  exposure  or  transmission,  investigations  are  warranted  to  interrupt
outbreaks and understand the evolving context in which outbreaks occur. For example,
the  changing  prevalence  of  underlying  conditions  (e.g.,  obesity,  diabetes,  and
cardiovascular  disease)  among  the  US  population  and  demographic  characteristics
(e.g., cultural determinants and age) of the population have the potential to alter host
susceptibility  and,  indeed,  the  epidemiologic  consequences  of  exposure  to  pathogens
and other hazards. Certain outbreaks that initially appear to be routine might lead to
important  epidemiologic  discoveries.  For  example,  in  1983,  investigators  pursued  a
cluster of diarrhea cases, an extremely common problem, to extraordinary lengths (17).
As a result, the investigators were able to trace the chain of transmission of a unique
strain  of  multiply  antibiotic-resistant  Salmonella  back  from  the  affected  persons  to
hamburger they ate, to the meat supplier, and, ultimately, to the specific animal source
herd. This investigation played a key role in clarifying the link between antibiotic use in
the  cattle  industry  and  subsequent  antibiotic-resistant  infection  in  humans.  Field
investigations  frequently  require  access  to  patients’  private  medical  records,  queries
about  private  behaviors,  analyses  of  private  enterprises  putatively  responsible  for
illness-causing  exposures,  reviews  of  proprietary  information,  or  assessments  of
reported putative errors of healthcare providers or health product manufacturers. These
tasks  may  be  necessary  to  complete  an  objective,  defensible  field  investigation,  but
each  is  also  fraught  with  considerable  ethical  and  legal  overtones  (see  Chapter  13).
Findings from some investigations are likely to be used as testimony in civil or criminal
trials  (18).  In  these  situations,  investigations  might  be  carried  further  than  they
otherwise  would  be.  For  example,  investigations  in  situations  where  criminal  actions
might  be  suspected  to  have  played  a  role  (19)  might  carry  additional  legal
requirements  for  establishing  a  chain  of  custody  of  evidence,  which  is  necessary  for
criminal prosecutions. The anthrax attacks during fall 2001 and related concerns about
bioterrorism have stimulated other advanced and carefully designed legal measures to
facilitate joint epidemiologic and criminal investigations. An example of such measures
is  a  protocol  developed  by  the  New  York  City  Department  of  Health  and  Mental
Hygiene, New York City Police Department, and Federal Bureau of Investigation to guide
in  the  interviewing  of  patients  during  joint  investigations  by  public  health  and  law
enforcement  professionals  representing  those  agencies  (20).  Similar  collaborations
exist  at  the  federal  level  (21).  By  analogy  to  clerkships  in  medical  school  and
postgraduate residencies, outbreak investigations provide opportunities for training in
basic  epidemiologic  skills.  Just  as  clinical  training  often  is  accomplished  at  the  same
time  patient  care  is  delivered,  training  in  field  epidemiology  often  simultaneously
assists  in  developing  skills  in  and  the  delivery  of  disease  control  and  prevention.  For
example,  since  1951,  CDC’s  EIS  Program  has  provided  assistance  to  state  and  local
health departments while simultaneously training health professionals in the practice of
applied  epidemiology  (22,23).  Changes  in  the  epidemiologic  capacities  of  state  and
local  health  departments  (24)  also  highlight  the  need  for  workforce  training  and
education  on  an  expanded  set  of  skills,  such  as  bioinformatics,  health  economics,
communications, systems thinking, and laboratory techniques. Globally, more than 70
Field Epidemiology Training Programs have been modeled after EIS but are owned by
individual  countries  and  ministries  of  health.  These  Field  Epidemiology  Training
Programs provide similar on-the-job training but within the context of specific cultures,
partners,  capacities,  and  public  health  systems  (25).  An  epidemiologist  investigating
problems in the field faces unique challenges that sometimes constrain the ideal use of
scientific  methods.  In  contrast  to  prospectively  planned  studies,  which  generally  are
based  on  carefully  developed  and  refined  protocols,  field  investigations  must  rely  on
data  sources  that  are  immediately  available,  less  readily  controlled,  and  subject  to
change  with  successive  hours  or  days.  In  addition  to  possible  limitations  in  data
sources,  factors  that  pose  challenges  for  epidemiologists  during  field  investigations
include  sampling  considerations,  availability  of  specimens,  effects  of  publicity,
reluctance  of  persons  to  participate,  and  conflicting  pressures  to  intervene.  New
technologies  hold  the  promise  of  mitigating  some  of  these  challenges.  Field
investigations often use information abstracted from different sources, such as hospital,
outpatient  medical,  or  school  health  records.  These  records  vary  substantially  in
completeness  and  accuracy  among  patients,  healthcare  providers,  and  facilities
because  entries  are  made  for  purposes  other  than  conducting  epidemiologic  studies.
Moreover, rapid and substantive transitions have occurred for several key information
sources—as, for example, in the growing use of electronic medical records, hospital and
managed-care data systems, and laboratory information management systems. These
automated  systems  can  facilitate  access  to  needed  records  but  might  not  be
compatible with meeting the needs of or supporting specific record access by external
investigators.  Thus,  the  quality  of  such  records  as  sources  of  data  for  epidemiologic
investigations can be substantially less than the quality of information obtained when
investigators  can  exert  greater  control  through  the  use  of  standardized,  pretested
questionnaires;  physical  or  laboratory  examinations;  or  other  prospectively  designed,
rather  than  retrospective,  data  collection  methods.  These  transitions  necessitate  that
epidemiologists involved in field investigations increasingly might need to know how to
use these data sources and, therefore, possess the requisite skills needed to analyze
them.  The  increasing  use  of  social  media  and  email  can  facilitate  outreach  to  and
queries of persons who might have common exposures in an outbreak situation, such
as participants in an organized event linked to a common-source exposure. Recently,
social media networks have been used to assist in identifying contacts of persons with
sexually transmitted diseases who might be at high risk and should be considered for
targeted  prophylaxis.  These  communication  tools  have  provided  added  insight  into
social  links  and  high-risk  behaviors  and  have  been  used  to  guide  and  augment  data
collected  from  traditional  case  investigation  methodologies  (26).  In  a  planned
prospective  study,  the  epidemiologist  determines  appropriate  sample  sizes  that  are
based  on  statistical  requirements  for  power  to  draw  conclusions  about  associations
between exposures and health outcomes. In contrast, outbreaks can involve a relatively
small  number  of  persons,  thereby  imposing  substantial  restrictions  on  study  design,
statistical  power,  and  other  aspects  of  analysis.  These  restrictions,  in  turn,  place
limitations  on  the  inferences  and  conclusions  that  can  be  drawn  from  a  field
investigation. However, communication technologies between jurisdictions can now be
used to help alleviate this problem. For example, the electronic Epidemic Information
Exchange (Epi-X) was developed for CDC officials, state and local health departments,
poison  control  centers,  and  other  public  health  professionals  to  access  and  share
preliminary health surveillance information (27). Although a primary motivation for this
system was to enhance the recognition of multistate events or the multistate dispersion
of  persons  with  disease  exposures  in  a  single  state  or  outside  the  United  States,  the
resulting  cross-jurisdictional  collaboration  has  the  additional  benefit  of  increasing
potential  sample  sizes  for  field  investigations.  Because  the  field  investigator  usually
arrives on the scene after the fact, collection of necessary environmental or biological
specimens is not always possible. For example, suspected food items might have been
entirely eaten or discarded, a suspected water system might have been flushed, or ill
persons might have recovered, thereby precluding collection of specimens during the
acute phase of illness when certain tests are most likely to be informative. Under these
conditions, the epidemiologist depends on the diligence of healthcare providers who are
first  to  evaluate  the  affected  persons  and  on  the  recall  of  affected  persons,  their
relatives, or other members of the affected community. This challenge increasingly is
counterbalanced by expanding technologies in the laboratory to help in using routinely
collected  specimens  to  determine  sources  of  outbreaks.  For  example,  PulseNet  is  a
national  laboratory  network  that  enables  the  use  of  DNA  fingerprinting  to  detect
thousands of local and multistate outbreaks (28), thereby enabling epidemiologists to
rapidly implement control measures for food safety problems that would not otherwise
be recognized. As another example, in 2015, epidemiologists investigated the largest
HIV  outbreak  in  the  United  States  since  1996.  Phylogenetic  analyses  of  target  genes
within the human immunodeficiency and hepatitis C viruses enabled epidemiologists to
retrospectively  determine  and  intervene  in  the  link  between  specific  outbreak  strains
and local needle-sharing networks using contaminated equipment (29). Acute disease
outbreaks  often  generate  considerable  local  attention  and  publicity.  In  this  regard,
media coverage can assist the investigation by helping to develop information, identify
cases, or promote and help implement control measures. Conversely, such publicity can
cause affected persons and others in the community to develop preconceptions about
the  source  or  cause  of  an  outbreak,  which  in  turn  can  lead  to  potential  biases  in
comparative  studies  or  failure  to  fully  explore  alternate  hypotheses.  As  government
employees,  field  epidemiologists  are  obligated  to  communicate  with  the  public  about
what  is  known,  what  is  unknown,  and  what  actions  are  being  taken  to  assess  public
health threats. Many reporters, in turn, endeavor to find and bring this information to
the public’s attention. That said, reporters in pursuit of the most current information on
the  investigation  can  demand  a  considerable  amount  of  epidemiologists’  time  to  the
detriment of the field investigation itself. Ensuring that a member of the response team
has the time and skills to communicate effectively with reporters can be essential to
the  success  of  a  field  investigation  and  to  disease  control  and  prevention  efforts,
particularly  in  high-profile  situations.  Frequently  during  the  course  of  an  event,  as
information unfolds and as field epidemiologists test, reject, or accept and reshape and
retest  hypotheses,  recommendations  for  interventions  might  evolve  or  become  more
focused. Apprising affected parties and the public of the rationale for these changes is
important  to  ensure  the  credibility  of  the  field  epidemiologists  and  of  public  health
recommendations  (see  Chapter  12).  In  recent  years,  CDC  and  other  public  health
agencies  have  used  social  media  tools  to  disseminate  health  messages.  Although
unskilled use of this medium during an ongoing investigation can pose challenges, such
as spreading misperceptions or fostering information biases, social media also can be
an  effective  means  for  expanding  the  reach  of  pertinent  evidence-based  health
messages (30). Although health departments are empowered to conduct investigations
and gain access to records, voluntary and willing participation of involved parties (e.g.,
case-patients,  persons  potentially  exposed  to  pathogens,  owners  or  operators  of
settings in which exposure or transmission might have occurred) is more conducive to
successful  investigations  than  compelled  participation.  In  addition,  persons  whose
livelihoods or related interests are at risk might be reluctant to cooperate voluntarily.
This  reluctance  often  can  be  the  case  for  common-source  outbreaks  associated  with
restaurants and other public establishments, in environmental or occupational hazard
investigations,  or  among  healthcare  providers  suspected  as  being  sources  for
transmission of infectious diseases, such as hepatitis B. When involved parties do not
willingly cooperate, delays can compromise access to and quality of information (e.g.,
by introducing bias and by decreasing statistical power). Epidemiologists who conduct
field investigations are often working in a fishbowl-type of environment. Epidemiologists
conducting  field  investigations  and  the  public  health  officials  under  whose  direction
they work must weigh the need for further investigation against the need for immediate
intervention, often in the face of strong and varying opinions of affected persons and
others  in  the  community.  In  the  absence  of  definitive  information  about  the  source,
cause,  or  potential  impact  of  a  problem,  the  various  parties  affected  by  a  particular
situation  might  view  implementation  of  a  plausible  control  measure  differently.  The
action might be welcomed by those who favor erring on the side of protecting health
and challenged by those who question the rationale for interventions absent definitive
information about the cause or source of illness, particularly if their economic or other
personal  interests  are  threatened.  Delaying  interventions  might  allow  time  to  obtain
more  definitive  information,  but  such  delays  also  might  lead  to  additional  illness.
Although  this  dilemma  is  not  unique  to  field  epidemiology  within  the  realm  of  public
health practice, the heightened urgency of acute situations can elevate the emotional
impact  on  all  involved  parties.  Field  investigations  are  sometimes  perceived  to
represent  what  is  sometimes  called  “quick  and  dirty”  epidemiology.  This  perception
might  reflect  the  inherent  nature  of  circumstances  for  which  rapid  responses  are
required. However, these requirements for action do not justify epidemiologic shortcuts.
Rather, they underscore for the field epidemiologist the importance of combining good
science  with  prudent  judgment.  A  better  description  of  a  good  epidemiologic  field
investigation  would  be  “quick  and  appropriate.”  In  judging  an  epidemiologic  field
investigation, consideration should be given to the quality of the science, opportunities
and constraints that shaped the context of the investigation, and judgment applied in
using  the  findings  to  take  public  health  actions.  The  goal  should  be  to  maximize  the
scientific  quality  of  the  field  investigation  in  the  face  of  the  full  range  of  limitations,
pressures, and responsibilities imposed on the investigator(s). Thus, the standards for
an epidemiologic field investigation are that it (1) is timely; (2) addresses an important
public health problem in the community, as defined by standard public health measures
(e.g.,  attack  rates,  apparent  or  potential  serious  illness,  or  death)  or  community
concern; (3) examines resource needs early and deploys them appropriately; (4) uses
appropriate methods of descriptive and/or analytic epidemiology that make optimal use
of  all  appropriate  available  data;  (5)  engages  expertise,  when  indicated,  from  other
public  health  sciences,  such  as  microbiology,  toxicology,  psychology,  anthropology,
informatics, economics, laboratory sciences, or statistics; (6) probes causality to enable
identification  of  the  source  and/or  etiology  of  the  problem  (31);  (7)  identifies
evidence-based  options  for  immediate  control  and  longterm  interventions;  and  (8)  is
conducted in active collaboration with colleagues who have policy, legal, programmatic,
communication,  or  administrative  roles  to  ensure  that  the  evidence  from  the
investigation is used optimally. This chapter has provided a definition of and framework
for field epidemiology in a modern and evolving context. Key developments in public
health practice during recent decades reflect the growing recognition and formalization
of field epidemiology, including establishment of field epidemiology training programs
in  affiliation  with  ministries  of  health  and  other  national-level  public  health  agencies
around the world (32). Other examples of this trend include the development of field
epidemiology courses and tracks within curriculum offerings of schools of public health
(33); undergraduate programs, and even middle school and high school programs in the
United States; the emergence of organizations that promote or link national-level field
epidemiology programs (34); and the growth of a body of literature related to the field
epidemiology  worldwide  (35,36).  CDC’s  own  workforce  development  program  in  field
epidemiology, EIS, has operated continuously since its creation in 1951 and has helped
to train more than 4,500 professionals in this discipline (37,38). As the discipline of field
epidemiology  continues  to  evolve,  new  developments  and  trends  are  shaping  its
ongoing  incorporation  within  public  health  practice.  Examples  of  these  developments
include the following. Field epidemiology draws on general epidemiologic principles and
methods,  and
 field
 epidemiologists  face  questions  that  are  familiar  to  all
epidemiologists  regardless  of  where  they  work,  including  questions  about  how  study
methods  are  shaped  by  logistical  constraints  and  about  the  amount  of  information
necessary to recommend or take action. Likewise, field epidemiologists are affected by
trends that influence the practice of epidemiology in general, such as public concerns
about  the  privacy  of  health  information,  the  increasing  automation  of  health
information,  and  the  growth  in  use  of  the  Internet.  Field  epidemiology  is  unique,
however, in compressing and pressurizing these concerns in the context of acute public
health emergencies and other events and in thrusting the epidemiologist irretrievably
into  the  midst  of  the  administrative,  legal,  and  ethical  domains  of  policy-making  and
public health action. Portions of this chapter as incorporated within previous editions of
this  book  were  adapted  from  Goodman  RA,  Buehler  JW,  Koplan  JP.  The  epidemiologic
field  investigation:  science  and  judgment  in  public  health  practice.  Am  J  Epidemiol.
1990;132:91–96.   <  Previous  Section:  Table  of  Contents  Next  Chapter  2:  Initiating
Operations  >   The  fellowship  application  period  and  host  site  application  period  are
closed.  For  questions  about  the  EIS  program,  please  contact  us  directly  at
EISApplication@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/eis/field-epi-manual/chapters/Defining-Field-Epi.html
