Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. The Journey of Your Child’s Vaccine Researchers spend several
years testing a vaccine in a lab to see if it can help protect against a specific disease.
They may also use small animals, like mice, to see if the vaccine causes an immune
response and is safe. If the vaccine shows promising results during this early stage of
testing,  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  can  give  approval  to  test  in  people
during  clinical  trials.  Clinical  trials  are  research  studies  involving  volunteers,  who  will
test the vaccine. This is how researchers learn if the new vaccine is safe and effective in
people.  Clinical  trials  usually  have  three  phases.  While  the  main  priority  is  vaccine
safety  and  effectiveness,  each  phase  has  a  specific  focus  for  researchers  to  explore.
During  Phase  1,  researchers  explore:  During  Phase  2,  researchers  explore:  During
Phase  3,  researchers  explore:  If  a  vaccine  is  successful  in  all  three  phases  of  clinical
trials,  FDA  reviews  all  the  gathered  research  data  to  consider  approving  it  for  use  in
people. After FDA approves a new vaccine for use, it may move to a fourth clinical trial
phase, called Phase 4. This phase includes several thousand volunteers. Phase 4 is an
ongoing study that looks at the vaccine’s safety and effectiveness over a longer period
of time. Vaccines are made in batches called “lots,” which are tested to make sure each
dose remains reliable and safe for use in people. You may have seen the recommended
schedule  for  vaccinations  at  your  doctor’s  office.  CDC  creates  these  schedules  each
year with help from a group of medical and public health experts called the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  To  make  a  recommendation  after  FDA
approval,  ACIP  carefully  reviews  all  data  about  a  vaccine.  This  includes:  After  ACIP
makes  a  recommendation  to  add  a  vaccine  to  a  schedule,  the  CDC  Director  decides
whether  to  approve  the  recommendation.  If  the  CDC  Director  approves,  the  new
vaccine will be added to the immunization schedule. The vaccine safety system in the
U.S.  ensures  vaccines  remain  safe  and  effective  for  use.  Health  experts  constantly
monitor a vaccine’s safety—starting as soon as FDA approves it. CDC and ACIP monitor
vaccine-related risks and side effects. If needed, they can update their recommendation
and the immunization schedule. Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
Anyone  can  submit  a  report  of  adverse  events  (serious  health  problems)  after
vaccination, regardless of whether it is vaccine-related. Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD)
Scientists can analyze health information from over 24 million people and determine if
possible  adverse  effects  are  actually  related  to  vaccination.  Post-Licensure  Rapid
Immunization Safety Monitoring (PRISM)
Researchers  can  monitor  vaccine  safety,  analyzing  data  from  190  million  people.
Clinical Immunization Safety Assessment (CISA) Project
This  collaboration  between  CDC  and  medical  research  centers  helps  experts  conduct
vaccine safety studies.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/parents/infographics/journey-of-child-vaccine.html
