Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
SPECIAL TOPIC — Volume 12 — April 30, 2015 Suggested citation for this article:
Quinn  E,  Johnson  DB,  Krieger  J,  MacDougall  E,  Payne  E,  Chan  NL.  Developing  Local
Board  of  Health  Guidelines  to  Promote  Healthy  Food  Access  —  King  County,
Washington,
 2010–2012.
 Prev
 Chronic
 Dis
 2015;12:140544.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd12.140544. PEER REVIEWED PEER REVIEWED Policies that
change  environments  are  important  tools  for  preventing  chronic  diseases,  including
obesity.  Boards  of  health  often  have  authority  to  adopt  such  policies,  but  few  do  so.
This study assesses 1) how one local board of health developed a policy approach for
healthy food access through vending machine guidelines (rather than regulations) and
2) the impact of the approach. Using a case study design guided by “three streams”
policy theory and RE-AIM, we analyzed data from a focus group, interviews, and policy
documents.  The  guidelines  effectively  supported  institutional  policy  development  in
several settings. Recognition of the problem of chronic disease and the policy solution
of vending machine guidelines created an opening for the board to influence nutrition
environments.  Institutions  identified  a  need  for  support  in  adopting  vending  machine
policies.  Communities  could  benefit  from  the  study  board’s  approach  to  using
nonregulatory evidence-based guidelines as a policy tool. Top Experts increasingly call
for policies to prevent chronic diseases, including obesity. Such policies aim to improve
access  to  healthy  food  and  physical  activity  opportunities,  making  it  easier  for  the
population to adopt healthier behaviors (1,2). Local boards of health (LBOH) often have
authority to adopt policies that could influence institutions such as government offices
and worksites, housing, and recreational facilities (3,4). Most local health departments
engage  in  policy-making  activities  (eg,  preparing  issue  briefs,  providing  public
testimony) (5). Nearly half report policy making specific to obesity or chronic disease
(5). However, fewer LBOHs engage in policy making than are authorized to do so (6).
The form and policy-making authority of the approximately 3,200 LBOHs in the United
States  vary.  More  LBOHs  are  allowed  to  adopt  regulations  than  to  impose  taxes,  for
example  (5).  Public  health  practitioners  could  benefit  from  studies  that  deepen
understanding  of  the  feasibility,  adoption,  and  implementation  of  policy  approaches
(7–10).  Well  respected  theoretical  frameworks  (11,12)  can  inform  such  studies.  This
article examines the case of an innovative LBOH policy tool in King County, Washington,
in  the  form  of  nonregulatory  nutritional  guidelines  for  food  and  beverages  sold  in
vending machines, and we provide insight into the tool’s development and initial use.
Top  Using  a  qualitative  case  study  design,  this  study  assesses  how  one  LBOH
developed a policy approach to address healthy food access in its community and the
extent of the approach’s initial use. The evaluation was designed through collaboration
between  public  health  practitioners  and  researchers  affiliated  with  Washington’s
Nutrition  and  Obesity  Policy  Research  and  Evaluation  Network  (NOPREN),  a  project
funded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to support transdisciplinary
policy  research  and  evaluation  across  a  continuum  of  policy  identification,
development,  evaluation,  and  dissemination  (http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nopren).
Data were collected through focus group, interview, and document review methods. We
used Kingdon’s “three streams” theory (11) to describe the adoption of the King County
Healthy Vending Guidelines (Guidelines) by the King County Board of Health (KCBOH).
Kingdon’s  constructs  of  “problem,”  “policy,”  and  “political”  streams  are  applied  to
consider whether and how local factors created a “policy window” for passage. We used
the  RE-AIM  framework  for  policy  impact  (12)  to  guide  an  analysis  of  the  use  of  the
Guidelines by local jurisdictions (eg, cities) and organizations in the year following the
adoption  (  Table  1).  Data  included  transcripts  from  a  1.5-hour  focus  group  (October
2011)  with  all  4  local  health  department  staff  who  participated  most  in  guideline
development, interviews with 4 LBOH members (February–August 2012; 3 local elected
officials,  1  health  expert),  and  interviews  with  representatives  of  5  local  jurisdictions
and organizations that used the Guidelines (April–May 2012; 2 municipal staff members,
2  department  directors,  and  1  contract  staff  member).  Nine  women  and  4  men
participated.  Interviews  took  30  to  60  minutes.  All  but  2  were  audio  recorded;  the
interviewer took notes for each. Participants provided consent per protocol approved by
University  of  Washington’s  Human  Subjects  Division.  We  also  reviewed  meeting
minutes and videos, policy drafts, memos, and contract language related to the LBOH’s
adoption of the Guidelines and local jurisdictions’ vending machine policy development.
We  developed  code  definitions  based  on  the  theoretical  frameworks  and  research
questions, and used Atlas.ti version 7.0 (ATLAS.ti GmbH) to code and analyze data. Two
researchers  coded  the  data,  compared  their  coding,  and  resolved  discrepancies  as
needed. One researcher reviewed and summarized the final coded passages. This same
researcher  reviewed  policy  documents  and  media  reports  to  supplement  data
recordings from interviews, focus groups, and meetings. Two local health department
staff  reviewed  the  resulting  narrative  to  vet  data  interpretation.  Minor  adjustments
were made on the basis of feedback. Top KCBOH is charged to “set county-wide public
health  policy,  enact  and  enforce  local  public  health  regulations,  and  carry  out  other
duties of local boards of health specified in state law” (13). Membership comprises 8
elected officials from specified jurisdictions (eg, county, largest city, 2 suburban cities)
and 3 appointed health experts. KCBOH and its corresponding local health department,
Public Health Seattle-King County (PHSKC), cover a large urban county with 39 cities,
including  Seattle,  the  most  populous  city  in  the  state.  Addressing  obesity  was  a  high
priority for PHSKC and KCBOH. Public health surveillance indicated that obesity was a
problem  in  King  County.  “The  board  of  health  every  year  tries  to  look  at  how  we’re
doing in King County,” said one KCBOH member. “It became very clear that we had a
rising problem of obesity.” Broad-based community-wide prevention initiatives, such as
the  Obesity  Prevention  Initiative  (14)  and  Communities  Putting  Prevention  to  Work
(CPPW),  increased  attention  to  these  issues.  For  example,  the  Seattle-King  County
CPPW  project  was  a  $25.5  million  federally  funded  initiative  focused  on  preventing
obesity and tobacco use through policy, systems, and environmental change from 2010
through  2012  (15).  PHSKC  and  KCBOH  were  impressed  with  evidence  that  frequent
eating  outside  the  home  contributed  to  obesity  and  therefore  wanted  to  improve  the
quality  of  food  in  away-from-home  settings.  At  the  time,  there  was  limited  practical
guidance  for  aligning  these  food  environments  with  the  2010  Dietary  Guidelines  for
Americans  (DGA)  (16).  In  2010,  KCBOH  convened  a  Healthy  Eating  and  Active  Living
(HEAL)  subcommittee  to  examine  potential  actions  to  promote  HEAL  and  prevent
obesity. The subcommittee comprised 3 KCBOH members who were elected officials, 1
KCBOH  member  who  was  a  health  expert,  and  PHSKC  staff  members.  The
subcommittee  created  a  list  of  approximately  25  best-practice  policy  strategies  and
selected  several  to  implement,  including  guidelines  for  healthy  vending.  Strategies
were  chosen  because  they  could  reach  many  people,  used  approaches  grounded  in
public  health  science,  avoided  redundancy,  demonstrated  leadership,  and  allowed
flexibility for jurisdictions and businesses. Before 2011, KCBOH had 2 policy categories:
1) Rules and Regulations, which “have the force of law, are general and permanent in
nature,  and  are  codified”  and  2)  Resolutions,  which  are  statements  “in  support  of  a
current action or project” that are neither permanent nor have the force of law (17). In
early  2011,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  PHSKC  director,  KCBOH  adopted  a  third  policy
category:  Guidelines  and  Recommendations.  The  new  category  was  “designed  to
provide  policy  guidance  where  the  Board  does  not  have  regulatory  authority  and  to
increase the reach of public health policy making to sectors that have not considered
the  public  health  impact  of  their  policies  in  their  sectors”  (17).  Members  saw  the
category  as  allowing  for  greater  specificity  and  impact  than  resolutions,  without  the
legal and political complexity of a rule or regulation. A KCBOH member said, “We could
take  more  frequent  action  without  having  the  legal  consequences  which  sometimes
seem to stymie government.” KCBOH used the category to create guidelines for healthy
community planning and then for healthy vending. It took approximately 6 months to
develop  the  guidelines.  PHSKC  staff  reviewed  vending  and  nutrition  guidelines  and
spoke  with  nutrition  policy  experts  from  across  the  United  States,  vending  machine
company representatives, and entities experienced with healthy vending. The resulting
Guidelines categorized foods as “limited” (ie, most processed; highest levels of sodium,
sugar, fat, and salt), “healthier,” and “healthiest” (ie, least processed, nutrient-rich, no
added sugar or salt) based on the DGA and recommended increasing the proportion of
“healthier”  and  “healthiest”  items  in  vending  machines  (18)  (Figure).  They  also
provided guidance on using the Guidelines for policy development. The subcommittee
identified “early adopter” organizations to pilot the Guidelines and demonstrate support
for  the  approach.    Figure.  Food  and  beverages  in  the  categories  of  “limited,”
“healthier,” and “healthiest” and nutrient levels for each category. [A text description
of this figure is also available.] PHSKC staff members described the rationale for and an
overview of the Guidelines and displayed sample items from each food category at the
April  2011  KCBOH  meeting.  Seven  stakeholders  testified  during  the  public  hearing
portion  of  the  meeting.  KCBOH  then  voted  unanimously  to  adopt  the  Guidelines  with
the intention that local jurisdictions and organizations across the county use them to
improve  their  vending  machine  policies  and  environments.  King  County  is  a  solidly
Democratic county. Residents are favorably disposed to an activist role for government
in  promoting  health  (19).  An  increasing  number  of  local  efforts  focus  on  improving
access  to  healthy  food.  KCBOH  also  has  a  history  of  using  policy  to  address  public
health issues, including trans fat in restaurant food, menu labeling, healthy community
planning,  and  tobacco  use.  Several  KCBOH  members  have  been  active  in  local  food
system and policy development. KCBOH members generally expressed strong support
for the Guidelines, citing a need for more healthy selections, a responsibility to make
evidence-based
 recommendations,
 and
 an
 appreciation
 for
 approaches
 that
encouraged  healthy  behaviors  rather  than  banning  unhealthy  options.  One  KCBOH
member  said,  “It’s  about  choices  .  .  .  .  It’s  all  things  in  moderation  and  in  healthy
amounts,  but  we’re  not  out  to  ban  Snickers  bars.”  During  testimony,  stakeholders
expressed a range of opinions about the Guidelines proposal ( Table 2). Proponents (2
“early adopter” organizations and an obesity prevention advocacy group) described a
need to increase the number of healthy vending machine options and an appreciation
for  the  Guidelines  as  a  resource  to  guide  policy  development.  Vending  machine
companies  ranged  from  cautiously  supportive  to  opposed  to  the  proposal;  vendors
expressed  concern  about  their  bottom  lines,  objected  to  price  differentials  between
healthy and unhealthy foods, and anticipated a lack of demand for and availability of
healthy products. One indicated that the company could “see the writing on the wall”
and  had  started  to  “gear  up”  for  the  shift  to  healthier  vending  machine  items.
Washington’s  Department  of  Services  for  the  Blind  (DSB)  expressed  concerns  about
anticipated  profit  decline.  (DSB  has  the  right  of  first  refusal  to  contract  for  vending
machines in government buildings, according to state and federal law; it uses vending
machine  profits  to  support  its  programs.)  A  KCBOH  member  reported  that  beverage
industry representatives met with his staff to express similar objections. The Guidelines’
recommendation  to  move  toward  100%  healthy  items  in  machines  was  the  most
contentious  point.  Both  proponents  and  opponents  cited  evidence  of  sales  declines
after introducing more than 30% healthy items, but proponents emphasized that sales
recovered.  One  KCBOH  member  suggested  removing  the  targeted  percentages  of
healthy foods, but others emphasized that the Guidelines were not legally binding and
were based on the best science. One member said, “Our role as a board of health is
really to tell citizens, ‘What do the facts say?’ We chose guidelines so we could work
with people and make it happen. . . . I think we need to challenge ourselves and the
industry.” KCBOH did not remove the targets. One PHSKC staff member later summed
up  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  nonregulatory  guidelines  approach  by
saying,  “It  doesn’t  have  the  force  of  law.  We  are  able  to  do  an  enormous  amount  in
terms of who the target audience is and where we set the bar for the best practice, but
it also means that carrying this through to implementation . . . is going to be different
for  each  organization  and  in  some  cases,  it  is  going  to  be  incredibly  time-intensive.”
Kingdon  theorizes  that  a  policy  window  “opens  because  of  a  change  in  the  political
stream . . . [or] because a new problem captures the attention of governmental officials
and those close to them” (11, p. 168). KCBOH’s new Guidelines and Recommendations
policy  category  provided  an  opening  as  obesity  prevention  and  healthy  food  access
were gaining  attention  and  support.  The Guidelines  provided  a  feasible alternative to
regulations that addressed the problem of unhealthy food away from home. PHSKC staff
described this concept as a “window of opportunity which we anticipate will eventually
close  because  [KCBOH’s]  attention  will  change  to  something  else.”  Interviewees
described measuring the reach of the Guidelines as a challenge, particularly for local
jurisdictions and organizations with decentralized vending but noted that the potential
reach was high. The networks to which KCBOH and PHSKC belonged (eg, jurisdictions
represented by elected official KCBOH members, PHSKC partners) were seen as assets.
Two  PHSKC  partners  and  2  jurisdictions  represented  by  KCBOH  members  used  the
Guidelines  in  the  first  year.  Another  KCBOH  member  said,  however,  “As  [an  elected
official],  I  guarantee  you,  I  would  not  go  in  and  tell  [my  constituents]  what  vending
machines  they  could  have.  I  need  to  have  an  advocate  from  within.”  Adoption  of
vending machine policies by the first 4 local jurisdictions and organizations using the
Guidelines affected approximately 345 vending machines. The total number of people
reached  is  unknown;  however,  in  one  housing  organization,  approximately  460
employees  and  residents  of  3,200  units  had  access  to  its  83  machines  (20).
Effectiveness is hard to measure because of a lack of accessible vending machine sales
data.  Interviewees  indicated  effectiveness  of  the  Guidelines  could  be  enhanced  by
outreach and technical assistance to promote and support use of the Guidelines as well
as complementary behavioral change interventions. The Guidelines were incorporated
into  policy  in  several  ways  during  the  first  year,  including  revised  vending  machine
contracting requirements for 2 local jurisdictions and organizations and a county council
motion for executive adoption of nutritional standards for vending machines ( Table 3).
Other  local  jurisdictions  and  organizations  spent  the  first  year  considering  policy
options, including centralizing vending processes to make use of the Guidelines easier.
Adopting  organizations  demonstrated  strong  fidelity  to  the  nutritional  guidelines  and
food categories, though several only required 50% healthy vending. Local jurisdictions
and organizations pursued vending machine policy change adoption because it seemed
feasible (eg, “an area over which they could have some influence,” “an easy win”) but
also  reported  that  adoption  was  more  complicated  than  anticipated.  Challenges
included  the  time  and  resources  required,  pushback  from  employees,  and  the
perception  that  healthy  vending  restricts  choice.  The  beverage  industry  and  vending
machine companies lobbied larger jurisdictions to discourage them from adopting 100%
healthy  items  in  vending  machines  or  price  differentials,  requesting  subsidies
(unsuccessfully)  to  offset  the  expected  sales  reduction  and  losses  due  to  expired
products,  and  negotiating  higher  percentages  of  revenue  that  the  companies  would
receive  from  the  machines.  PHSKC  staff  supported  use  of  the  Guidelines  through
presentations,  development  of  a  tool  kit,  consulting  on  contracting  language,  and
identifying sources of products that met guidelines (21). After approximately 2 years, 2
additional  local  jurisdictions  and  organizations  adopted  policies,  including  a  city
ordinance, requiring 50% healthy vending in all machines. A baseline evaluation of the
ordinance  reported  that  less  than  10%  of  the  city’s  machines  met  the  Guidelines
initially  (Perez  J.  Process  evaluation  report:  City  of  Seattle  implementation  of  King
County Healthy Vending Guidelines [unpublished student report]. Seattle, Washington:
Public Health Seattle King County; 2013). A local children’s hospital, community center,
and low-income housing nonprofit also began changing their vending machine policies
based  on  the  Guidelines  (20,22).  Top  This  case  illustrates  an  innovative  LBOH  policy
approach  to  promote  healthy  food  access  when  neither  legislation  nor  regulation  is
feasible  or  desirable.  The  Guidelines’  format,  along  with  recognized  health  concerns
and an amenable political landscape, created a policy window for KCBOH to extend its
influence  in  promoting  evidence-based  practice  and  affect  the  nutritional  quality  of
vending  machine  products.  The  Guidelines  catalyzed  and  supported  several  local
jurisdictions and organizations in developing or strengthening vending machine policies
with fidelity to the Guidelines, and thus to national dietary recommendations. Although
there are no data to measure longer-term outcomes in this case, improvements to the
nutritional quality of vending machine products have altered consumer behavior in the
past (23). Although most LBOH policy making takes the form of regulation, regulations
have limitations, including politicization and conflicts with or preemption by other laws
(3). By using the Guidelines, KCBOH and PHSKC probably avoided some “nanny-state”
concerns associated with other policy approaches (24). However, even the Guidelines
produced some pushback from stakeholders. This qualitative study allowed for in-depth
examination of the case, but the findings pertain to organizations with unique contexts
and cannot necessarily be generalized to others. In recollecting events and reactions, or
describing  politically  sensitive  situations,  some  interviewees  may  have  omitted
important details. No sales or implementation cost data were collected. Also, vending
machine company representatives declined to participate. As this study focused on the
development and preliminary uptake of the Guidelines, future research could examine
implementation  of  vending  machine  policies  based  on  such  guidelines  as  well  as
longer-term  use  of  or  changes  made  to  nonregulatory  tools  based  on  evolving
perceptions of the problem, tool, or political realities. Furthermore, studies could assess
vending  machine  sales  in  particular  jurisdictions  over  time  and  consider  the  health
implications  and  facilitators  and  barriers  to  those  changes.  Experts  have  called  for
policy  approaches  to  prevent  obesity  and  chronic  disease  by  improving  access  to
healthy food and addressing other determinants. LBOHs and communities could benefit
from  KCBOH’s  experience  in  using  nonregulatory  evidence-based  guidelines  as  one
policy  tool  toward  this  end.  Top  This  project  is  supported  through  NOPREN  by
cooperative agreement no. 5U48-DP001911 from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.  The  findings  and  conclusions  are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not
necessarily  represent  the  official  position  of  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention. Top Corresponding Author: Emilee Quinn, MPH, School of Public Health, Box
353410, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195. Telephone: 206-616-7362. Email:
equinn1@uw.edu. Author Affiliations: Donna B. Johnson, Elizabeth Payne, University of
Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  James  Krieger,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,
Washington, and Action for Healthy Food, Seattle, Washington; Erin MacDougall, Bastyr
University,  Kenmore,  Washington;  Nadine  L.  Chan,  Public  Health  –  Seattle  and  King
County,  Seattle,  Washington.  During  this  study,  James  Krieger  and  Erin  MacDougall
were affiliated with Public Health – Seattle and King County, Seattle, Washington. Top
Top a Implementation and Maintenance are not addressed in this study, given the focus
on  preliminary  impact  within  the  first  year  of  Guidelines’  use.    Abbreviations:  DSB,
Washington  State  Department  of  Services  for  the  Blind;  HA,  health  advocates;  LJOs,
local jurisdictions and organizations; KCBOH, King County Board of Health, VC, vending
companies.a Some stakeholders discussed thresholds whereby vending machines that
had  30%  to  50%  healthier  options  would  be  likely  to  result  in  revenue  loss,  whereas
vending  machines  with  a  lower  percentage  of  healthy  items  might  result  in  limited
revenue  loss.    Abbreviations:  DSB,  Department  of  Services  for  the  Blind;  Guidelines,
King  County  Healthy  Vending  Guidelines;  KCBOH,  King  County  Board  of  Health;  RFP,
request  for  proposal.a  Details  describe  decisions  made  more  than  1  year  after
Guidelines  were  adopted  by  KCBOH.  Top  The  opinions  expressed  by  authors
contributing  to  this  journal  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  opinions  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2015/14_0544.htm
