  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Please note: An
erratum has been published for this article. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Alicia  Anderson,  DVM1  Henk  Bijlmer,  MD,  PhD2  Pierre-Edouard  Fournier,  MD,  PhD3
Stephen Graves, MD, PhD4 Joshua Hartzell, MD5 Gilbert J. Kersh, PhD1 Gijs Limonard,
MD6  Thomas  J.  Marrie,  MD7  Robert  F.  Massung,  PhD1  Jennifer  H.  McQuiston,  DVM1
William  L.  Nicholson,  PhD1  Christopher  D.  Paddock,  MD1  Daniel  J.  Sexton,  MD8  
1National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia
2National  Institute  for  Public  Health  and  the  Environment,  The  Netherlands  3French
National Center for the Study and Diagnosis of Q Fever, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille,
France  4Australian  Rickettsial  Reference  Laboratory  Foundation,  Victoria,  Australia
5Walter  Reed  National  Military  Medical  Center,  Washington,  DC  6Canisius-Wilhelmina
Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 7Dalhousie University, Nova Scotia, Canada 8Duke
University Medical School, Durham, North Carolina The material in this report originated
in the National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Beth P. Bell, MD,
Director;  and  the  Division  of  Vector-Borne  Diseases,  Lyle  R.  Petersen,  MD,  Director.  
Corresponding  preparer:  Alicia  Anderson,  DVM,  Division  of  Vector-Borne  Diseases,
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, 1600 Clifton Road,
MS  A-30,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:  404-639-4499;  Fax:  404-639-2778;  E-mail:
aha5@cdc.gov. Q fever, a zoonotic disease caused by the bacterium Coxiella burnetii,
can  cause  acute  or  chronic  illness  in  humans.  Transmission  occurs  primarily  through
inhalation of aerosols from contaminated soil or animal waste. No licensed vaccine is
available in the United States. Because many human infections result in nonspecific or
benign constitutional symptoms, establishing a diagnosis of Q fever often is challenging
for clinicians. This report provides the first national recommendations issued by CDC for
Q  fever  recognition,  clinical  and  laboratory  diagnosis,  treatment,  management,  and
reporting  for  health-care  personnel  and  public  health  professionals.  The  guidelines
address treatment of acute and chronic phases of Q fever illness in children, adults, and
pregnant  women,  as  well  as  management  of  occupational  exposures.  These
recommendations will be reviewed approximately every 5 years and updated to include
new published evidence. Q fever, first described in 1937, is a worldwide zoonosis that
has  long  been  considered  an  underreported  and  underdiagnosed  illness  because
symptoms  frequently  are  nonspecific,  making  diagnosis  challenging  (1–3).  The
causative organism, Coxiella burnetii, is an intracellular bacterium that tends to infect
mononuclear  phagocytes  but  can  infect  other  cell  types  as  well.  Infection  in  humans
usually  occurs  by  inhalation  of  bacteria  from  air  that  is  contaminated  by  excreta  of
infected animals. Other modes of transmission to humans, including tick bites, ingestion
of  unpasteurized  milk  or  dairy  products,  and  human-to-human  transmission,  are  rare
(1).  Laboratory  diagnosis  relies  mainly  on  serology,  and  doxycycline  is  the  most
effective treatment for acute illness. No vaccine is available commercially in the United
States.  Q  fever  was  designated  a  nationally  notifiable disease in  the United  States  in
1999. Since then, reports of Q fever have increased, with 167 cases reported in 2008,
an increase greater than ninefold compared with 2000, in which 17 cases were reported
(4). The national seroprevalence of Q fever is estimated to be 3.1% based on data from
the  National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey  (2003–2004),  and  human
infections  have  been  reported  from  every  state  in  the  United  States  (5).  Q  fever
infections in humans and animals have been reported from every world region except
Antarctica  (6).  Q  fever  has  acute  and  chronic  stages  that  correspond  to  two  distinct
antigenic phases of antibody response. During an acute infection, an antibody response
to C. burnetii phase II antigen is predominant and is higher than the response to the
phase  I  antigen,  whereas  a  chronic  infection  is  associated  with  a  rising  phase  I
immunoglobulin  G  (IgG)  titer.  Although  acute  Q  fever  symptoms  in  humans  vary,  the
condition  typically  is  characterized  by  a  nonspecific  febrile  illness,  hepatitis,  or
pneumonia. Asymptomatic infections followed by seroconversion have been reported in
up to 60% of cases identified during outbreak investigations (6–8). Onset of symptoms
usually occurs within 2–3 weeks of exposure, and symptomatic patients might be ill for
weeks  or  months  if  untreated.  Chronic  Q  fever  can  manifest  within  a  few  months  or
several  years  after  acute  infection  and  can  follow  symptomatic  or  asymptomatic
infections. Chronic disease is rare (<5% of patients with acute infections) and typically
is characterized by endocarditis in patients with preexisting risk factors such as valvular
or  vascular  defects  (9).  Unlike  acute  Q  fever,  which  has  a  low  mortality  rate  (<2%),
chronic Q fever endocarditis is always fatal if untreated (10). Routine blood cultures are
negative  in  patients  with  chronic  Q  fever  endocarditis.  Diagnosis  of  chronic  Q  fever
endocarditis  can  be  extremely  difficult  because  vegetative  lesions  are  visualized  by
echocardiography  in  approximately  12%  of  patients  (6).  Q  fever  is  an  occupational
disease in persons whose work involves contact with animals, such as slaughterhouse
workers, veterinarians, and farmers, although infection is not limited to these groups.
Urban outbreaks and cases with no known exposure or close proximity to livestock have
been  reported,  as  have  nonoccupational  exposures  such  as  through  a  hobby  farm  (a
small  farm  that  is  not  a  primary  source  of  income)  (11).  Data  collected  from  Q  fever
case report forms submitted to CDC during 2000–2010 indicate that 320 of 405 (79%)
cases in patients who reported occupational status are recognized in patients who are
not  in  previously  defined  high-risk  occupations,  and  243  of  405  (60%)  cases  are  in
patients  who  do  not  report  livestock  contact  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2010).  These
findings  underscore  the  need  for  health-care  professionals  to  consider  Q  fever  in  the
differential  diagnosis  in  patients  with  a  compatible  illness,  even  in  the  absence  of
occupational risk or history of direct contact with animal reservoirs. Approximately 200
cases of acute Q fever were reported in U.S. military personnel who had been deployed
to Iraq since 2003. Investigations of these cases linked illness to tick bites, sleeping in
barns,  and  living  near  helicopter  zones  with  environmental  exposure  resulting  from
helicopter-generated  aerosols  (12,13).  The  largest  known  reported  Q  fever  outbreak
involved  approximately  4,000  human  cases  and  occurred  during  2007–2010  in  the
Netherlands. This outbreak was linked to dairy goat farms near densely populated areas
and presumably involved human exposure via a windborne route (14). Prompt diagnosis
and  appropriate  treatment  shortens  the  illness  and  reduces  the  risk  for  severe
complications (15,16). In patients with chronic Q fever illness, early treatment might be
lifesaving.  Physician  awareness  of  the  epidemiologic  and  clinical  characteristics  of  Q
fever is required to make a prompt and correct diagnosis. Information in this report is
designed  to  assist  U.S.  clinicians  with  the  following:  A  compilation  of  the  key  point
summaries for Q fever clinical features, diagnosis, treatment, occupational exposures,
and surveillance and reporting are provided (Appendix A). This report provides the first
national guidelines for the diagnosis and management of Q fever in the United States.
The  recommendations  were  prepared  by  the  Q  Fever  Working  Group,  which  includes
CDC scientists, infectious disease specialists, laboratorians, epidemiologists, and clinical
practitioners  with  expertise  in  the  diagnosis  and  management  of  Q  fever.  These
recommendations  were  developed  through  expert  consultation  and  consensus  and
represent  the  best  judgment  of  Q  fever  subject-matter  experts,  many  of  whom  are
international  experts  because  of  the  low  number  of  Q  fever  clinical  subject-matter
experts  in  the  United  States.  In  2009,  CDC  created  the  first  draft  using  previously
published  guidelines,  review  articles,  and  multiple  search  strategies  of  medical  and
professional computerized databases. During 2010–2012, each member of the Q Fever
Working Group reviewed, revised, and refined the recommendations. In 2012, the CDC
National  Institute  of  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  reviewed  the  recommendations.
When  possible,  recommendations  were  based  on  existing  recommendations  or
guidelines  (referenced  within  the  text),  with  emphasis  on  U.S.  populations.  Published
guidelines  and  the  peer-reviewed  literature  were  reviewed  to  ensure  the  relevance,
completeness,  and  accuracy  of  the  recommendations.  If  no  adequate  guidelines
existed,  the  guidelines  and  recommendations  were  based  on  the  experience  and
expertise  of  the  Q  Fever  Working  Group  members.  Cattle,  sheep,  and  goats  are  the
primary  reservoirs  for  C.  burnetii.  However,  infection  has  been  confirmed  in  multiple
vertebrate species, including wildlife, marine mammals, domestic mammals, birds, and
reptiles (17). C. burnetii has been isolated from approximately 40 species of ticks, and
possible  tickborne  transmission  of  C.  burnetii  to  humans  has  been  reported  (18–20).
Any infected animal has the potential to transmit the pathogen via bacterial shedding in
their body secretions. Human outbreaks and cases have been epidemiologically linked
to  exposure  to  multiple  species  including  pigeons,  dogs,  and  rabbits  (21–23).  Human
cases  and  outbreaks  linked  to  exposure  to  infected  parturient  cats  also  have  been
reported (24–26). The majority of animal infections are asymptomatic. Clinical illness in
ruminants  is  primarily  characterized  by  reproductive  disorders  such  as  abortion,
stillbirth, endometritis, mastitis, and infertility (27). The highest numbers of organisms
are shed in birth products, although viable organisms also might be shed in the urine,
milk,  and  feces  of  infected  animals  (28,29).  A  positive  antibody  titer  in  an  infected
animal  does  not  correlate  with  active  shedding  of  organisms  because  some
seronegative animals might actively shed bacteria (30,31). Conversely, animals might
seroconvert  after  exposure  to  C.  burnetii  but  not  shed  the  bacteria  (31–34).  Thus,
serologic testing is not a reliable method to determine whether specific animals are a
potential source of transmission of C. burnetii to humans or other animals. Polymerase
chain  reaction  (PCR)  testing  of  body  fluids  (e.g.,  feces,  milk,  and  vaginal  mucus)  is  a
more  reliable  method  to  detect  shedding,  which  might  be  intermittent.  The  most
common  mode  of  transmission  in  humans  is  inhalation  of  infectious  aerosols  directly
from birth fluids of infected animals or via inhalation of dust contaminated with dried
birth fluids or excreta. C. burnetii is extremely resistant to physical stresses, including
heat  and  desiccation  and  can  survive  in  the  environment  for  months  to  years.  The
bacteria  can  become  airborne,  traveling  on  wind  currents  for  miles,  resulting  in
outbreaks  (35,36).  In  one  outbreak,  Q  fever  cases  were  documented  in  persons  who
lived 10 miles from the farm that was the source of the outbreak. In a recent outbreak
in the Netherlands, living within 2 km of an infected farm was a significant risk factor
for infection (36–38). Less common routes of transmission include ingestion of raw milk
and  dairy  products  or  contact  with  contaminated  clothing  (39,40).  Person-to-person
transmission of Q fever is possible but rarely reported. Persistent infection of the genital
tract has been documented both in animals and humans, and sexual transmission and
transplacental  transmission  of  disease  have  been  reported  (41–44).  Rare  cases  of
transmission caused by blood transfusion or bone marrow transplantation from infected
human donors have been reported (45,46). C. burnetii has been isolated from human
breast  milk,  and  lactogenic  transmission  is  possible,  although  no  cases  have  been
documented  via  this  route  of  transmission  (47).  Sporadic  cases  of  nosocomial
transmission  associated  with  autopsies  and  obstetrical  procedures  of  infected  women
have  been  reported  (48,49).  The  reported  incidence  and  seroprevalence  of  acute  Q
fever  is  higher  among  persons  aged  ≥40  years  than  among  younger  persons,  and
disease severity increases with age (5,50). Persons aged 60–64 years have the highest
age-related risk of Q fever in the United States (4). In addition, males have a higher risk
for symptomatic Q fever illness than females (6), which might be partly explained by
sex-associated  occupational  exposures  or  the  protective  effects  of  17β-estradiol  in
females, which has been validated in animal studies (51,52). Although infections occur
year  round,  acute  Q  fever  cases  in  the  United  States  peak  in  the  spring.  Seasonal
incidence  of  acute  Q  fever  likely  correlates  with  livestock  birthing  times  or  farm
management practices such as manure spreading (4,53,54). In addition to host factors,
other  elements  that  might  influence  disease  susceptibility  and  clinical  manifestations
include  route  of  infection  and  size  of  inoculum  (6,55,56).  When  compiling  a  medical
history, health-care providers should consider the following factors: Although a detailed
exposure  history,  including  animal  contact,  might  assist  health-care  providers  in
identifying  potential  Q  fever  in  a  patient,  a  lack  of  direct  animal  contact  should  not
preclude a clinical suspicion of diagnosis because airborne transmission of C. burnetii
can occur. Symptomatic acute Q fever, which occurs in approximately half of infected
persons,  is  characterized  by  a  wide  variety  of  clinical  signs  and  symptoms.  After  an
incubation period of 2–3 weeks, the most common clinical manifestation is a nonspecific
febrile illness that might occur in conjunction with pneumonia or hepatitis (6). The most
frequently reported symptoms include fever, fatigue, chills, and myalgia (Table 1). In a
study  of  deployed  U.S.  military  personnel,  the  three  most  common  International
Classification  of  Diseases,  Clinical  Modification  (ICD-9-CM)  codes  assigned  to  patients
who  were  later  identified  as  having  Q  fever  were  as  follows:  fever,  not  otherwise
specified  (780.6);  pneumonia,  organism  unspecified  (486);  and  viral  infection,  not
otherwise  specified  (079.99)  (12).  Severe,  debilitating  headaches  also  are  a  frequent
symptom,  and  lumbar  punctures  have  been  performed  on  patients  for  suspected
meningitis who were later shown to have Q fever (J. Hartzell, MD, Walter Reed National
Military  Medical  Center,  2012,  personal  communication).  The  headache  might  be
retroorbital and associated with photophobia (6). In patients with acute Q fever illness,
this has been misclassified as a new onset migraine headache or a potentially infected
tooth because the headache pain radiates to the jaw (11). Pneumonia is an important
clinical  manifestation  of  acute  Q  fever,  and  C.  burnetii  might  be  an  underrecognized
cause  of  community-acquired  pneumonia.  In  North  America  in  the  1980s,  the
prevalence  of  acute  Q  fever  in  1,306  cases  of  community-acquired  pneumonia  in
hospitalized  patients  was  30  cases  (2.3%)  (57).  Features  of  Q  fever  pneumonia  are
similar  to  other  etiologies  of  community-acquired  pneumonia  and  cannot  be
distinguished clinically, radiologically, or by any other routine laboratory evaluation. Q
fever  pneumonia  can  range  from  mild  to  severe,  and  numerous  patients  have
extrapulmonary  manifestations  (including  severe  headache,  myalgia,  and  arthralgia).
Cough is often present and is nonproductive in 50% of patients; upper respiratory signs
are less likely to be reported in persons with Q fever pneumonia (58–62). Fever lasts a
median  of  10  days  in  untreated  patients  (range:  5–57  days);  the  majority  of  cases
defervesce within 72 hours of doxycycline administration (63,64). The duration of fever
increases with age; one study demonstrated that 60% of patients aged >40 years had a
fever  duration  of  >14  days,  compared  with  29%  of  patients  aged  <40  years  (64).  In
another study, 5%–21% of patients with acute Q fever had a maculopapular or purpuric
rash (53). Onset of symptoms can be gradual or abrupt, with variable severity. Although
mortality  is  <2%  in  patients  with  acute  Q  fever,  in  the  Netherlands  outbreak,  which
included approximately 4,000 reported cases, up to 50% of acute Q fever patients were
hospitalized  (6,38).  Less  frequently  described  clinical  symptoms  include  pericarditis,
myocarditis, aseptic meningitis, encephalitis, and cholecystitis (53,65). Children with Q
fever  are  less  likely  to  have  symptoms  than  adults  and  might  have  a  milder  illness.
Acute  Q  fever  in  symptomatic  children  typically  is  characterized  by  a  febrile  illness,
often  accompanied  by  headache,  weakness,  cough,  and  other  nonspecific  systemic
symptoms. Illness frequently is self-limited, although a relapsing febrile illness lasting
for  several  months  has  been  documented  in  some  children  (66).  Gastrointestinal
symptoms  such  as  diarrhea,  vomiting,  abdominal  pain,  and  anorexia  are  reported  in
50%–80% of pediatric cases (66–68). Skin rash is more common in children than adults,
with  a  prevalence  as  high  as  50%  among  children  with  diagnosed  cases  (66–69).  Q
fever  pneumonia  is  usually  moderate  with  mild  cough;  respiratory  distress  and  chest
pain  might  occur.  Severe  manifestations  of  acute  disease  are  rare  in  children  and
include  hepatitis,  hemolytic  uremic  syndrome,  myocarditis,  pericarditis,  encephalitis,
meningitis,
 hemophagocytosis,
 lymphadenitis,
 acalculous
 cholecystitis,
 and
rhabdomyolysis  (70–74).  Q  fever  infections  in  women  that  occur  shortly  before
conception or during pregnancy might result in miscarriage, stillbirth, premature birth,
intrauterine growth retardation, or low birthweight (75). Adverse pregnancy outcomes
are  likely  to  be  caused  by  vasculitis  or  vascular  thrombosis  resulting  in  placental
insufficiency, although direct infection of the fetus has been documented (76). Of the
reports that describe outcomes of infected pregnant women, none have documented an
increased  risk  for  congenital  malformations  because  of  infection  (75,76).  Pregnant
women might be less likely to have symptoms of Q fever compared with other adults
(e.g., a febrile illness), although they remain at risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes
(50). As a result, if a pregnant woman with no history of clinical illness has only a single
increased antibody titer, it is difficult for the health-care provider to determine whether
the  increase  is  from  a  previous  or  current  infection.  Serosurveys  of  pregnant  women
evaluating a possible association between a single, elevated C. burnetii antibody titer
(which  cannot  differentiate  between  previous  or  current  infection)  and  adverse
pregnancy outcomes have reported mixed findings (77–80). A woman with a previous
infection  (>30  days  before  conception)  with  no  evidence  of  progression  to  chronic
disease  does  not  require  treatment  during  pregnancy.  However,  a  Q  fever  infection
during  pregnancy  requires  antibiotic  treatment  (Table  2),  and  health-care  providers
should  consider  several  factors  to  determine  the  best  treatment  approach.  Careful
assessment  of  serologic  results  are  useful  because  the  phase  II  antibody  response  is
increased in patients with an acute infection but decreases during convalescence as the
phase  I  antibody  response  increases.  Factors  to  consider  before  initiating  treatment
include  whether  the  patient  had  contact  with  infected  livestock,  occupational  animal
contact, or an epidemiological link to another person with Q fever to guide treatment
decisions.  The  risk  for  adverse  effects  on  the  fetus  and  the  risk  that  the  mother  will
develop  chronic  Q  fever  are  highest  when  an  acute  infection  occurs  during  the  first
trimester  (81,82).  Untreated  infection  in  the  first  trimester  is  more  likely  to  result  in
miscarriage,  whereas  infection  later  in  pregnancy  is  more  likely  to  cause  premature
delivery  (75).  Women  infected  with  acute  Q  fever  during  pregnancy,  including  those
who were asymptomatic or experienced no adverse pregnancy outcomes, might be at
risk for recrudescent infection during subsequent pregnancies (83). Therefore, pregnant
women  with  a  history  of  Q  fever  infection  during  a  previous  pregnancy  should  be
monitored closely for recrudescent infection in all subsequent pregnancies. Health-care
providers should educate women of child-bearing age who receive a diagnosis of acute
Q  fever  of  potential  risks  to  the  fetus.  These  women  should  be  advised  to  avoid
pregnancy  for  at  least  1  month  after  diagnosis  and  treatment  and  should  receive  a
pregnancy  test  to  determine  whether  long-term  antibiotic  treatment  is  needed.
Pneumonia  is  one  of  the  primary  clinical  manifestations  of  acute  Q  fever  (6).  Chest
radiograph  abnormalities  are  seen  in  the  majority  of  patients  with  acute  Q  fever,
although  patients  in  the  early  stages  of  disease  might  have  normal  radiographic
findings.  Radiographic  evaluation  of  acute  Q  fever  patients  during  the  Netherlands
outbreak showed infiltrates in >96% of patients (84). Radiographic patterns for acute Q
fever  pneumonia  are  nonspecific;  the  most  common  abnormalities  are  segmental  or
lobar consolidation, which might be unilateral or bilateral, involve upper or lower lobes,
or feature multiple or single opacities. Patchy infiltrations are an uncommon feature of
Q  fever  pneumonia  (58,85,86).  Acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome  is  a  rare
manifestation of Q fever but has occurred (87,88). It is not possible to differentiate Q
fever  pneumonia  from  other  causes  of  community-acquired  pneumonia  solely  on  the
basis of radiographic findings. Although up to 25% of patients with acute Q fever have
an increased leukocyte count, most patients have normal white blood cell counts. Mild
thrombocytopenia in early illness, which occurs in approximately one third of patients,
might be followed by subsequent thrombocytosis. Increased erythrocyte sedimentation
rate,  hyponatremia,  hematuria,  increased  creatine  kinase,  and  increased  C-reactive
protein  levels  have  been  reported.  The  most  common  laboratory  abnormalities  are
increased  liver  enzyme  levels,  which  are  observed  in  up  to  85%  of  cases  (89).
Hyperbilirubinemia  occurs  in  one  in  four  patients  (90–93).  Hepatomegaly  or
splenomegaly  (unrelated  to  thrombocytopenia)  also  might  be  present,  although
jaundice is rare (90). Q fever causes significant immune activation that might result in
cross-reactivity with other laboratory tests for autoimmune or infectious processes or
agents,
 including
 tests
 for
 antineutrophil
 cytoplasmic
 antibodies,
 human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), brucellosis, or rapid plasma reagin (94). Chronic Q fever
is rare, occurring in <5% of persons with acute infection, and might occur within a few
months, years, or even decades after the initial acute infection (6). Chronic disease can
occur  after  symptomatic  or  asymptomatic  infections.  Potential  signs  and  symptoms
include  endocarditis,  chronic  hepatitis,  chronic  vascular  infections,  osteomyelitis,
osteoarthritis,  and  chronic  pulmonary  infections  (6).  Although  patients  likely  have
lifelong immunity to reinfection, disease recrudescence might occur and has been well
documented  (95).  The  patients  at  highest  risk  for  chronic  Q  fever  are  those  with
valvular  heart  disease,  a  vascular  graft,  or  an  arterial  aneurysm.  Acute  infection  in
immunosuppressed  persons  and  pregnant  women  also  has  been  linked  to  later
development  of  chronic  disease  (6,96).  Since  Q  fever  was  categorized  as  a  notifiable
disease in the United States in 1999, CDC has received 49 reports of chronic Q fever, of
which 24 manifested as endocarditis (CDC, unpublished data, 2012). Endocarditis is the
major  form  of  chronic  Q  fever,  comprising  60%–78%  of  all  cases  worldwide.
Endocarditis is a severe condition that is invariably fatal due to heart failure if untreated
and has a 10-year mortality rate of 19% in treated patients (97,98). The second most
common  form  of  chronic  Q  fever  is  infection  of  aneurysms  or  vascular  prostheses,
followed  by  chronic  Q  fever  infections  after  pregnancy  (98).  However,  during  the  Q
fever outbreak in the Netherlands, vascular infections were the most common form of
chronic  disease  reported  (15).  A  clinical  assessment  of  patients  with  acute  Q  fever
should be performed to determine whether they are at high risk for subsequent chronic
infection.  Approximately  40%  of  persons  with  a  known  valvulopathy  with  an  acute  Q
fever  diagnosis  subsequently  develop  infective  endocarditis  (99).  Patients  with
endocarditis  are  predominantly  men  aged  >40  years  (97).  Similar  to  other  infective
endocarditis etiologies, patients at highest risk for development of Q fever endocarditis
after acute infection are those with a prosthetic valve, followed by patients with aortic
bicuspid valves, mitral valve prolapse, and moderate mitral insufficiency (99,100). The
initial clinical signs and symptoms in patients with chronic Q fever often are nonspecific
and  highly  variable.  Features  might  include  fatigue,  fever,  abdominal  or  chest  pain,
weight loss, night sweats, or hepatosplenomegaly (101). Arterial embolism, pulmonary
embolism, or deep venous thrombosis also might occur (97,102). Valvular vegetations
usually are small and are detected by echocardiogram in approximately 12% of cases.
Cardiologists evaluating the echocardiogram should be made aware of the suspected
diagnosis  of  chronic  Q  fever  because  the  lesions,  which  often  are  subtle,  might  be
missed  (97).  A  transesophageal  echocardiogram  (TEE)  is  more  sensitive  than  a
transthoracic  echocardiogram  (TTE)  in  detecting  valvular  defects;  TEEs  should  be
performed in patients with suspected endocarditis who have TTEs that are negative or
not  definitive  (103).  However,  a  negative  echocardiogram,  whether  TTE  or  TEE,  does
not  rule  out  a  diagnosis  of  chronic  Q  fever  endocarditis.  In  a  retrospective  study  of
patients  with  Q  fever  endocarditis,  the  most  common  abnormality  found  by
echocardiography in patients with chronic Q fever endocarditis was a newly discovered
or  worsening  valvular  insufficiency  (97).  Other  echocardiographic  findings  included
vegetations,  valvular  thickening,  calcification,  cardiac  abscess,  stenosis,  prosthetic
leakage  or  avulsion,  or  pericardial  effusion.  The  mitral  and  aortic  valves  were  most
commonly affected. Patients often did not have a previous diagnosis of acute Q fever.
The  median  onset  time  for  endocarditis  was  2.5  months  (range:  1–66  months)  after
acute illness among those who received a diagnosis of acute Q fever (97). Persons with
arterial aneurysms or vascular grafts also are at risk for chronic Q fever, and C. burnetii
vascular  infection  carries  a  high  mortality  rate  even  in  treated  patients  (96,104).
Treated patients have an estimated 3-year mortality rate of 25%, a rate much higher
than patients with treated Q fever endocarditis, who have an estimated 3-year mortality
rate  of  7%  (97,104).  The  majority  of  C.  burnetii  vascular  infections  reported  in  the
literature  are  aortic  infections,  which  complicate  an  aortic  aneurysm  or  previously
placed endovascular prosthesis (104). The infected aneurysm frequently is diagnosed
during  surgery  because  the  aortic  wall  ruptures;  death  is  most  commonly  caused  by
vascular rupture. Infections develop more slowly in grafts than in aneurysms. Patients
might have culture-negative aortitis (105). Spondylodiscitis and vertebral involvement
might occur and should prompt testing for Q fever in patients with aortic defects (104).
Imaging techniques that might prove useful for diagnosis of vascular infections include
computed
 tomography,
 magnetic
 resonance
 imaging,
 or
 duplex
 ultrasound.
Fluorodeoxyglucose
 positron
 emission
 tomography
 combined
 with
 computed
tomography  has  high  sensitivity  and  specificity  for  diagnosis  of  low-grade  vascular
infections and can visualize other potential infectious foci that cannot be visualized by
other imaging methods (101,105). Women infected with Q fever during pregnancy are
at high risk for developing chronic Q fever, possibly because of a failure to mount an
appropriate  immune  response  to  acute  infection  or  the  ability  of  C.  burnetii  to  use
placental trophoblasts as a replicative niche (106,107). The earlier during pregnancy a
woman is infected, the greater her risk for development of chronic disease (75). After a
diagnosis  of  new  onset  acute  infection,  treatment  throughout  pregnancy  is
recommended to decrease the risk for an adverse birth outcome as well as the risk for
future  development  of  chronic  Q  fever  (75).  Chronic  infection  might  be  evidenced  by
increased phase I IgG C. burnetii titers that do not decrease after pregnancy and can
lead to adverse outcomes during subsequent pregnancies (81). Chronic Q fever is rarely
reported  in  children.  Pediatric  chronic  Q  fever  manifests  most  frequently  as  chronic
relapsing  or  multifocal  osteomyelitis,  blood-culture–negative  endocarditis,  or  chronic
hepatitis (108). Children with Q fever osteomyelitis often experience a prolonged course
with recurrent episodes affecting multiple bones before diagnosis (71,109). Like adults,
children who are immunocompromised or have underlying heart valve disease might be
at higher risk for chronic Q fever. Post-Q fever fatigue syndrome has been reported in
up  to  20%  of  patients  with  acute  Q  fever  and  is  the  most  common  chronic  outcome
after  acute  infection  (110–122).  However,  the  data  related  to  post-Q  fever  fatigue
syndrome are limited, and its rate of occurrence in the United States is unknown. This
syndrome  is  distinct  from  other  sequelae  of  acute  infection  such  as  chronic  Q  fever
manifesting as endocarditis or osteomyelitis. The majority of patients with post-Q fever
fatigue  syndrome  are  previously  healthy  persons  with  no  underlying  medical  or
psychological  problems  who  develop  a  complex  of  symptoms  dominated  by  a
debilitating  fatigue  after  symptomatic  acute  Q  fever  infection.  Other  accompanying
symptoms might include nausea, headache, night sweats, myalgia, intermittent muscle
fasciculations, enlarged lymph nodes, arthralgia, difficulty sleeping, alcohol intolerance,
photophobia,  irrational  and  out-of-proportion  irritability,  depression,  decreased
concentration,  and  impaired  short-term  memory.  There  is  no  apparent  organ
involvement (111). Although any or all of these symptoms might occur in patients with
an acute infection and last up to a year followed by full recovery, post-Q fever fatigue
syndrome is characterized by fatigue and other expected Q fever symptoms that last
beyond a year and for many patients last for several years or for life. No consensus has
been reached on the pathogenesis of post-Q fever fatigue syndrome, although genetic
predisposition and the severity of acute illness have been suggested to play a role in its
development  (117,123).  Diagnosis  of  post-Q  fever  fatigue  syndrome  relies  on
persistence  of  characteristic  symptoms  >1  year  after  a  symptomatic  acute  Q  fever
infection, elevated antibody titers against C. burnetii antigen, and a lack of clinical and
laboratory  evidence  of  chronic  Q  fever  with  organ  involvement.  All  other  causes  of
similar symptoms should be excluded, and a thorough search for organ involvement or
nidus  of  infection  is  imperative  before  making  a  diagnosis  of  post-Q  fever  fatigue
syndrome  because  Q  fever  with  organ  involvement  is  responsive  to  antibiotic
treatment.  Management  strategies  for  post-Q  fever  fatigue  syndrome  might  reflect
those  used  for  chronic  fatigue  syndrome,  such  as  graded  exercise  therapy  and
cognitive  behavioral  therapy.  There  are  anecdotal  reports  of  limited  success  using
antibiotic therapy; however, no evidence-based recommendations exist for treatment of
post-Q  fever  fatigue  syndrome  (124,125).  Because  most  persons  with  acute  Q  fever
have  nonspecific  symptoms,  health-care  providers  typically  do  not  suspect  Q  fever
during the acute stage of the disease. Although a laboratory diagnosis of acute Q fever
can  be  made  on  the  basis  of  serologic  results,  the  requirement  of  a  fourfold  rise  in
phase  II  IgG  antibody  titer  between  acute  and  convalescent  samples  for  definitive
diagnosis  makes  this  primarily  a  retrospective  diagnosis  (Table  3).  For  a  definitive
diagnosis in the early stages of acute Q fever illness, serologic testing in combination
with PCR is recommended. PCR of whole blood or serum can be positive very early after
symptom  onset  but  becomes  negative  as  the  antibody  titer  increases  and  after
administration  of  antibiotics  (Table  4).  When  interpreting  serologic  and  PCR  data,
particularly  if  appropriately  timed  acute  and  convalescent  titers  were  not  obtained,
empiric  treatment  should  be  based  on  the  presence  of  a  clinically  compatible
syndrome.  Treatment  should  never  be  withheld  pending  receipt  of  diagnostic  test
results or discontinued because of a negative acute serologic or PCR result. Conversely,
because  antibodies  might  remain  detectable  for  months  to  years  after  infection,
treatment  should  not  be  provided  based  solely  on  elevated  titers  (such  as  those
detected  through  routine  screening  or  baseline  occupational  assessments)  without
clinical manifestation of acute illness (e.g., fever, pneumonia, hepatitis, or other acute
symptoms).  For  serologic  testing,  the  indirect  immunofluorescence  assay  (IFA)  is
commercially available and is the most commonly used method for serologic diagnosis
of Q fever in the United States. Other methods described for Q fever serologic diagnosis
include complement fixation, radioimmunoassay, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay,
and  Western  immunoblotting,  although  assay  kits  for  these  tests  are  not  readily
available  in  the  United  States.  The  interpretation  of  serologic  results  for  possible  Q
fever must include differential reactivity to Coxiella antigens. C. burnetii exists in two
antigenic  phases,  phase  I  and  phase  II.  Phase  I  is  the  virulent,  highly  infectious  form
that  undergoes  a  transition  to  phase  II,  the  avirulent  form,  during  serial  laboratory
passages in embryonated eggs or cell cultures. In acute infection, the phase II antibody
response to C. burnetii appears first and is higher than the phase I antibody response
(6).  The  most  commonly  used  means  of  confirming  the  diagnosis  of  acute  Q  fever  is
demonstration of a fourfold rise in phase II IgG by IFA between serum samples from the
acute  and  convalescent  phases  taken  3–6  weeks  apart.  Ideally,  the  first  serum
specimen should be taken during the first week of illness. Although this specimen can
be  tested  immediately,  results  often  are  negative  or  too  low  for  detection  pending
production of measurable antibodies. Therefore, serum samples from the acute phase
are not helpful for guiding immediate treatment decisions. Various values are used by
individual  laboratories  to  categorize  patients  as  seropositive  or  seronegative.
Alternatively, the serum specimen from the acute phase could be appropriately stored
(refrigerated at 4°C [32.9°F] or frozen at ≤-20°C [-4°F]) until the convalescent serum
specimen  is  drawn.  Both  specimens  can  be  sent  together  to  the  laboratory  for  IFA
testing in the same assay run to eliminate interassay variation. If the samples cannot
be  tested  simultaneously,  interassay  and  interlaboratory  variations  can  lead  to
misinterpretation  of  perceived  changes  in  titer.  End-point  titers  also  might  be
influenced  by  the  use  of  different  antigen  preparations  and  assay  protocols  (126).
Because  results  from  different  laboratories  can  differ  significantly,  using  the  same
laboratory  service  whenever  possible  can  provide  the  most  accurate  results  (126).
Seroconversion typically occurs 7–15 days after symptoms appear, and 90% of patients
seroconvert by the third week of illness. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies to phase II
antigen develop in the second week of acute illness, with an increase in phase II IgG
occurring  almost  simultaneously.  In  successfully  treated  or  spontaneously  resolving
disease,  IgG  and  IgM  titers  to  phase  I  antigen  might  continue  to  increase  in  later
specimens  but  typically  do  not  exceed  phase  II  titers.  Regardless  of  whether  the
infection is symptomatic or asymptomatic, after the infection, antibodies might remain
detectable for many months, for years, or for life (127). In a nationally representative
serosurvey of otherwise healthy persons, 3.1% of the general adult U.S. population had
detectable antibodies to C. burnetii (5). Therefore, a single serum sample is less useful
for the diagnosis of acute Q fever than paired acute and convalescent serum samples
collected 3–6 weeks apart. Despite these limitations, a single serum titer is the most
commonly  applied  diagnostic  criterion  among  cases  reported  to  CDC,  likely  because
clinical  suspicion  for  Q  fever  is  uncommon  for  patients  who  initially  seek  care  for
symptoms.  In  the  absence  of  positive  PCR  results  and  the  ability  to  obtain  an  acute
serum sample, a single positive convalescent serum sample (IgG phase II ≥1:128) in a
patient  who  has  been  ill  >1  week  indicates  a  probable  acute  infection  IgM  results
provide  ancillary  information  to  the  IgG  titers;  however,  because  of  persistence  (>1
year in some cases), the IgM test provides limited diagnostic value as a standalone test.
IgM  antibodies  have  a  much  lower  specificity  than  IgG  and  might  have  a  higher
cross-reactivity.  Cross-reactions  between  Coxiella,  Legionella,  and  Bartonella  species
have been reported (128,129). However, the cross-reacting antibodies generally have
low titers and should not result in misdiagnosis. Because early doxycycline treatment
(within the first 3 days of symptoms) is most effective, treatment of a patient suspected
of having Q fever should be based on clinical findings and should not be delayed while
awaiting laboratory confirmation (16). No evidence indicates that early administration
of  doxycycline  blunts  the  antibody  response  or  prevents  seroconversion  (130,131).
Rapid,  sensitive,  and  quantitative  PCR  techniques  have  been  developed  for  Q  fever
testing.  Multiple  gene  targets  have  been  used,  and  physicians  should  be  aware  that
they  can  differ  in  sensitivity  and  specificity  (132).  Either  whole  blood  collected  in
anticoagulant-treated tubes or serum can be used for PCR testing. Whole blood might
have  a  higher  concentration  of  C.  burnetii  DNA  than  serum  but  is  also  likely  to  have
more PCR inhibitors. For PCR results to be useful, the clinical sample must be obtained
in the acute phase of infection (optimally during the first 2 weeks of symptom onset)
and either before or shortly after (within 24–48 hours) antibiotic administration. When
appropriate samples are drawn (i.e., during the acute phase and before or shortly after
antibiotic administration), PCR results are positive in almost all patients with early acute
Q  fever  before  the  antibody  response  develops   (133).  The  Duke  criteria,  a  set  of
validated diagnostic criteria for infective endocarditis, were revised in 2000 to include
redefined  Q  fever  serologic  parameters  (134).  That  revision  defined  a  phase  I  IgG
antibody  titer  >1:800  or  a  single  positive  blood  culture  for  C.  burnetii  as  a  major
criterion  for  infective  endocarditis.  The  Duke  Endocarditis  Service  also  advocated  for
use  of  TEEs  as  the  initial  diagnostic  test  of  choice  in  patients  categorized  as  having
possible infective endocarditis, those with suspected complicated infective endocarditis,
and those with suspected prosthetic valve infective endocarditis (Appendix B). A patient
with a phase I IgG antibody titer >1:800 or a single positive blood culture for C. burnetii
and one of the following minor criteria would be classified as having possible infective
endocarditis, thereby warranting use of an initial TEE: predisposition, predisposing heart
condition or injection drug use, fever, vascular phenomena, immunologic phenomena,
or microbiologic evidence. Chronic Q fever is diagnosed primarily by serologic testing.
Establishing  an  identifiable  nidus  of  chronic  infection  (e.g.,  endocarditis,  vascular
infection,  or  osteomyelitis)  is  required,  as  is  laboratory  confirmation.  The  distinct
antigenic  phases  to  which  humans  develop  antibodies  play  an  important  role  in  the
diagnosis.  In  contrast  to  acute  Q  fever  infection,  chronic  infection  is  associated  with
continued increasing phase I IgG titers (typically ≥1:1024) that might be higher than
phase  II  IgG.  However,  there  are  reports  of  chronic  Q  fever  patients  who  retain
extremely high phase II IgG antibody titers that equal or exceed their phase I IgG titers
(135,136). If an acute Q fever case progresses to chronic disease, phase I IgG titer will
continue to rise to levels ≥1:1024 and might exceed the phase II titer. It is possible for
a patient with previously diagnosed acute Q fever who no longer has clinical symptoms
to have increased phase I IgG titers for several months that subsequently decrease or
stabilize without ever progressing to chronic disease (135,137). Patients with suspected
chronic  Q  fever  should  have  whole  blood  or  serum  PCR  performed  because  they  can
experience  a  recurrent  bacteremia  similar  to  early  acute  infection.  Reported  rates  of
PCR positivity in blood or serum of patients with Q fever endocarditis have ranged from
33% to 64% (97,135,136). PCR assays also can be performed on excised heart valve
tissue from the site of active infection, even if frozen or embedded in paraffin. Infected
heart  valves,  procured  fresh  or  as  formalin-fixed,  paraffin-embedded  specimens,  are
excellent for laboratory diagnosis because they typically contain abundant numbers of
bacteria. PCR can be performed on cerebrospinal fluid, pleural fluid, bone marrow, bone
biopsies, liver biopsies, milk, placenta, and fetal tissue. Immunohistochemistry can be
used to detect the presence of C. burnetii antigens in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissues and is particularly valuable for examining cardiac valve specimens excised from
patients  with  culture-negative  endocarditis  for  whom  chronic  Q  fever  is  suspected
(138). This assay is particularly useful because it can stain C. burnetii bacteria in tissues
from  patients  even  after  they  have  received  antibiotic  therapy.  The  assay  also  can
provide  a  crucial  retrospective  diagnosis  in  patients  who  relapse  after  valve
replacement  surgery  for  unrecognized  or  undiagnosed  Q  fever  endocarditis.  In  the
United States, this test can be referred to CDC through state public health laboratories.
Cultivation of C. burnetii is not recommended for routine diagnosis because the process
is difficult, time consuming, and dangerous; culture requires a biosafety level 3 (BSL-3)
laboratory  because  bacteria  are  highly  infective  and  can  be  hazardous  for  laboratory
workers. Often, patients with chronic Q fever have already received antibiotics, which
further complicates isolation attempts; a negative culture does not rule out a C. burnetii
infection. Specimens can be referred to CDC through state public health laboratories for
culture.  Clinical  specimens  for  evaluation  of  C.  burnetii  can  be  tested  at  some  state
public health laboratories or private referral laboratories. Health-care providers should
contact  their  state  health  department  for  assistance  with  specimen  submission  and
reporting infected patients. CDC accepts samples and performs testing at no charge if
the  samples  have  been  submitted  with  the  approval  of  or  through  a  state  health
department. In 2011, the Food and Drug Administration approved a PCR test, for use by
deployed military health-care providers, that includes a Department of Defense assay
for the diagnosis of Q fever (139). Serum. Using a red-top or serum separator tube, the
acute-phase  specimen  should  be  collected  as  soon  as  possible  after  symptom  onset
(within  the  first  2  weeks)  with  a  convalescent-phase  specimen  collected  3–6  weeks
later. Sera should be refrigerated and shipped by express shipping on frozen gel packs
separated  from  the  specimen  by  packing  material.  Samples  can  be  frozen  in  a
non–frost-free freezer and shipped on dry ice to the laboratory. Blood. Whole blood for
PCR  testing  should  be  collected  before  antibiotic  administration  in  EDTA-treated
anticoagulant  tubes  and  shipped  refrigerated  on  frozen  gel  packs  by  overnight
shipping. If samples are to be prepared for other laboratory tests, the buffy coat can be
saved for DNA amplification and stored frozen in a non–frost-free freezer. Tissue. Heart
valve tissue is the most commonly evaluated specimen used for confirmation of chronic
Q  fever.  Fresh  tissue  specimens,  which  are  the  most  effective  and  have  the  widest
range  of  diagnostic  techniques,  should  be  refrigerated  if  they  are  being  transported
within 24 hours, and they should be shipped on frozen gel packs. If transport does not
occur  within  24  hours,  specimens  should  be  frozen  in  a  non–frost-free  freezer  and
shipped on dry ice for either culture or PCR analysis. In preparation for transport, fresh
tissue should not be immersed in saline but should be placed on a gauze pad moistened
with  sterile  saline  and  placed  in  a  sterile  collection  cup.  PCR,  immunohistochemistry
staining, and culture isolation for C. burnetii can be attempted on fresh tissue. Should
culture  attempts  be  performed,  biopsy  specimens  should  be  kept  at  -80°C  (-112°F)
before  shipping  and  shipped  on  dry  ice.  Formalin-fixed  paraffin-embedded  blocks  for
PCR  and  immunohistochemistry  can  be  stored  and  shipped  at  room  temperature  and
should  never  be  frozen.  During  warmer  months,  the  blocks  should  be  shipped
refrigerated with a frozen gel pack to prevent melting. Formalin-fixed wet tissue should
be stored and shipped at room temperature. Length of time in formalin might adversely
affect  assay  results.  If  sending  glass  slides  with  sections  from  paraffin-embedded
blocks,  10–12  treated  (e.g.,  with  silane  or  poly-L-lysine)  glass  slides  with  sections  of
affected tissue cut at a thickness of 3 µm (no greater than 5 µm) should be submitted.
These may be shipped at room temperature or refrigerated on cold packs and should
never be frozen. The majority of acute Q fever cases resolve spontaneously within 2–3
weeks,  even  without  treatment.  Symptomatic  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected
acute  Q  fever,  including  children  with  severe  infections,  should  be  treated  with
doxycycline  (Table  2).  Doxycycline  is  the  most  effective  treatment  for  Q  fever.
Treatment is most effective if given within the first 3 days of symptoms, shortens the
illness, and reduces the risk for severe complications (15,16). Other antibiotic regimens
that  can  be  used  if  doxycycline  is  contraindicated  because  of  allergies  include
moxifloxacin,
 clarithromycin,
 trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole,
 and
 rifampin
(75,140,141).  Treatment  for  acute  Q  fever  is  not  routinely  recommended  for
asymptomatic persons or for those whose symptoms have resolved, although it might
be considered in those at high risk for developing chronic Q fever. In one study of acute
Q  fever  patients  who  were  monitored  over  time  for  progression  to  chronic  disease,
those  who  eventually  had  chronic  Q  fever  were  more  likely  to  have  not  received
appropriate  doxycycline  treatment  during  their  acute  illness  because  their  symptoms
were mild or they were asymptomatic (15). Patients with acute Q fever should undergo
a careful clinical assessment to determine whether they might be at risk for progression
to chronic Q fever because patients at high risk require closer observation during the
convalescent period. A thorough clinical assessment should include review of possible
immunosuppressive  conditions,  pregnancy  testing  when  appropriate,  and  assessment
for  vascular  and  heart  valve  defects  because  certain  valvular  lesions  might  not  be
detectable  by  auscultation  (142).  A  medical  history  and  clinical  examination  alone
might not be sufficient to identify patients with existing heart valve defects (143,144);
health-care  providers  should  use  their  clinical  judgment  to  determine  the  most
appropriate  tools  for  assessment  of  risk  (Figure).  Management  of  chronic  Q  fever  is
evaluated  through  both  serologic  and  clinical  monitoring.  Using  the  same  laboratory
and testing procedures for serologic monitoring is important because variations among
laboratories  might  give  an  inaccurate  appearance  of  significant  titer  decreases  or
increases. Patients who are healthy and have no identified risk factor for chronic illness
should  receive  a  clinical  and  serologic  evaluation  approximately  6  months  after
diagnosis of acute infection to identify potential progression to chronic disease. Phase I
and  phase  II  IgG  and  IgM  antibodies  should  be  measured  to  endpoint  by  IFA  and
compared  with  previous  titers.  Patients  with  a  phase  I  IgG  antibody  titer  ≥1:1024
should  be  carefully  assessed  for  clinical  evidence  of  progression  to  chronic  Q  fever
infection.  If  a  patient  has  no  serologic  or  clinical  evidence  of  progression  to  chronic
infection, serologic monitoring can either be discontinued or continued less frequently if
deemed appropriate by the health-care provider. However, patients should be advised
to  seek  medical  care  immediately  should  symptoms  of  chronic  Q  fever  occur  at  any
time throughout their lives. Patients with cardiovascular risk factors for chronic disease
(e.g.,  heart  valve  defect,  vascular  graft,  or  aneurysm)  at  the  time  of  acute  infection
should be serologically monitored and receive a physical examination at intervals of 3,
6,  12,  18,  and  24  months  (Figure).  Women  infected  during  pregnancy  should  be
serologically  and  clinically  monitored  at  the  same  intervals  (3,  6,  12,  18,  and  24
months)  after  delivery.  If  there  is  no  evidence  of  an  increase  in  phase  I  IgG  titers
≥1:1024  after  2  years  and  no  evidence  of  clinical  progression  to  chronic  infection,
serologic  monitoring  may  be  discontinued  or  continued  less  frequently  if  deemed
appropriate by the health-care provider. However, patients should be advised to seek
medical care immediately should symptoms occur at any time throughout their lives,
because  those  with  valvular  defects  or  vascular  abnormalities  remain  at  high  risk  for
chronic Q fever for life. In addition, patients who have been infected with acute Q fever
and develop valvular disease later in life from any cause are at risk for a recrudescent
infection that can result in chronic Q fever endocarditis. It is not uncommon for patients
with  an  acute  Q  fever  infection  to  develop  serologic  profiles  of  chronic  Q  fever  that
eventually  regress.  Clinical  evidence  of  chronic  Q  fever  must  accompany  increased
phase I IgG antibody titers to confirm a chronic diagnosis, and treatment should not be
given based on increased titers alone. In all monitored patients, diagnosis of chronic Q
fever  is  based  on  a  rising  or  elevated  phase  I  IgG  titer  (typically  ≥1:1024)  and  an
identifiable nidus of infection (e.g., endocarditis, vascular infection, and osteomyelitis).
Any  symptomatic  patient  with  serologic  evidence  of  chronic  Q  fever  (phase  I  IgG
antibody  titer  ≥1:1024)  should  be  given  a  thorough  clinical  assessment  to  identify
potential organ infection. The phase I IgG antibody titer might be higher than the phase
II IgG titer; however, this is not a diagnostic criterion because patients with chronic Q
fever might retain extremely high phase II IgG titers that equal or exceed phase I IgG
titers  (136).  Adults  who  receive  a  diagnosis  of  chronic  Q  fever  should  receive  a
treatment  regimen  of  doxycycline  and  hydroxychloroquine  (100  mg  of  doxycycline
twice daily with 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine three times daily); duration of treatment
might vary by the site of infection (Table 2) (6). A combination regimen is necessary to
eradicate  the  organism  because  hydroxychloroquine  raises  the  pH  in  the  acidified
phagosomal  compartment  and,  in  combination  with  doxycycline,  has  been  shown  to
have  in  vitro  bactericidal  activity  against  C.  burnetii.  Because  of  potential  retinal
toxicity from long-term use of hydroxychloroquine, a baseline ophthalmic examination
should be performed before treatment and every 6 months thereafter. Both doxycycline
and  hydroxychloroquine  can  cause  photohypersensitivity,  and  hypersensitivity  to
sunlight  is  a  potential  complication  with  acute  and  chronic  treatment  regimens.
Hydroxychloroquine
 is
 contraindicated
 in
 persons
 with
 glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase  deficiency  and  persons  with  retinal  or  visual  field  deficits.  During
treatment for chronic Q fever, patients should receive monthly serologic testing for C.
burnetii  phase  I  and  II  IgG  and  IgM  antibodies  and  monthly  clinical  evaluations.  If  an
appropriate
 treatment
 response
 is
 not
 achieved,
 monthly
 monitoring
 for
hydroxychloroquine plasma levels (which should be maintained at 0.8–1.2 µg/mL) and
doxycycline  plasma  levels  (which  should  be  maintained  at  ≥5  µg/mL)  should  also  be
performed during the treatment (145,146). Treatment should continue for at least 18
months for native valve infections and at least 24 months for prosthetic valve infections
(97). Although treatment of vascular infections, such as infected aneurysms or grafts, is
less clearly defined because of the smaller patient group, duration of antibiotic therapy
reported  in  recovered  patients  is  similar  (18–24  months)  (104).  Early  surgical
intervention improves patient survival and might be necessary to remove an infected
graft  if  the  patient  does  not  respond  to  antibiotic  therapy  (104,105).  Treatment  and
management of rarer manifestations of chronic disease (e.g., osteoarticular infections)
depends on clinical and serologic response, and consultation with an infectious disease
physician is recommended. The definition of a cured case of chronic fever on the basis
of  serologic  testing  previously  was  defined  as  phase  I  IgG  ≤1:200,  although  other
researchers have recommended a phase I IgG cutoff of <1:800 to determine treatment
duration  (145,147).  Because  these  specific  titer  dilutions  are  not  available  from
commercial laboratories in the United States, they are more difficult to interpret in the
United  States.  Rather  than  rely  on  indiscriminate  application  of  predetermined  cutoff
titers,  health-care  providers  should  use  serologic  testing  as  a  tool  to  ensure  that  the
phase  I  IgG  is  decreasing  during  treatment  in  conjunction  with  recovery  from  clinical
symptoms.  A  patient  who  has  been  treated  appropriately  for  ≥18  months  and  has
recovered from clinical symptoms but whose phase I IgG remains ≥1:1024 might not
benefit  from  continued  treatment.  One  study  found  that  a  favorable  prognostic
indicator  for  treated  endocarditis  patients  who  had  no  progression  of  clinical  disease
yet  who  were  not  considered  cured  on  the  basis  of  serologic  testing  was  a  fourfold
decrease in phase I IgG and IgA and the complete disappearance of phase II IgM (97).
Twice yearly serologic monitoring of treated patients should continue for a minimum of
5  years  after  treatment,  and  lifelong  serologic  monitoring  might  be  warranted  in
patients with severe valvular defects (97). Treatment of chronic Q fever is challenging.
Because of the highly variable clinical nature both of acute and chronic Q fever, clinical
judgment  remains  the  most  crucial  factor  in  the  treatment  and  management.
Health-care providers should contact their state health department for assistance with
specimen  submission  and  reporting  of  infected  patients.  Health-care  providers  who
need  an  epidemiologic  consultation  on  Q  fever  can  contact  their  state  health
department  or  CDC  at  1-800-CDC-INFO  (Appendix  C).  Treatment  of  pregnant  women
who
 received
 an
 acute
 Q
 fever
 diagnosis
 during
 pregnancy
 with
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole throughout pregnancy has been shown to significantly
decrease the risk for adverse consequences for the fetus (75). Up to 81% of untreated
infected  pregnant  women  might  have  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes  (75).  Although
approximately
 40%
 of
 pregnant
 women
 who
 receive
 long-term
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole  treatment  might  still  experience  adverse  outcomes,
complications  are  more  likely  to  be  limited  to  intrauterine  growth  retardation  and
premature
 delivery
 instead
 of
 stillbirth
 or
 miscarriage
 (75).
 Long-term
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole treatment during pregnancy has decreased the risk for
conversion to chronic Q fever in the mother and prevented adverse pregnancy events
in subsequent pregnancies (75). Doxycycline is classified as a category D drug because
of demonstrated concerns about the effects of tetracyclines on the bone structure and
dentitia
 of
 the
 developing
 fetus
 (see
 drug
 categories
 for
 pregnancy
 at
http://chemm.nlm.nih.gov/pregnancycategories.htm).
 An
 effective
 alternative,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, has been used as a treatment in pregnant women who
received  an  acute  Q  fever  diagnosis,  although  the  drug  is  classified  as  a  category  C
drug. The use of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole during pregnancy might increase the
risk  for  congenital  abnormalities  (primarily  including  urinary  tract  and  cardiovascular
abnormalities) because of antifolate effects (148), and concomitant use of folic acid is
recommended.
 Research
 to
 assess
 the
 potential
 fetal
 risk
 from
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole during pregnancy has been inconclusive (149). Because
pregnant women with acute Q fever are considered to be at high risk for chronic Q fever
infection or recrudescent infections activated during subsequent pregnancies, patients
should be monitored after delivery for postpartum progression to chronic disease and
during subsequent pregnancies. Although rare, the development of Q fever endocarditis
in  a  pregnant  woman  presents  a  difficult  clinical  dilemma  because  the  safety  of  the
treatment  of  choice  (doxycycline  and  hydroxychloroquine)  has  not  been  evaluated
during pregnancy. Health-care providers who are treating chronic Q fever endocarditis
during pregnancy should consult with an expert in infectious diseases. Women who are
treated  for  acute  Q  fever  during  pregnancy  should  be  monitored  similarly  to  other
patients at high risk for progression to chronic disease (e.g., serologic monitoring at 3,
6, 12, 18, and 24 months after delivery). Women should be advised of potential risks to
the fetus should they become pregnant during the monitoring or treatment period. In
one  study,  seven  women  treated  for  chronic  Q  fever  with  doxycycline  and
hydroxychloroquine  for  at  least  1  year  had  normal  subsequent  pregnancies  with  no
recurrent  miscarriages  (81).  Q  fever  serologic  testing  should  be  resumed  for  women
previously  treated  during  pregnancy  who  become  pregnant  again  during  this  2-year
period;  reinitiation  of  long-term  trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole  is  indicated  when  IgG
titers demonstrate a fourfold rise indicating a recrudescent infection, even if other signs
or  a  definite  nidus  of  infection  cannot  be  identified.  In  these  women,  the  nidus  of
infection is assumed to be the reproductive system, and the only clinical sign might be
an  adverse  pregnancy  event  in  a  subsequent  pregnancy.  Doxycycline  is  the  drug  of
choice for treatment of acute Q fever in children and is recommended for patients aged
≥8  years  and  for  severe  infections  in  children  of  any  age.  The  pediatric  doxycycline
dose for treatment of acute Q fever is 2.2 mg/kg twice per day for 2 weeks (maximum
100 mg per dose). The clinical benefit of using doxycycline to treat Q fever in children
aged <8 years who meet the criteria for being considered high risk is greater than the
potential risk for dental staining. Children aged <8 years who are considered high risk
and  should  therefore  receive  the  full  2-week  treatment  with  doxycycline  include
children  who  are  hospitalized  or  have  severe  illness,  children  with  preexisting  heart
valvulopathy, children who are immunocompromised, or children with delayed Q fever
diagnosis who have experienced illness for >2 weeks without resolution of symptoms.
Although  short  courses  (≤5  days)  of  doxycycline  for  the  treatment  of  rickettsial
infections such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever have not resulted in significant dental
staining in children, the possible long-term dental effects of 2 weeks of doxycycline in
children  aged  <8  years  have  not  been  well  studied  (150).  Because  acute  Q  fever  is
frequently a mild or self-limiting illness with a low risk for death or a poor prognosis,
health-care providers should use their clinical judgment to determine whether a 2-week
course of doxycycline treatment should be used to treat Q fever infections in children
aged  <8  years  who  have  a  mild  or  uncomplicated  illness.  For  these  patients,
health-care  providers  might  consider  a  5-day  course  of  doxycycline,  which  does  not
cause dental staining. Children with continued mild symptoms after a short course of
doxycycline  can  be  treated  with  14  days  of  trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.  Limited
data are available on treatment of chronic Q fever in children; therefore, consultation
with an expert in pediatric infectious diseases is recommended. The safety of long-term
hydroxychloroquine treatment in children has not been determined, and evaluation for
retinal  toxicity  might  be  limited  because  of  difficulties  in  evaluation  of  color  vision.
Alternative  long-term  treatments  that  might  be  considered  in  children  with  chronic  Q
fever include use of a fluoroquinolone (e.g., moxifloxacin or levofloxacin) with rifampin
or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole with doxycycline. Certain occupations are associated
with increased risk for exposure to C. burnetii, as might their associated institutions and
businesses.  Multiple  Q  fever  outbreaks  have  been  reported  among  workers  in
slaughterhouses, farms, animal research facilities, military units, and, rarely, hospitals
and diagnostic laboratories (12,151–156). Employees in high-risk occupations should be
educated  about  the  risk  for  exposure  and  the  clinical  presentation  of  Q  fever.
Educational  efforts  should  describe  groups  vulnerable  to  development  of  chronic  Q
fever, such as workers who have preexisting valvulopathy, a prosthetic heart valve, a
vascular  prosthesis,  an  aneurysm,  are  pregnant  or  might  become  pregnant,  or  are
immunosuppressed, because these employees have a higher risk for a severe outcome
or death if infected. Although protection for at-risk workers can be provided by Q fever
vaccination, a licensed vaccine for humans is only commercially available in Australia
(157).  Therefore,  most  workers  in  high-risk  occupations  in  the  United  States  are  not
vaccinated.  Transmission  of  C.  burnetii  to  health-care  personnel  has  been  rarely
reported (158,159). One obstetrician was infected through contact with the birth fluids
of an  infected  parturient woman  (48).  Hospital  personnel  have become infected  after
autopsies of patients with Q fever, although the infection control precautions used, if
any,  are  unknown  (49,160).   Adherence  to  standard  precautions  is  recommended  to
prevent  Q  fever  infection  in  health-care  personnel  during  routine  care  (161).  During
autopsies of patients who have died of Q fever, health-care personnel should use either
a  BSL-3  facility  or  use  the  barrier  precautions  of  BSL-2  and  the  negative  airflow  and
respiratory precautions of BSL-3 as recommended by the CDC Guidelines for Safe Work
Practices  in  Human  and  Animal  Medical  Diagnostic  Laboratories  (162).  During
procedures  that  put  health-care  personnel  at  risk  for  infection  from  splashing  of
infected  material,  such  the  delivery  of  an  infant  from  an  infected  woman,  standard
precautions including the use of a face mask and eye protection or a face shield are
recommended.  Care  should  be  used  when  handling  soiled  laundry  (e.g.,  bedding,
towels, and personal clothing) of Q fever patients. Soiled laundry should not be shaken
or  otherwise  handled  in  a  way  that  might  aerosolize  infectious  particles.  During  any
procedure  that  might  generate  aerosols  of  infectious  materials  (e.g.,  a  procedure
involving  use  of  a  surgical  power  instrument  such  as  an  oscillating  bone  saw)  in  a
patient with suspected or confirmed Q fever, health-care personnel should also take the
following  precautions:  1.Use  a  fit-tested  N-95  (or  comparable)  respirator  and  eye
protection (e.g., goggles or face shield). 2.Contain and dispose of contaminated waste
(e.g.,  dressings  or  birth  products)  in  accordance  with  facility-specific  guidelines  for
infectious waste. 3.Place the patient in an airborne infection isolation room or a private
room if one is not available during the procedure. The patient does not need to wear a
face mask, because Q fever is not transmitted by sneezing or coughing. 4.Handle used
patient-care  equipment  in  a  way  that  prevents  contamination  of  skin  and  clothing.
Ensure  that  used  equipment  has  been  cleaned  and  reprocessed  appropriately.
5.Ensure  that  procedures  are  in  place  for  cleaning  and  disinfecting  environmental
surfaces  in  the  patient  care  environment  (see  #5  in  the  Research  Facility  Safety
Standards section that follows for chemical disinfectant recommendations). Precautions
used  in  addition  to  standard  precautions  are  only  recommended  during  an
aerosol-generating  procedure.  Procedures  that  do  not  generate  aerosols,  such  as
drawing blood or giving physical examinations, do not pose a risk for transmission of Q
fever.  Transmission  through  coughing  or  sneezing  is  not  a  documented  route  of
infection,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  Q  fever  is  transmitted  by  any  type  of  casual
contact  (e.g.,  hugging,  shaking  hands,  kissing,  or  sharing  food).  Laboratory
transmission of C. burnetii is primarily a concern when bacteria are propagated using
specialized  techniques  (i.e.,  tissue  culture),  during  lapses  in  standard  precautions
leading  to  specimen  aerosolization,  and  through  protocols  involving  passage  through
animals.  Handling  of  usual  biomedical  specimens,  including  routine  blood  culture
testing,  from  humans  or  animals  collected  in  medical  or  veterinary  settings  is  not
considered  an  exposure  risk  for  Q  fever  and  can  be  processed  by  routine  standard
precautions
 and
 handling
 techniques.
 Laboratory
 safety
 and
 containment
recommendations for C. burnetii should be followed as described in the CDC Biosafety
in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories  manual  (163).  Samples  known  or
suspected  to  contain  viable  C.  burnetii  (i.e.,  birth  products  or  other  biologic  material
from infected animals or humans) should be handled in a BSL-3 facility and rendered
nonviable  or  destroyed.  Appropriate  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  can  be
effective at reducing the risk for exposure in handling these types of specimens. In the
BSL-3 laboratory, attire worn while working with viable C. burnetii should be sterilized
after  use.  Protective  eyewear  such  as  splatter-proof  safety  goggles  or  face  shields,
disposable gloves, and shoe covers also should be worn, and showering after working
with C. burnetii under BSL-3 conditions is recommended. In laboratories that work with
viable  C.  burnetii  organisms  in  culture  media  or  live  animals,  unvaccinated  workers
should wear respiratory protection such as an N95 respirator. An N95 respirator filters
at  least  95%  of  airborne  particles  when  used  correctly  but  might  not  completely
eliminate infection risk. A powered air purifying respirator with P100 filtration also can
be  used  in  research  laboratories  that  experiment  with  C.  burnetii,  particularly  by
employees  unable  to  wear  an  N95  respirator.  Whether  this  higher  level  of  protection
further  reduces  transmission  of  C.  burnetii  is  unknown.  If  respirators  are  used,
compliance  with  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  Respiratory
Protection  Standard  is  required  (164).  Compliance  includes  but  is  not  limited  to
establishment of a written respiratory protection program, a medical evaluation, annual
fit testing, and training in proper use and maintenance (164). Biomedical facilities that
house sheep and goats but do not directly experiment with C. burnetii are the mostly
common settings for occupationally related outbreaks of Q fever in the United States
(156,165–167), and these outbreaks have primarily been associated with exposure to
pregnant ewes. Cases have occurred not only among persons who worked directly with
animals  but  also  among  administrative  staff,  janitorial  staff,  and  family  members  of
workers  infected  through  fomite  transmission  from  contaminated  clothing.  The
following  general  recommendations  should  reduce  the  risk  for  infection  and  focus  on
facilities  that  house  animals  at  high  risk  for  C.  burnetii,  such  as  pregnant,  small
ruminants.  Specific  safety  standards  vary  by  the  size,  purpose,  and  location  of  each
facility.  1.A  Q  fever  medical  surveillance  program  should  be  established.  Workers
should  receive  a  preemployment  medical  screening  to  document  any  risk  factors  for
chronic illness if infected, and education for Q fever exposure risks and symptoms of
illness should be provided. A baseline serum sample should be drawn within 30 days of
beginning work and tested for evidence of previous exposure to C. burnetii infection.
Sera should then be tested for IgG antibodies against phase I and phase II C. burnetii
annually  to  determine  whether  seroconversion  has  occurred  and  whenever  an
employee develops symptoms consistent with Q fever. Facilities should store a baseline
or  previously  drawn  serum  specimen  for  comparison  testing  of  paired  samples  when
evaluating workers. Seroconversion or a greater than fourfold increase in titer indicates
infection  with  C.  burnetii.  Workers  with  documented  seroconversion  should  be
questioned to determine whether a clinically compatible illness occurred in the previous
year and was treated with an appropriate regimen. Seroconversion of employees should
trigger  a  review  of  exposure  risk  in  the  work  environment  and  standard  operating
procedures.  Workers  who  develop  symptoms  of  Q  fever  should  immediately  be
evaluated by a health-care provider and tested. 2.Appropriate changing, washing, and
showering  facilities  should  be  available  to  workers.  Employees  should  shower  and
change  before  leaving  work,  and  work  clothes  should  be  laundered  on  site.  Work
footwear should not be worn outside of the facility. Employees should thoroughly wash
their hands after any type of animal contact. 3.Access to the facility should be limited
to  necessary  personnel  who  are  informed  of  the  Q  fever  risk.  4.Gloves,  protective
clothing, and respiratory protection (typically an N95 respirator) should be worn when
the probability of exposure is high (e.g., when assisting with birth or removing retained
placentas from infected livestock). Protective clothing might consist of laboratory coats,
smock,  aprons,  or  coveralls.  They  should  be  changed  daily  and  should  not  be  worn
outside  of  the  work  environment.  Staff  should  use  respiratory  protection  during
high-risk activities such as changing or cleaning air filters or during any dust-generating
tasks.  A  face  shield  or  splatter-proof  goggles  in  conjunction  with  an  N95  respirator
should  be  used  during  procedures  with  a  high  risk  for  droplet  contamination  (e.g.,
assistance with birth). 5.Because of the extracellular sporelike form of C. burnetii, the
bacteria are highly resistant to inactivation by chemical disinfectants, heat, pressure, or
drying. Contaminated surfaces can be cleaned with MicroChem-Plus (a dual-quaternary
ammonium/detergent  compound),  which  completely  inactivates  the  bacteria  using  a
30-minute  contact  time.  Seventy-percent  ethanol  also  completely  deactivates  the
organism, although rapid evaporation makes this a less feasible treatment (168). Use of
humidified ethylene oxide gas or vapor phase hydrogen peroxide effectively sterilizes
C.  burnetii  in  contaminated  rooms  that  can  be  isolated  and  sealed  (168).  Treatment
with a 1:100 dilution of household bleach or a 1% Virkon S treatment produces >90%
reduction in infectivity (169,170). All visible organic matter should be removed before
cleaning, and proper PPE should be worn. 6.If available, facility air filtration should be
used and negative air pressure should be maintained in all animal holding areas with
respect to areas not designated as part of the Q fever biohazard area. Consultation with
a ventilation engineer experienced with infection control practices in animal facilities is
recommended.  7.Determining  whether  an  animal  or  a  flock  is  free  of  Q  fever  is
difficult.  A  positive  antibody  titer  in  infected  animals  does  not  correlate  with  active
shedding  of  organisms  because  some  seronegative  animals  also  might  actively  shed
bacteria.  Although  body  secretions  (vaginal  mucus,  feces,  or  milk)  can  be  tested  by
PCR,  bacterial  shedding  is  intermittent.  Therefore,  even  frequent  serologic  and  PCR
testing and intensive surveillance of animals cannot completely ensure that an animal
is  not  infected  and  shedding  the  bacteria.  However,  an  ongoing  animal  surveillance
program that isolates and quarantines animals until they have two negative serologic
tests  might  reduce  the  likelihood  of  infection  and  reveal  infected  source  herds  that
should not be purchased by the facility. 8.No animals (regardless of whether infection
is suspected) should be transported through areas not designated as part of the Q fever
biohazard  area.  9.Use  male  and  nonpregnant  female  animals  for  research  when
possible.  10.Birth  products  and  all  other  organic  materials  should  be  removed  and
disposed of immediately via incineration, composting, or burial in a designated sanitary
landfill.  Appropriate  PPE  should  be  used  during  removal  and  disposal,  and  training  in
safe handling and disposal of animal products (e.g., birth products, urine, feces, or milk)
should be provided. Facilities should consult with state or local environmental agencies
regarding  regulations  on  manure  management  and  carcass  disposal  because  the
regulations  vary  by  state.  11.Workers  should  participate  in  an  initial  and  periodic
training  program  for  the  recommendations.  Standard  operating  procedures  should  be
developed  for  all  safety  and  containment  practices  recommended.  No  recent  data
support the use of postexposure prophylaxis outside of an experimental setting and the
use  of  prophylactic  antimicrobial  agents  are  not  routinely  recommended  for  workers
after a known or potential exposure and before symptom onset. A 1956 U.S. military
study of five men who received tetracycline prophylaxis 8–12 days after a C. burnetii
challenge dose exposure resulted in asymptomatic infection; five men equally exposed
and administered tetracycline prophylaxis 1 day after exposure had delayed symptom
onset  (130).  One  report  theorized  that  providing  postexposure  prophylaxis  after  a
bioterrorism release of C. burnetii would be useful if the timing of exposure were known
(171).  However,  the  recommendation  was  based  on  the  limited  data  provided  by  the
1956 study. Prophylaxis prevented symptomatic illness in this study but did not prevent
infection.  In  persons  at  high  risk,  the  risk  for  chronic  Q  fever  development  is  still
present regardless of whether symptomatic or asymptomatic infection occurs. Because
of  the  limited  treatment  duration  in  the  1956  study,  the  lack  of  additional  studies
verifying its findings, and use of oxytetracycline instead of doxycycline, the benefit of
prophylactic  antimicrobial  agents  is  questionable  and  therefore  not  recommended.  A
daily fever monitoring log should be kept for a minimum of 3 weeks after exposure to C.
burnetii. The incubation period for Q fever is dose dependent. The majority of infected
persons have symptom onset 2–3 weeks after exposure, although onset can occur up to
6  weeks  after  exposure.  If  fever  occurs  during  the  monitoring  period,  immediate
treatment with doxycycline should be administered and testing should be performed.
Treatment  within  24  hours  of  fever  onset  is  extremely  effective  in  shortening  illness
duration and symptom severity (16,130). Baseline serologic testing can be performed
to evaluate previous infection status with a convalescent sample drawn 6 weeks later to
determine
 whether
 asymptomatic
 seroconversion
 has
 occurred.
 Although
asymptomatic  infections  do  not  routinely  require  treatment,  even  asymptomatic
infection  carries  a  risk  for  progression  to  chronic  disease  in  groups  at  high  risk;
therefore, treatment for asymptomatic infection might be considered in these groups.
Determination  of  infection  status  might  provide  useful  data  to  guide  future  health
management. Q fever is a nationally notifiable disease in the United States. Health-care
providers should report suspected or confirmed cases through local or state reporting
mechanisms  in  place  for  notifiable  disease  conditions.  Many  state  laboratories  have
systems  in  place  that  automatically  report  specific  diseases,  although  this  varies  by
state.  The  most  recent  human  case  definition,  revised  in  2009,  provides  separate
reporting categories for acute and chronic Q fever (Table 3). The CDC case definition is
used for national reporting as a public health surveillance tool and is not intended for
clinical diagnosis. A medical diagnosis is made to treat a patient and should consider all
aspects  of  the  illness.  Surveillance  case  definitions  are  used  for  standardization,  not
patient care. National surveillance for Q fever in the United States relies on accurate
and  timely  reporting  of  cases  by  health-care  providers.  When  health-care  providers
identify a potential case of acute or chronic Q fever, they should notify the local or state
health  department,  which  can  assist  with  obtaining  appropriate  diagnostic  testing.
Epidemiologic  and  clinical  patient  information  is  reported  through  state  health
departments to CDC on a standard, confidential case report form (Appendix D). When
reporting cases of Q fever, clinical signs and symptoms should be included as well as
laboratory  results.  CDC  compiles  reports  of  Q  fever  from  state  health  departments
including  diagnosis,  date  of  onset,  and  basic  demographic  and  geographic  data,  and
reports the summary data. Although Q fever is a zoonotic disease, infection in animals
is not considered reportable to national agricultural authorities. However, many states
consider  the  disease  reportable  when  it  is  diagnosed  in  animals.  Veterinary  health
authorities  should  follow  state-specific  reporting  guidelines.  Joanna  Regan,  Naomi
Drexler,  and  Randy  Nett,  CDC.  Nicola  Marsden-Haug,  Washington  Department  of
Health. Dutch Consensus Group Q Fever: Chantal Bleeker, MD, PhD, Corine Delsing MD,
PhD,  Alphons  Horrevorts  MD,  PhD,  Linda  Kampschreur,  Marion  Koopmans,  PhD,  Peter
Lestrade,  MD,  PhD,  Jan  Marcelis  MD,  PhD,  Marrigje  Nabuurs-Franssen  MD,  PhD,  Daan
Notermans,  MD,  PhD,  Jan  Jelrik  Oosterheert  MD,  PhD,  Nicole  Renders,  MD  PhD,  Peter
Schneeberger  MD,  PhD,  Wim  van  der  Hoek,  Pepijn  van  der  Voort,  MD,  PhD,  Marjolijn
Wegdam,  MD,  and  Peter  Wever,  MD,  PhD.  TABLE  1.   Percentage  of  acute  Q  fever
patients with selected clinical and laboratory findings Clinical or laboratory finding % of
patients  Clinical  Fever 88–100 Fatigue 97–100 Chills 68–88 Headache 68–98 Myalgia
47–69  Sweats  31–98  Cough  24–90  Nausea  22–49  Vomiting  13–42  Chest  pain  10–45
Diarrhea  5–22  Skin  rash  5–21  Myocarditis  0.5–1  Pericarditis  1  Meningoencephalitis  1
Death  1–2  Laboratory  Normal  leukocyte  count  90  Thrombocytopenia  25  Increased
transaminase  levels*  45–85  Increased  bilirubin  levels  9–14.3  Increased  alkaline
phosphatase  levels  27.7–57  Increased  γ-glutamyl  transferase  levels  25–75  Increased
creatine  phosphokinase  levels  29  Increased  lactate-dehydrogenase  levels  33.3–40
Increased  creatinine  levels  29–40  Elevated  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate  43–87.5
Smooth  muscle  antibodies  65  Antiphospholipase  antibodies  50  Source:  Modified  from
Maurin M, Raoult D. Q fever. Clin Microbiol Rev 1999;12:518. *Alanine transaminase
and  aspartate  transaminase.  TABLE  2.  Recommended  antibiotics  and  dosages*  for
treatment  of  acute  and  chronic  Q  fever  Indication  Adults  Children¶  Pregnant  women
Acute Q fever† Doxycycline§ 100 mg twice a day for 14 days ≥8 years: Doxycycline: 2.2
mg/kg  per  dose  twice  a  day  for  14  days  (maximum  100  mg  per  dose)
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole: 160 mg/800 mg twice a day throughout pregnancy††
<8 years with high risk criteria**: Doxycycline: 2.2 mg/kg per dose twice a day for 14
days  (maximum:  100  mg  per  dose)  <8  years  with  mild  or  uncomplicated  illness:
Doxycycline 2.2 mg/kg per dose twice a day for 5 days (maximum 100 mg per dose). If
patient remains febrile past 5 days of treatment: trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 4–20
mg/kg  twice  a  day  for  14  days  (maximum:  800  mg  per  dose)   Chronic  Q  fever
Endocarditis  or  vascular  infection  Doxycycline§§  100  mg  twice  a  day  and
hydroxychloroquine¶¶  200  mg  three  times  a  day  ≥18  months  Recommend
consultation***  Recommend  consultation†††  Noncardiac  organ  disease§§§  Doxycycline
100  mg  twice  a  day  and  hydroxychloroquine  200  mg  three  times  a  day  Recommend
consultation***  Recommend  consultation†††  Postpartum¶¶¶  with  serologic  profile  for
chronic Q fever Doxycycline 100 mg twice a day and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg three
times  a  day  for  12  months   —  —  Post-Q  fever  fatigue  syndrome****  No  current
recommendations  No  current  recommendations  No  current  recommendations  *All
drug  dosages  are  oral  regimens.   †Prophylactic  treatment  after  a  potential  Q  fever
exposure  is  not  recommended;  treatment  is  not  recommended  for  asymptomatic
infections or after symptoms have resolved, although it might be considered in persons
at high risk for development of chronic Q fever. §Patients may take doxycycline with
food to avoid stomach upset but should have no dairy products within 2 hours (before
or  after)  of  taking  medication.  Doxycycline  should  not  be  taken  with  antacids  or
bismuth-containing  products,  and  patients  should  avoid  taking  it  immediately  before
going to bed or lying down. Doxycycline might cause photosensitivity and can decrease
the  efficacy  of  hormonal  contraceptives.  ¶Doxycycline  is  the  drug  of  choice  for
treatment of Q fever in adults and patients of any age with severe illness. Short courses
(≤5  days)  for  treatment  of  rickettsial  infections  have  not  been  shown  to  result  in
significant  dental  staining  in  children;  however,  whether  a  2-week  course  will  cause
permanent tooth discoloration in children is unknown. Health-care providers should use
their clinical judgment to determine appropriate therapy in children aged <8 years and
may  consider  treatment  with  trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole  or  a  shorter  duration  of
doxycycline  (5  days)  in  children  with  a  mild  or  uncomplicated  illness.   **Children
aged  <8  years  who  are  considered  high  risk  and  should  therefore  receive  the  full
14-day treatment with doxycycline include children who are hospitalized or have severe
illness,
 children
 with
 preexisting
 heart
 valvulopathy,
 children
 who
 are
immunocompromised, or children with delayed Q fever diagnosis who have experienced
illness for >14 days without resolution of symptoms. ††Limited data are available on
treatment  of  Q  fever  during  pregnancy.  Consultation  with  an  expert  in  infectious
diseases is recommended.  §§Target serum levels for optimal efficacy during chronic
Q  fever  treatment  is  ≥5  µg/mL.  ¶¶Take  with  food  or  milk.  Should  not  be  used  by
persons  with  glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  deficiency.  Monitor  for  retinal
toxicity.  Target  serum  levels  for  optimal  efficacy  is  1.0+0.2  µg/mL.  The  safety  of
long-term  treatment  in  children  has  not  been  evaluated.  ***Limited  data  are
available  on  treatment  of  chronic  Q  fever  in  children.  Consultation  with  an  expert  in
pediatric infectious diseases is recommended. †††The safety of long-term doxycycline
or  hydroxychloroquine  treatment  in  pregnant  women  and  fetal  risk  has  not  been
evaluated.  Consultation  with  an  expert  in  infectious  diseases  and  obstetrics  is
recommended.   §§§Limited  reports  of  treatment  for  chronic  Q  fever  unrelated  to
endocarditis  or  vascular  infection  (e.g.,  osteoarticular  infections  or  chronic  hepatitis);
duration of treatment is dependent on serologic response. Consultation with expert in
infectious diseases is recommended. ¶¶¶Women should only be treated postpartum
if serologic titers remain elevated >12 months after delivery (immunoglobulin G phase I
titer ≥1:1024). Women treated during pregnancy for acute Q fever should be monitored
similarly to other patients who are at high risk for progression to chronic disease (e.g.,
serologic  monitoring  at  3,  6,  12,  18,  and  24  months  after  delivery).  ****Reports  of
treatment  studies  are  rare.  Although  limited  success  has  occurred  with  long-term  or
pulsed  tetracycline-class  antibiotics,  evidence  to  guide  patient  management  is  weak.
TABLE 3. CDC surveillance case definition and case classification for acute and chronic
Q fever Acute Q fever Chronic Q fever Clinical evidence of infection Fever and one or
more of the following: rigors, severe retrobulbar headache, acute hepatitis, pneumonia,
or elevated liver enzymes Newly recognized culture-negative endocarditis (particularly
in  a  patient  with  previous  valvulopathy  or  compromised  immune  system),  suspected
infection  of  a  vascular  aneurysm  or  vascular  prosthesis,  or  chronic  hepatitis,
osteomyelitis,  osteoarthritis,  or  pneumonitis  in  the  absence  of  other  known  etiology
Laboratory criteria*,† Laboratory confirmed (one or more of the following): Laboratory
confirmed  (one  or  more  of  the  following):  •  Fourfold  change  in  IgG  antibody  titer  to
Coxiella burnetii phase II antigen by IFA between paired sera • IgG titer ≥1:800§ to C.
burnetii phase I antigen by IFA  • Detection of C. burnetii DNA in a clinical specimen  by
PCR • Detection of C. burnetii DNA in a clinical specimen  by PCR • Demonstration of C.
burnetii  in  a  clinical  specimen  by  IHC  •  Demonstration  of  C.  burnetii  in  a  clinical
specimen by IHC • Isolation of C. burnetii from a clinical specimen by culture • Isolation
of C. burnetii from a clinical specimen by culture Laboratory supportive (one or more of
the following): Laboratory supportive: • Single IgG titer ≥1:128 to C. burnetii phase II
antigen by IFA (phase I titers may be elevated as well) or • IFA IgG titer ≥1:128 and
<1:800§ to C. burnetii phase I antigen • Elevated phase II IgG or IgM antibody reactive
with C. burnetii antigen by ELISA, dot-ELISA, or latex agglutination Case classification
Confirmed  acute  Q  fever:   Confirmed  chronic  Q  fever:  Laboratory-confirmation  with
clinical evidence of infection  or an epidemiological link to a laboratory-confirmed case
Clinical  evidence  of  infection  with  laboratory  confirmation  Probable  acute  Q  fever:
Probable  chronic  Q  fever:  Clinical  evidence  of  infection  with  laboratory-supportive
results  Clinical  evidence  of  infection  with  laboratory-supportive  results  Abbreviations:
ELISA  =  enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay;  IFA  =  indirect  immunofluorescence
antibody  assay;  IgG  =  immunoglobulin  G;  IgM  =  immunoglobulin  M;  IHC  =
immunohistochemistry; PCR = polymerase chain reaction. *CDC prefers simultaneous
testing  of  paired  samples.  IgM  tests  are  not  strongly  supportive  of  serodiagnosis
because  the  response  might  be  persistent  (making  it  unreliable  as  an  indicator  of
recent  infection)  or  nonspecific  (resulting  in  false  positives).  ELISA  tests  are  not
quantitative and cannot be used to measure changes in antibody titer; thus, they can
only be used for classification of probable cases. Performing laboratories determine the
appropriate  cutoff  titers  for  ELISA.  Serologic  test  results  should  be  interpreted  with
caution  because  baseline  antibodies  acquired  as  a  result  of  previous  exposure  to  Q
fever might exist, especially in patients with rural or farming backgrounds. †Patients
with suspected chronic Q fever should be evaluated for titers both to phase I and phase
II antigens. Serologic test results should be interpreted with caution because baseline
antibodies acquired as a result of previous exposure to Q fever might exist, especially
in patients with rural or farming backgrounds. §U.S. laboratories use a twofold dilution
scheme that does not result in a titer equaling 800; in this document, a titer of 1024 is
used  as  the  replacement.  TABLE  4.  Types  of  Q  fever  diagnostic  testing  analyses,  by
phase  of  infection,  type  of  sample,  and  interval  since  onset  of  symptoms  Phase  of
infection and type of sample  Interval since onset of symptoms Type of analysis Acute
Whole blood Until day 14 (and before antibiotic therapy) PCR  Serum       Until day 21
for IFA Until day 14 for PCR (and before antibiotic therapy) IFA for phase I and II IgG and
IgM; PCR  Convalescent Serum  3–6 weeks after acute sample IFA for phase I and II IgG
and IgM  Chronic Whole blood >6 weeks after acute illness PCR Serum >6 weeks after
acute illness IFA for phase I and II IgG and IgM; PCR Heart valve and other tissues 6
weeks to years  PCR, culture, IHC Abbreviations: IFA = immunofluorescent assay; IgG =
immunoglobulin  G;  IgM  =  immunoglobulin  M;  IHC  =  immunohistochemistry;  PCR  =
polymerase chain reaction. FIGURE. Q fever management algorithm* Abbreviations: CT
=  computed  tomography;  IFA  =  immunofluorescent  assay;  IgG  =  immunoglobulin  G;
IgM  =  immunoglobulin  M;  IHC  =  immunohistochemistry;  PCR  =  polymerase  chain
reaction; PET = positron emission tomography. *This algorithm is intended for use as a
general guide and does not replace the physician's clinical judgment. It is intended to
provide a management strategy for patients under the care of a physician and is not
intended  for  those  who  might  be  tested  for  Q  fever  as  part  of  an  occupational
monitoring  program.  Women  infected  during  pregnancy  should  be  treated  and
monitored  as  described  in  the  text  of  the  report.  Alternate  Text:  This  figure  shows  a
flow chart describing the management of acute Q fever and chronic Q fever.
                     Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and
does  not  imply  endorsement  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers
and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations or their programs by
CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for
the content of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current
as  of  the  date  of  publication.  All  MMWR  HTML  versions  of  articles  are  electronic
conversions  from  typeset  documents.  This  conversion  might  result  in  character
translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML  version.  Users  are  referred  to  the  electronic
PDF  version  (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr)  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for
printable versions of official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions  or  messages  regarding  errors  in  formatting  should  be  addressed  to
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6203a1.htm
