A Practical Guide for Physicians and Other Health-Care and Public 
Health Professionals 
 
Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail.
Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne Rickettsial 
Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis 
--- United States
 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
Alice S. Chapman, DVM1
in collaboration with the
Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases Working Group 
Johan S. Bakken, MD, PhD2 Scott M. Folk, 
MD6 Christopher D. Paddock, MD1 
Karen C. Bloch, MD3 Allan Krusell, 
MD7  Daniel J. Sexton, 
MD10
Steven C. Buckingham, MD4  Gary S. Marshall, 
MD8 Gregory A. Storch, MD11 
Gregory A. Dasch, PhD1  Jennifer H. McQuiston, 
DVM1 David L. Swerdlow, 
MD1
J. Stephen Dumler, MD5 William L. Nicholson, 
PhD1 David H. Walker, MD12 
Marina E. Eremeeva, MD, PhD, ScD1 Christopher A. Ohl, 
MD9 
1National Center for Infectious Diseases, CDC; 
2St. Luke's Infectious Disease Associates, Duluth, Minnesota; 
3Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee; 
4University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee; 
5Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland; 
6Heartland Regional Medical Center, St. Joseph, Missouri; 
7Northeast Medical Center, Concord, North Carolina; 
8University of Louisville Medical School, Louisville, Kentucky; 
9Wake Forest University Medical School, Winston-Salem, North 
Carolina; 10Duke University Medical School, Durham, North Carolina; 
11Washington University Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri; 
12University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas
 
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,
Rima Khabbaz, MD, Director; and the Division of Viral 
and Rickettsial Diseases, Steve Monroe, PhD, Acting Director. 
 Corresponding  preparer:  David  L.  Swerdlow,  MD,  Division  of  Viral  and  Rickettsial
Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, 1600 
Clifton  Rd.,  NE,  MS  G-13,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:  404-639-1329;  Fax:
404-639-4436; E-mail: DSwerdlow@cdc.gov.
Summary
 Tickborne  rickettsial  diseases  (TBRD)  continue  to  cause  severe  illness  and  death  in
otherwise healthy adults 
and  children,  despite  the  availability  of  low  cost,  effective  antimicrobial  therapy.  The
greatest challenge to clinicians is 
the difficult diagnostic dilemma posed by these infections early in their clinical course,
when antibiotic therapy is most 
effective.  Early  signs  and  symptoms  of  these  illnesses  are  notoriously  nonspecific  or
mimic benign viral illnesses, making 
diagnosis  difficult.  In  October  2004,  CDC's  Viral  and  Rickettsial  Zoonoses  Branch,  in
consultation with 11 clinical and 
academic  specialists  of  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever,  human  granulocytotropic
anaplasmosis, and human 
monocytotropic  ehrlichiosis,  developed  guidelines  to  address  the  need  for  a
consolidated source for the diagnosis and management of 
TBRD.  The  preparers  focused  on  the  practical  aspects  of  epidemiology,  clinical
assessment, treatment, and laboratory diagnosis 
of  TBRD.  This  report  will  assist  clinicians  and  other  health-care  and  public  health
professionals to 1) 
recognize  epidemiologic  features  and  clinical  manifestations  of  TBRD,  2)  develop  a
differential diagnosis that includes and 
ranks  TBRD,  3)  understand  that  the  recommendations  for  doxycycline  are  the
treatment of choice for both adults and 
children,  4)  understand  that  early  empiric  antibiotic  therapy  can  prevent  severe
morbidity and death, and 
5) report suspect or confirmed cases of TBRD to local public health authorities to assist
them with control measures and public 
health education efforts.
Introduction
 Tickborne  rickettsial  diseases  (TBRD)  are  clinically  similar,  yet  epidemiologically  and
etiologically distinct illnesses. 
In the United States, these diseases include 1) Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), 2)
human monocytotropic 
(or monocytic) ehrlichiosis (HME), 3) human 
granulocytotropic (or granulocytic) anaplasmosis (HGA, formerly known 
as human granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis or HGE) 
(1), 4) Ehrlichia ewingii infection, and 5) other emerging TBRD. 
The  reported  incidence  of  these  diseases  has  increased  during  the  previous  decade.
Despite the availability of low-cost 
and  effective  antibiotic  therapy,  which  may  be  used  empirically  for  suspected  cases,
TBRD continue to cause severe 
illness  and  death  in  otherwise  healthy  adults  and  children.  The  greatest  challenge  to
clinicians is diagnosing these 
infections early in their clinical course, when antibiotic therapy is most effective 
(2,3). The majority of patients with TBRD 
seek medical care within 2--4 days of onset of illness 
(4--7). In general, these patients are first evaluated by 
family practitioners, pediatricians, internists, emergency department (ED) physicians, or
physician 
extenders. Early signs and symptoms of these illnesses are notoriously nonspecific, or
they might mimic benign viral illnesses, making 
diagnosis  difficult.  For  example,  even  in  areas  where  awareness  of  RMSF  is  high,
approximately 60%--75% of 
patients  with  this  TBRD  receive  an  alternate  diagnosis  on  their  first  visit  for  medical
care 
(8,9). Moreover, the earlier patients seek care 
in the course of their illness, the more likely an alternate diagnosis will be made 
(4). The lack of a specific initial 
syndrome, however, does not imply that the course of these diseases will be benign.
 In October 2004, to address the need for a consolidated resource for the diagnosis and
management of TBRD, 
CDC's Viral and Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch collaborated with 11 clinical and academic
specialists of RMSF, HGA, and 
HME.  These  external  contributors  were  invited  by  CDC  subject  matter  specialists  to
participate among clinicians 
and  researchers  in  the  field  of  TBRD,  based  on  direct  working  interactions  related  to
case consultation and 
recognized  expertise  from  peer-reviewed  publications.  In  December  2004,  the
framework of this report was developed by 
CDC's Viral and Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch, based on a summary of the peer-reviewed
published reports on the 
epidemiology  and  clinical  aspects  of  TBRD.  External  contributors  further  developed
recommendations for the diagnosis and 
treatment  of  TBRD  based  on  their  clinical  research  and  experience.  All  work  group
collaborators reviewed and provided input 
and approved the final content of this report.
 The  primary  goal  of  this  report  is  to  provide  primary  care  physicians  and  physician
extenders with 
practical information to assist with the diagnosis and care of 
patients with TBRD. This report provides a framework 
for recognizing suggestive symptoms, considering likely alternative diagnoses, eliciting
relevant history, 
requesting  appropriate  diagnostic  tests,  and  initiating  prompt,  effective  treatment.
Information in this guide is designed to 
assist clinicians to
 This  report  also  provides  resources  on  TBRD  for  health-care  and  public  health
professionals. Clinical cases 
are included for self-evaluation and to reinforce the information presented in this guide.
Additional information 
concerning  TBRD  in  this  report  is  available  from  medical  specialists,  various  medical
societies, CDC, and state and local 
health authorities.
Epidemiology of TBRD
 RMSF, HME, and HGA are tickborne zoonoses caused by 
Rickettsia rickettsii, Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis, and Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum,  respectively.  These  pathogens  are  maintained  in  natural  cycles
involving wild mammals and 
hard-bodied (ixodid) ticks. The epidemiologies of these diseases reflect the geographic
distribution and seasonal activities of the 
vectors  and  reservoirs  and  the  human  behaviors  that  place  persons  at  risk  for  tick
attachment and subsequent infection. 
Selected epidemiologic and clinical features of TBRD have been summarized 
(Table  1).  RMSF,  HME,  and  HGA  are  reported  each  month  of  the  year  in  the  United
States, 
although 90%--93% of reported cases occur during April--September 
(6,10--12), coincident with peak levels of tick feeding activity on 
humans. Travelers outside of the United States might also be 
exposed to other tick vectors in other countries that transmit related agents that result
in disease after they return to the 
United States.
Males  appear  to  be  at  higher  risk  for  infection  with  all  TBRD,  possibly  because  of
greater recreational or 
occupational exposures to tick habitats. Although previous studies have indicated that
the highest incidences of RMSF have 
occurred in children aged <10 years, surveillance during 2003 demonstrates a higher
age-specific incidence for RMSF 
among persons aged 40--64 years, compared with other age groups 
(13). For HME and HGA, the highest 
age-specific incidences occurred among persons aged 
>70 and 60--69 years, respectively 
(14).  The  higher  frequency  of  disease  reporting  in  adults  might  reflect  greater
susceptibility to recognizable disease rather than higher infection rates. 
Two recent cross-sectional studies in the southeastern and south central United 
States* have indicated that up to 22% of children have serologic evidence of previous
exposure to antigens of both 
E. chaffeensis (15) and R. rickettsii 
(16), suggesting that rickettsial and ehrlichial 
infection might be more common than previously recognized.
RMSF
In the United States, R. rickettsii is transmitted to 
humans by several tick species. However, the species that 
transmit R. rickettsii most frequently include the American dog tick 
(Dermacentor variabilis; Figure 1) in the eastern, central, 
and Pacific coastal United States and the Rocky Mountain wood tick 
(Dermacentor andersoni; Figure 2) in the western 
United States. In 2005, the brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus; Figure 3), a vector of RMSF in Mexico 
(17), was implicated as a vector of this disease in a confined geographic area in Arizona
(18). The cayenne tick (Amblyomma 
cajennense; Figure 4) is a common vector for RMSF in Central and South America, and
its range 
extends into the United States in Texas (19). During 1997--2002, the estimated average
annual incidence of RMSF, based on 
passive  surveillance,  was  2.2  cases  per  million  persons.  More  than  half  (56%)  of
reported cases of RMSF were from only 
five states: North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Oklahoma, and Arkansas (CDC,
unpublished data, 2005). 
However,  cases  have  been  reported  from  each  of  the  contiguous  48  states,  except
Vermont and Maine 
(10,11). Average reported annual incidence of RMSF per 
1 million population, based on cases reported to CDC during 1997--2002, has 
been  reported  (Figure  5).  Incidence  varies  considerably  by  geographic  area.  RMSF  is
also 
endemic  throughout  several  countries  in  Central  and  South  America,  including
Argentina, Brazil, Columbia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and 
Panama  (17,19,20).  Household  clusters  of  disease  and  hyperendemic  foci  of  infected
ticks have been 
reported (3,21). Dogs are susceptible to RMSF, and they might frequently develop the
disease concurrently with other household members in 
an endemic focus (22,23).
HME
E. chaffeensis is transmitted to humans by the lone star tick, 
A. americanum (Figure 6), and possibly other ticks. 
The white-tailed deer is a major host of all stages of lone star ticks and is an important
natural reservoir 
for  E.  chaffeensis.  Natural  infections  of  coyotes,  dogs,  and  goats  have  been
documented. The lone star tick is among the 
most  commonly  encountered  ticks  in  the  southeastern  United  States,  with  range
extensions into areas of the South 
Central and New England states (Figure 7). Cases of HME are most commonly reported
to CDC from Missouri, 
Oklahoma,  Tennessee,  Arkansas,  and  Maryland,  although  the  disease  is  found
throughout the range of the lone star tick. The 
average  reported  annual  incidence  of  HME  was  0.7  cases  per  million  population,  but
incidence varied by state, based on 
cases  reported  to  CDC  from  2001  to  2002  (Figure  8).  In  a  prospective  study  among
febrile patients with a history of a 
recent  tick  bite  in  central  North  Carolina,  the  incidence  of  ehrlichial  infection  was
approximately twice that of RMSF 
(24). The reported incidence probably represents an underestimate of the true burden
of disease in areas where 
E. chaffeensis is endemic (24,25). Clusters of HME have been reported, suggesting that
foci of ticks 
infected with E. chaffeensis do 
occur (21,26).
HGA
The blacklegged tick (Ixodes scapularis; 
Figure 9) is the vector of A. 
phagocytophilum in New England and North 
Central United States, whereas the western blacklegged tick 
(Ixodes pacificus; Figure 10) is the principal vector in northern 
California.  Deer,  elk,  and  wild  rodents  are  thought  to  be  reservoirs.  HGA  is  more
frequently reported than HME, resulting in an 
average reported annual incidence of 1.6 cases per million during 2001--2002. States
that reported the highest 
incidence during this period were Rhode Island (36.5 cases per million), Minnesota (12.3
cases per million), Connecticut (8.1 cases per 
million), New York (2.3 cases per million), and Maryland (1.6 cases per million) 
(Figure 11). HGA has been identified as a 
substantial cause of unexplained fever during the tick season in Wisconsin 
(27). Evidence suggests that the incidence of HGA 
in Wisconsin might be much higher than that in Minnesota 
(7). Because these Ixodes species ticks also transmit 
Borrelia burgdorferi (the causative agent of Lyme disease) and various 
Babesia species (agents of human babesiosis), the preponderance 
of cases of HGA occur in the same states that report high incidences of Lyme disease
and human babesiosis. 
Simultaneous infection with A. 
phagocytophilum and B. burgdorferi has been reported 
(28), and discerning such a mixed infection is 
vital because it might affect antimicrobial choice. For example, amoxicillin can be used
to treat early stage Lyme disease, but it is 
not effective for HGA.
Ehrlichia ewingii Infection
Amblyomma americanum also is the principal vector of the ehrlichial pathogen, 
E. ewingii. The ecologic features of E. ewingii 
are not completely known; however, dogs and deer have been naturally infected. Cases
of 
granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis caused by E. 
ewingii have been reported primarily in immunocompromised patients from 
Missouri, Oklahoma, and Tennessee (29,30). 
E. ewingii infections in dogs or ticks also have been described in these states and 
in  Arkansas,  Texas,  Florida,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  and  Virginia,
suggesting that human infections with 
this pathogen might be expected to occur throughout the range of the lone star tick 
(31,32).
The following is a summary of the salient epidemiologic features of TBRD:
Occurrence  is  seasonal,  with  the  majority  of  illness  onset  during  warmer  spring  and
summer months, but cases 
might develop throughout the year.
RMSF has been reported in all of the contiguous 48 states, except Vermont and Maine.
RMSF  and  HME  are  most  commonly  reported  in  the  southeastern  and  south  central
United States.
HGA is reported most frequently in New England, the north central states, and in focal
areas along the West Coast.
Pathogen Tropisms and Clinical Presentation
 Males  appear  to  be  at  higher  risk  for  infection  with  all  TBRD,  possibly  because  of
greater recreational or 
occupational exposures to tick habitats. Although previous studies have indicated that
the highest incidences of RMSF have 
occurred in children aged <10 years, surveillance during 2003 demonstrates a higher
age-specific incidence for RMSF 
among persons aged 40--64 years, compared with other age groups 
(13). For HME and HGA, the highest 
age-specific incidences occurred among persons aged 
>70 and 60--69 years, respectively 
(14).  The  higher  frequency  of  disease  reporting  in  adults  might  reflect  greater
susceptibility to recognizable disease rather than higher infection rates. 
Two recent cross-sectional studies in the southeastern and south central United 
States* have indicated that up to 22% of children have serologic evidence of previous
exposure to antigens of both 
E. chaffeensis (15) and R. rickettsii 
(16), suggesting that rickettsial and ehrlichial 
infection might be more common than previously recognized.
RMSF
 In the United States, R. rickettsii is transmitted to 
humans by several tick species. However, the species that 
transmit R. rickettsii most frequently include the American dog tick 
(Dermacentor variabilis; Figure 1) in the eastern, central, 
and Pacific coastal United States and the Rocky Mountain wood tick 
(Dermacentor andersoni; Figure 2) in the western 
United States. In 2005, the brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus; Figure 3), a vector of RMSF in Mexico 
(17), was implicated as a vector of this disease in a confined geographic area in Arizona
(18). The cayenne tick (Amblyomma 
cajennense; Figure 4) is a common vector for RMSF in Central and South America, and
its range 
extends into the United States in Texas (19). During 1997--2002, the estimated average
annual incidence of RMSF, based on 
passive  surveillance,  was  2.2  cases  per  million  persons.  More  than  half  (56%)  of
reported cases of RMSF were from only 
five states: North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Oklahoma, and Arkansas (CDC,
unpublished data, 2005). 
However,  cases  have  been  reported  from  each  of  the  contiguous  48  states,  except
Vermont and Maine 
(10,11). Average reported annual incidence of RMSF per 
1 million population, based on cases reported to CDC during 1997--2002, has 
been  reported  (Figure  5).  Incidence  varies  considerably  by  geographic  area.  RMSF  is
also 
endemic  throughout  several  countries  in  Central  and  South  America,  including
Argentina, Brazil, Columbia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and 
Panama  (17,19,20).  Household  clusters  of  disease  and  hyperendemic  foci  of  infected
ticks have been 
reported (3,21). Dogs are susceptible to RMSF, and they might frequently develop the
disease concurrently with other household members in 
an endemic focus (22,23).
HME
 E. chaffeensis is transmitted to humans by the lone star tick, 
A. americanum (Figure 6), and possibly other ticks. 
The white-tailed deer is a major host of all stages of lone star ticks and is an important
natural reservoir 
for  E.  chaffeensis.  Natural  infections  of  coyotes,  dogs,  and  goats  have  been
documented. The lone star tick is among the 
most  commonly  encountered  ticks  in  the  southeastern  United  States,  with  range
extensions into areas of the South 
Central and New England states (Figure 7). Cases of HME are most commonly reported
to CDC from Missouri, 
Oklahoma,  Tennessee,  Arkansas,  and  Maryland,  although  the  disease  is  found
throughout the range of the lone star tick. The 
average  reported  annual  incidence  of  HME  was  0.7  cases  per  million  population,  but
incidence varied by state, based on 
cases  reported  to  CDC  from  2001  to  2002  (Figure  8).  In  a  prospective  study  among
febrile patients with a history of a 
recent  tick  bite  in  central  North  Carolina,  the  incidence  of  ehrlichial  infection  was
approximately twice that of RMSF 
(24). The reported incidence probably represents an underestimate of the true burden
of disease in areas where 
E. chaffeensis is endemic (24,25). Clusters of HME have been reported, suggesting that
foci of ticks 
infected with E. chaffeensis do 
occur (21,26).
HGA
 The blacklegged tick (Ixodes scapularis; 
Figure 9) is the vector of A. 
phagocytophilum in New England and North 
Central United States, whereas the western blacklegged tick 
(Ixodes pacificus; Figure 10) is the principal vector in northern 
California.  Deer,  elk,  and  wild  rodents  are  thought  to  be  reservoirs.  HGA  is  more
frequently reported than HME, resulting in an 
average reported annual incidence of 1.6 cases per million during 2001--2002. States
that reported the highest 
incidence during this period were Rhode Island (36.5 cases per million), Minnesota (12.3
cases per million), Connecticut (8.1 cases per 
million), New York (2.3 cases per million), and Maryland (1.6 cases per million) 
(Figure 11). HGA has been identified as a 
substantial cause of unexplained fever during the tick season in Wisconsin 
(27). Evidence suggests that the incidence of HGA 
in Wisconsin might be much higher than that in Minnesota 
(7). Because these Ixodes species ticks also transmit 
Borrelia burgdorferi (the causative agent of Lyme disease) and various 
Babesia species (agents of human babesiosis), the preponderance 
of cases of HGA occur in the same states that report high incidences of Lyme disease
and human babesiosis. 
Simultaneous infection with A. 
phagocytophilum and B. burgdorferi has been reported 
(28), and discerning such a mixed infection is 
vital because it might affect antimicrobial choice. For example, amoxicillin can be used
to treat early stage Lyme disease, but it is 
not effective for HGA.
Ehrlichia ewingii Infection
 Amblyomma americanum also is the principal vector of the ehrlichial pathogen, 
E. ewingii. The ecologic features of E. ewingii 
are not completely known; however, dogs and deer have been naturally infected. Cases
of 
granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis caused by E. 
ewingii have been reported primarily in immunocompromised patients from 
Missouri, Oklahoma, and Tennessee (29,30). 
E. ewingii infections in dogs or ticks also have been described in these states and 
in  Arkansas,  Texas,  Florida,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  and  Virginia,
suggesting that human infections with 
this pathogen might be expected to occur throughout the range of the lone star tick 
(31,32).
 The following is a summary of the salient epidemiologic features of TBRD:
 
Pathogen Tropisms and Clinical Presentation
 R. rickettsii, E. chaffeensis, 
E. ewingii, and A. phagocytophilum have specific and distinct cell tropisms. 
R. rickettsii infects endothelial cells and more rarely infects underlying smooth muscle
cells, where rickettsiae multiply freely in 
the cytoplasm. The rickettsiae cause a small-vessel vasculitis, 
resulting in a maculopapular or petechial rash in the 
majority of patients. Vasculitis occurring in organs (e.g., the brain or lungs) can result in
life-threatening complications. 
R. rickettsii does not stain with the majority of routine histopathologic stains and is not
detected by blood smear evaluation 
because of limited numbers of circulating bacteria. Ehrlichioses and anaplasmosis are
characterized by infection of 
leukocytes,  where  the  causative  agents  multiply  in  cytoplasmic  membrane-bound
vacuoles as microcolonies called morulae. 
E. chaffeensis most frequently infects monocytes, whereas 
A. phagocytophilum and E. ewingii demonstrate 
a predilection for granulocytes. Morulae may be stained with conventional Wright or 
Giemsa stains and are occasionally observed in leukocytes in smears of 
peripheral  blood,  buffy  coat  preparations,  or  cerebrospinal  fluid.  In  this  context,  a
routine 
blood  smear  can  provide  a  presumptive  clue  for  early  diagnosis;  however,  the
visualization of morulae still requires 
confirmatory testing for Ehrlichia or Anaplasma 
species by serology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or immunostaining methods 
(33). The demonstration of morulae is also not sensitive, and a case of ehrlichiosis or
anaplasmosis might be missed if 
the diagnosis relies solely on detection of morulae on blood smears. Although the 
diagnostic sensitivity of a blood smear is greater for HGA than for HME, blood smears
might only be positive in up to 60% of patients with HGA 
(34).
 The following is a summary of salient features of pathogen tropisms:
 A  thorough  clinical  history  that  elicits  recent  tick  exposure,  specific  recreational  or
occupational exposures to 
tick-infested habitats, recent travel to areas where TBRD might be endemic, or similar
illnesses in family 
members, coworkers, or pet dogs can provide critical information that can be used to
make a presumptive diagnosis of TBRD 
and  help  guide  subsequent  therapeutic  actions.  However,  the  absence  of  certain
features does not exclude a diagnosis 
of TBRD. These features include 1) history of tick bite or exposure, 2) recent travel to
areas endemic for TBRD, and 
3) similar illness in family members, coworkers, or pets.
History of Tick Bite or Exposure
 A  detailed  medical  history  might  reveal  activities  that  suggest  potential  exposure  to
ticks. Outdoor activities 
during  April--September,  particularly  in  areas  with  high  uncut  grass,  weeds,  and  low
brush can increase the risk for tick 
bites (35). These activities include recreational pursuits (e.g., camping, hiking, fishing,
hunting, gardening, and 
walking dogs) as well as occupational activities that involve persons being in brushy or
grassy areas that might be inhabited 
by ticks. Vegetation that borders roads, trails, yards, or fields also are potential areas
that might be inhabited by ticks. 
In endemic areas (where the agents causing TBRD are present at all times), even adults
or children who play in grassy 
areas in their backyard are at risk. Queries concerning frequency of contact with family
pets, especially dogs, and findings 
of tick attachment to animals or removal can be useful. The majority of patients will not
recall or recognize an attached 
tick because the location of the tick might be obscure; the bite is typically painless; and
bites from smaller immature 
stages of ticks (e.g., nymphs are approximately 1--2 mm 
or the size of the head of a pin; Figure 12) might not be 
readily detected but might still result in infection. A specific history of a tick bite within
14 days of illness onset is 
typically only reported in 60% of RMSF cases 
(10,11) and has been reported in only 68% of ehrlichiosis cases 
(6).  Therefore,  the  absence  of  definite  tick  attachment  should  never  dissuade  a
physician from considering the 
diagnosis of a TBRD. Finally, certain patients do not specifically recall tick exposure but
might describe other pruritic, erythematous, or 
ulcerated cutaneous lesions that they call a mosquito bite, spider bite, chigger bite, or
bug bite, which can be 
indistinguishable from an actual tick bite.
Recent Travel to Areas Endemic for TBRD
 Clinicians in areas of the United States where the incidence of TBRD is historically low
are typically at a 
disadvantage  in  distinguishing  these  diseases  among  multiple  other  infectious  and
noninfectious syndromes that they 
resemble.  Because  TBRD  are  typically  sporadic,  identifying  these  infections  requires
high clinical acumen, especially in 
an  environment  in  which  TBRD  have  not  previously  been  recognized  as  occurring
frequently.
 Knowledge of the epidemiology of these illnesses, including regions of the country with
a high incidence (number 
of  reported  cases  per  million  persons  per  year)  of  TBRD  (e.g.,  south  Atlantic,  north
central, and south central and 
New England states), is important. A history of recent travel from an endemic area of
TBRD (e.g., within 2 weeks 
preceding illness), especially if the patient had participated in an outdoor activity, might
support a suspicion of tickborne 
illness. Physicians should also consider the possibility that changes in tick vector range
can influence the distribution of 
TBRD. In addition, in 2004, a total of 13 cases of RMSF occurred in eastern Arizona, a
state in which the disease was 
previously rarely diagnosed (18).
 Clinicians  should  also  consider  that  TBRD  occur  worldwide  and  might  have
epidemiologic, seasonal, and 
clinical features distinct from those observed in the United States. International travel
to destinations (e.g., 
southern Mediterranean, Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East)
might result in tick vector 
exposure, particularly if the patient participated in rural or outdoor 
activities. For example, African tick-bite fever (ATBF), 
an increasingly reported travel-related rickettsiosis caused by 
R. africae, has an estimated incidence of 4%--5.3% 
among international travelers to sub-Saharan Africa and has been identified in clusters
of 
infection among group travelers (e.g., game hunters, safari tourists 
[36], and humanitarian workers; 37). A related rickettsial organism, 
R. conorii, endemic in the Mediterranean basin, Middle East, and parts of 
Africa and the Indian subcontinent causes Mediterranean 
spotted fever (MSF; 38). ATBF and MSF are characterized by fever, malaise, headache,
and myalgia, which are typical 
symptoms for other TBRD. However, a distinguishing clinical feature of both 
travel-related diseases is the development of one 
or  more  eschars  (a  dark,  scab-like  plaque  overlying  a  shallow  ulcer  with  surrounding
erythema or scaling) at the site of 
tick attachment that is noted coincident with or shortly after the 
onset of fever in 30%--50% of patients 
(36,39).
Emerging TBRD
 Similarly, considering TBRD as a diagnosis is essential 
because of new, previously unrecognized rickettsial 
pathogens that have been observed in tick vectors in the United States. For example, in
2002, 
R. parkeri was identified as a new cause of spotted fever rickettsiosis in a patient living
in the southeastern coastal United States 
(40). This agent is present in A. 
maculatum (the Gulf Coast tick; Figure 13), which is found in the southeastern United
States. A 
clinical presentation, similar to ATBF and MSF (i.e., fever, headache, eschars, and 
regional lymphadenopathy), was observed in a patient with no substantial travel history
(Figure 14). The diagnosis of spotted fever rickettsiosis was confirmed by 
using  rickettsial  culture  from  an  eschar  skin  biopsy  and  serologic  and  molecular
methods 
(40).  Other  spotted  fever  group  rickettsiae  might  also  cause  mild  febrile  illness  in
certain persons exposed to ticks in highly endemic areas 
(41). The common observation of antibodies to rickettsiae and ehrlichiae in persons and
dogs might indicate exposure to 
other rickettsial agents of varying pathogenicity 
(15,16,24).
Similar Illness in Family Members, Coworkers, or Pets
 Clinicians might be inclined to offer diagnoses of a communicable viral infection when
more than one family 
member  is  affected  by  an  illness.  However,  clustering  of  certain  TBRD  is  a
well-recognized epidemiologic phenomenon 
and  might  occur  after  exposure  to  natural  foci  of  infected  ticks.  Temporally  and
geographically related clusters 
occurring  among  family  members,  coworkers,  or  persons  frequenting  a  particular
common area have been observed. These 
clusters include family clusters of RMSF (3), clusters of ehrlichiosis among residents of a
golfing community 
(26), and soldiers on field maneuvers 
(21).  Common  exposures  to  tick-infested  habitats  or  outdoor  activities  might  place
certain or 
all  members  of  a  family  or  group,  including  pet  dogs,  at  risk  for  TBRD.  Concurrent
infections with 
R. rickettsii and Ehrlichia species also have been observed in humans and dogs 
(22,24,29). Therefore, clinicians should query 
patients  concerning  similar  illnesses  among  family  members,  close  coworkers,  or
community residents, and even 
among household dogs.
 The following is a summary of salient features of clues from the clinical history:
 
Clinical Assessment
 The early signs and symptoms of HME, HGA, RMSF, and 
E. ewingii infection might resemble nonspecific findings 
of other infectious and noninfectious diseases. The 
majority of patients with TBRD visit a physician during the first 
2--4 days of illness, after an incubation period of approximately 5--10 days after a tick
bite 
(5). Patients with HGA might seek medical care later (4--8 days after fever onset) 
(7). Substantial overlap occurs in the initial clinical presentation 
of  the  three  diseases.  Initial  symptoms  commonly  include  a  sudden  onset  of  fever,
chills, and headache, 
commonly  associated  with  malaise  and  myalgia.  In  adults,  photophobia  might  be
observed. Headache is nearly always reported 
by adults who seek medical care and can be severe. Patients also might report nausea,
vomiting, and anorexia early in 
the course of their illness, especially with RMSF 
(35) and HME in children. Diarrhea might occasionally 
occur. Other frequently observed signs and symptoms in children with either RMSF or
HME are 
abdominal pain, altered mental status, and conjunctival injection. Abdominal pain might
be severe enough to mimic appendicitis or other causes 
of acute abdominal pain (42). Certain findings described in medical textbooks are less
commonly observed by 
clinicians and include bilateral periorbital 
edema, edema of the dorsum of hands and feet, and calf pain and tenderness. 
Because the signs and symptoms that persons have when they first seek medical care
are nonspecific, clinicians frequently 
must incorporate clues from the clinical and epidemiologic history and consider other
features (e.g., the presence of rash 
or abnormalities of routine laboratory tests).
 In RMSF, a rash typically appears 2--4 days after onset of fever; however, the majority
of patients will seek medical 
care  before  this  period.  For  adults  and  children  with  RMSF,  rash  frequently  occurs
earlier in children than in adults 
(43)  and  is  eventually  observed  in  approximately  90%  of  children.  The  exanthem
typically begins as small, blanching, 
pink macules on the ankles, wrists, or forearms that evolve to maculopapules 
(Figure 15). In half of cases, the rash might evolve to petechiae over the next several
days of illness. The classic centripetal spread of rash is typically not noticed 
by  the  patient  and  might  be  difficult  to  elicit  from  the  clinical  history.  The  rash  can
expand to involve the entire 
body,  including  the  palms  and  soles,  but  its  presence  on  the  face  is  usually  limited.
Discerning the rash in 
darker-skinned persons might be difficult. The classic spotted or generalized petechial
rash of RMSF is usually not apparent until 
the fifth or sixth day of the illness and signifies progression of the disease, 
although the progression is considerably variable 
(Figure 16). Patients with petechial rash are often severely ill, and 
although fever and organ dysfunction might resolve quickly with treatment, complete
recovery can take longer to 
occur. The rash progression of RMSF includes 
several critical exceptions and considerations.
 Rash is observed in approximately one third of all 
patients with HME (although rash is described in up to 66% 
of children) and is rare in patients with HGA or 
E. ewingii infection (45,46). For children with HME and a 
rash,  distinguishing  the  condition  from  RMSF  might  be  difficult.  Rash  patterns
occasionally associated with HME vary 
in character from petechial or maculopapular 
(Figure 17; 47) to diffuse erythema 
(48) and typically occur later in the course of disease 
(median: 5 days after onset; 6).The rash patterns might involve the extremities, trunk,
face or, 
rarely, the palms and soles (49).
 In certain cases, patients with RMSF or ehrlichiosis might seek medical attention for a
febrile illness that mimics 
viral  meningoencephalitis.  Focal  neurologic  deficits,  including  cranial  or  peripheral
motor nerve paralysis or sudden 
transient deafness, might also be observed 
(50).
Differential Diagnosis of Febrile Patients with Rash
 The differential diagnosis of febrile patients with rash is broad. The onset of TBRD is
frequently rapid, and 
the majority of patients experience high fever, shaking chills, 
severe headache, and generalized myalgias, in contrast to 
other tickborne diseases (e.g., Lyme disease). Tickborne viral fevers (e.g., Colorado tick
fever) infrequently cause rash but 
should be included in the differential diagnoses of TBRD, particularly when leukopenia
and thrombocytopenia are present in 
a patient who has recently traveled to the western United States. Clinically, TBRD might
be essentially 
indistinguishable from the majority of viral infections, particularly those in children. The
dermatologic classification of the rash, 
its distribution, pattern of progression and timing relative to onset of fever, and other
systemic signs provide clues that 
help the clinician rule out other exanthemata. Maculopapular rashes might 
occur in association with multiple conditions, including human herpesvirus 6 infection
(i.e., roseola), human parvovirus B19, enteroviral infection (e.g., 
coxsackievirus  and  echovirus),  Epstein-Barr  virus  infection,  disseminated  gonococcal
infection, 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection, leptospirosis, secondary syphilis, Kawasaki disease,
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(TTP), drug reactions, and immune complex-mediated illness 
(51). A petechial rash can occur in association with meningococcal infection, 
enteroviral  infection,  immune  thrombocytopenic  purpura,  and  after  group  A
streptococcal pharyngitis. 
R. rickettsii infection is noted for causing a rash on the soles and palms, although this
distribution typically occurs late in RMSF and in only half of 
cases, whereas in the majority of other bacterial or viral infections rash has not been 
observed. Initially, clinicians might experience difficulty distinguishing 
N. meningitidis infection from RMSF because both can 
begin as a maculopapular rash and progress to a petechial rash, but the rash and other
clinical features progress more rapidly in meningococcemia than in 
RMSF. 
Selected infectious causes and features of maculopapular and petechial rash illnesses
have been reported 
(Table 2). Other exanthematous diseases that can occasionally be confused with TBRD
include toxic-shock syndrome, erythema 
multiforme, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Laboratory Findings
Obtaining  a  complete  blood  cell  count  (CBC),  comprehensive  metabolic  panel,  and
examination of peripheral 
blood smear are essential when considering a diagnosis of TBRD. The total white blood
cell (WBC) count is typically 
normal in patients with RMSF, but increased numbers of immature bands are generally
observed. Thrombocytopenia, 
mild  elevations  in  hepatic  transaminases,  and  hyponatremia  might  be  observed  with
RMSF 
(35),  whereas  leukopenia  (up  to  53%  of  patients),  thrombocytopenia  (up  to  94%  of
patients), and modest elevations of liver transaminase levels 
are particularly suggestive of HME and HGA 
(52,53). An inverse relation has been reported between the mean WBC 
and platelet count and the probability that HGA is the cause of nonspecific fever 
(53). Blood smears might be useful in identifying patients with HGA 
(34) or E. ewingii infection. Nonspecific changes 
in  the  concentrations  of  routine  laboratory  parameters  that  have  been  observed  for
patients infected with 
E. chaffeensis (52) or A. 
phagocytophilum have been reported 
(53; Table 3).
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis might be a useful 
adjunct to laboratory diagnosis of TBRD. When CSF is 
evaluated in patients with RMSF or HME, a pleocytosis (usually <100 cells/microliter) is
typically observed (with either 
a polymorphonuclear or lymphocytic predominance), whereas CSF evaluated in 
E. ewingii infection is characterized by a neutrophilic pleocytosis 
(29). Moderately elevated protein (100--200 mg/dL) and normal glucose levels also 
are commonly observed in patients with RMSF 
(54,55). A Gram stain indicating gram-negative diplococci, very low 
glucose  (i.e.,  <20--30  mg/dL),  or  neutrophilic  pleocytosis  is  more  suggestive  of
meningococcal meningitis. Clinicians 
should distinguish TBRD-related CNS involvement from other infections (e.g., 
N. meningitidis); however, in the majority 
of  patients,  reliably  distinguishing  between  RMSF,  HME,  and  meningococcal  infection
based on laboratory testing is 
difficult  (unless  a  pathogen  is  cultured).  Therefore,  empiric  treatment  for  both  TBRD
and meningococcemia is necessary for 
ill patients with fever and rash and for patients in whom neither disease can be ruled
out.
The following is a summary of salient clinical assessment features:
Early clinical presentations of HME, HGA, RMSF, and 
E. ewingii infection include fever, headache, myalgia, 
and  malaise  and  are  difficult  to  distinguish  from  other  infectious  and  noninfectious
diseases.
Patients with RMSF typically do not have a spotted or petechial rash when they initially
seek medical care during 
the first 2--4 days of illness.
A CBC, metabolic panel, and peripheral blood smear 
examination are helpful in developing both a 
differential diagnosis and treatment approach to TBRD.
CSF analysis might reveal neutrophilic or lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein
but might not 
reliably distinguish TBRD and meningococcal disease, 
necessitating empiric antibiotic therapy for both conditions 
when indicated.
Leukopenia,  thrombocytopenia,  mild  hyponatremia,  and  mildly  elevated  hepatic
transaminase levels are common 
and particularly useful clinical features of TBRD, although the absence of these features
does not exclude a diagnosis 
of TBRD.
Infrequent features of TBRD include severe abdominal pain and meningoencephalitis.
Rash is observed frequently in RMSF, occasionally in HME, and rarely in HGA or 
E. ewingii infection.
Treatment and Management
 Selected infectious causes and features of maculopapular and petechial rash illnesses
have been reported 
(Table 2). Other exanthematous diseases that can occasionally be confused with TBRD
include toxic-shock syndrome, erythema 
multiforme, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Laboratory Findings
 Obtaining  a  complete  blood  cell  count  (CBC),  comprehensive  metabolic  panel,  and
examination of peripheral 
blood smear are essential when considering a diagnosis of TBRD. The total white blood
cell (WBC) count is typically 
normal in patients with RMSF, but increased numbers of immature bands are generally
observed. Thrombocytopenia, 
mild  elevations  in  hepatic  transaminases,  and  hyponatremia  might  be  observed  with
RMSF 
(35),  whereas  leukopenia  (up  to  53%  of  patients),  thrombocytopenia  (up  to  94%  of
patients), and modest elevations of liver transaminase levels 
are particularly suggestive of HME and HGA 
(52,53). An inverse relation has been reported between the mean WBC 
and platelet count and the probability that HGA is the cause of nonspecific fever 
(53). Blood smears might be useful in identifying patients with HGA 
(34) or E. ewingii infection. Nonspecific changes 
in  the  concentrations  of  routine  laboratory  parameters  that  have  been  observed  for
patients infected with 
E. chaffeensis (52) or A. 
phagocytophilum have been reported 
(53; Table 3).
 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis might be a useful 
adjunct to laboratory diagnosis of TBRD. When CSF is 
evaluated in patients with RMSF or HME, a pleocytosis (usually <100 cells/microliter) is
typically observed (with either 
a polymorphonuclear or lymphocytic predominance), whereas CSF evaluated in 
E. ewingii infection is characterized by a neutrophilic pleocytosis 
(29). Moderately elevated protein (100--200 mg/dL) and normal glucose levels also 
are commonly observed in patients with RMSF 
(54,55). A Gram stain indicating gram-negative diplococci, very low 
glucose  (i.e.,  <20--30  mg/dL),  or  neutrophilic  pleocytosis  is  more  suggestive  of
meningococcal meningitis. Clinicians 
should distinguish TBRD-related CNS involvement from other infections (e.g., 
N. meningitidis); however, in the majority 
of  patients,  reliably  distinguishing  between  RMSF,  HME,  and  meningococcal  infection
based on laboratory testing is 
difficult  (unless  a  pathogen  is  cultured).  Therefore,  empiric  treatment  for  both  TBRD
and meningococcemia is necessary for 
ill patients with fever and rash and for patients in whom neither disease can be ruled
out.
 The following is a summary of salient clinical assessment features:
 
Treatment and Management
 An assessment of clinical signs and symptoms, along with laboratory diagnostic tests
and a thorough clinical 
history,  will  help  guide  clinicians  in  developing  a  differential  diagnosis  and  treatment
plan. At least 50% of patients with 
TBRD might need to be hospitalized. Patients with evidence of organ dysfunction and
severe thrombocytopenia, mental 
status changes, and the need for supportive therapy should be hospitalized. Essential
considerations include social factors, 
the  likelihood  that  the  patient  can  and  will  take  oral  medications,  and  existing
comorbidities. For 
example,  a  patient  who  appears  well,  has  acute  febrile  illness  and  an  unrevealing
history and physical examination, and whose laboratory 
indices are within normal limits might warrant a "wait and watch" approach for 24 hours
with reassessment if the 
patient fails to improve. If laboratory testing of a patient with a history compatible with
TBRD reveals leukopenia 
or thrombocytopenia, or metabolic abnormalities, the 
clinician should consider obtaining blood cultures for other 
likely  pathogens  and  specific  laboratory  tests  and  initiating  empiric  oral  antimicrobial
therapy that will 
effectively  treat  TBRD.  Certain  patients  with  TBRD  can  be  treated  on  an  outpatient
basis with oral medication, particularly if a 
reliable caregiver is available in the home and the patient is compliant with follow-up
medical care. When other diagnoses 
are  under  consideration,  empiric  treatment  for  these  conditions  can  be  incorporated
into the therapeutic plan. For 
example, for a patient's condition in which meningococcal disease cannot be ruled out, 
intramuscular  ceftriaxone  should  be  administered  in  addition  to  oral  doxycycline  to
provide activity against possible meningococcal infection, 
pending  culture  results.  Inpatient  observation  and  assessment  of  the  blood  cultures
after 24 hours of incubation should 
be considered for such patients. A critical step is for clinicians to keep in close contact
with patients who are treated in 
the outpatient setting to ensure that they are responding to therapy as 
expected.
 Appropriate antibiotic treatment should be initiated 
immediately when a clinician suspects that the diagnosis 
could  be  RMSF,  HME,  HGA,  or  E.  ewingii  infection,  based  on  clinical,  laboratory,  or
epidemiologic findings. Delay 
in treatment can lead to severe disease and fatal outcome for TBRD 
(2--4). Because each of the agents causing TBRD 
is susceptible to tetracycline-class antibiotics, these drugs, particularly doxycycline, are
considered the therapy of choice 
in  nearly  all  clinical  situations.  Fever  typically  subsides  within  24--48  hours  after
treatment when the patient 
receives  doxycycline  or  another  tetracycline  during  the  first  4--5  days  of  illness.  If  a
patient fails to respond to early 
treatment with a tetracycline antibiotic (i.e., within 48 hours), this response might be an
indication that their condition is not 
a TBRD. Severely ill patients might require longer periods before clinical 
improvement is noted, especially if they have multiple organ dysfunction.
 Doxycycline is the drug of choice for treatment of all TBRD in children and adults. This
drug is bacteriostatic in 
its activity against rickettsial organisms. The recommended dose is 100 mg per dose
administered twice daily (orally 
or intravenously) for adults or 2.2 mg/kg body weight per dose administered twice daily
(orally or intravenously) 
for children weighing <100 lbs. (45.4 kg). Intravenous 
therapy is frequently indicated for hospitalized patients, and 
oral therapy is acceptable for patients considered to be early in the disease and who
can be managed as outpatients. 
Oral  therapy  also  can  be  used  for  inpatients  who  are  not  vomiting  or  obtunded.  The
optimal duration of therapy has not 
been  established,  but  current  recommendations  for  RMSF  and  HME  are  for  treatment
for at least 3 days after the 
fever subsides and until evidence of clinical improvement is noted, which is typically for
a minimum total course of 5--7 
days. Severe or complicated disease might require longer treatment courses. 
Patients  with  HGA  should  be  treated  with  doxycycline  for  10--14  days  to  provide
appropriate length of therapy for possible incubating coinfection with 
Lyme disease (45).
 The  use  of  tetracyclines  to  treat  children  with  TBRD  is  no  longer  a  subject  of
controversy 
(56--58). Concerns regarding dental staining after tetracycline therapy have been based
primarily on studies conducted during the 
1960s that involved children receiving multiple courses of the drug for recurrent otitis
media 
(59,60).  The  propensity  of  tetracyclines  to  bind  calcium  can  lead  to  darkening  of  the
teeth if the antibiotic is ingested during the period of 
tooth  crown  formation.  More  recent  studies  in  1971  and  1998,  however,  have
demonstrated that although multiple 
exposures to tetracycline increase the risk for tooth staining, limited use of this drug in
children during the first 6--7 years of 
life has a negligible effect on the color of permanent incisors 
(56,57). Beyond ages 6--7 years, the risk for 
tetracycline  staining  is  of  minimal  consequence  because  visible  tooth  formation  is
complete. Moreover, a prospective study 
of children treated with doxycycline for RMSF demonstrated that these children did not
have substantial discoloration 
of permanent teeth compared with those who had never received the drug 
(56). Because TBRD can be life-threatening 
and  limited  courses  of  therapy  with  tetracycline-class  antibiotics  do  not  pose  a
substantial risk for tooth staining, 
the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  Committee  on  Infectious  Diseases  revised  its
recommendations in 1997 and 
has  identified  doxycycline  as  the  drug  of  choice  for  treating  presumed  or  confirmed
RMSF and ehrlichial 
infections in children of any age (61,62).
 Chloramphenicol is an alternative drug that has been used to treat RMSF 
(50);  however,  this  drug  is  associated  with  various  side  effects  and  might  require
monitoring of blood indices. Chloramphenicol is no longer available in the oral 
form  in  the  United  States.  Moreover,  epidemiologic  studies  in  which  CDC  case  report
data have been used suggested 
that patients with RMSF treated with 
chloramphenicol have a higher risk of dying than persons who received a 
tetracycline (11,63). In vitro evidence also indicates that chloramphenicol might not be
an effective antibiotic for HME or 
HGA  (64,65).  Clinicians  who  suspect  a  TBRD  and  are  considering  empiric  antibiotic
therapy before laboratory 
confirmation should be aware that doxycycline provides therapeutic coverage for RMSF,
HME, HGA, and 
E. ewingii infection.
 Tetracyclines are generally contraindicated for use in pregnant women because of risks
associated with malformation 
of teeth and bones in the fetus and hepatotoxicity and pancreatitis in the mother 
(66). However, tetracycline has been used successfully to treat HME in pregnant women
(67), and the use of tetracyclines might be warranted during 
pregnancy  in  life-threatening  situations  where  clinical  suspicion  of  TBRD  is  high.
Whereas chloramphenicol is typically 
the  preferred  treatment  for  RMSF  during  pregnancy,  care  must  be  used  when
administering chloramphenicol late 
during  the  third  trimester  of  pregnancy  because  of  risks  associated  with  grey  baby
syndrome 
(66). Substantially limited clinical data exist that support the use of other antimicrobials
during pregnancy, although rifampin has been used successfully 
in  several  pregnant  women  with  HGA  (68).  In  vitro  studies  have  demonstrated  that
rifamycins provide effective 
activity against Ehrlichia and Anaplasma 
species (64,65), and therapy with rifampin may be considered for patients with 
HGA who are unsuited for tetracycline treatment because of pregnancy or a history of
drug allergy 
(45).  Clinicians  should  use  caution,  however,  in  ensuring  that  RMSF  can  be  ruled  out
because the clinical presentations of RMSF and 
anaplasmosis  are  similar,  and  the  comparative  effectiveness  of  rifampin  and
doxycycline is unknown at this time.
 Because certain patients with TBRD might initially 
receive an alternative diagnosis, they might be empirically 
treated
 with
 antibiotics
 inactive
 against
 rickettsiae,
 including
 penicillins,
cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, erythromycin, 
or sulfonamides. This situation presents both diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. In
certain cases, 
patients treated with beta-lactam antibiotics or 
sulfa-containing drugs are mistakenly thought to have drug 
eruptions when they later manifest a rash 
(66),  further  postponing  a  correct  diagnosis  and  appropriate  treatment.  Because  the
physician might conclude 
that the prescribed treatment will take time to work, a delay in obtaining 
critical additional laboratory or clinical 
information  also  might  be  a  result.  In  addition,  sulfa-containing  antimicrobials  have
been associated with increased severity of 
TBRD, although whether disease severity is directly related to the use of 
sulfa-containing drugs or the delayed administration of 
more effective antimicrobials is not clear. Cases of severe ehrlichiosis complicated by
acute respiratory distress syndrome have been 
associated with the use of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(69,70).
 In  addition,  clinicians  should  note  the  overlap  between  early  symptoms  of  invasive
meningococcal infection 
and TBRD. These conditions are difficult to distinguish early in the course of illness. In
patients for whom both 
conditions  are  included  in  the  initial  differential  diagnoses,  after  performing  blood
cultures and a lumbar puncture, 
empirically  treating  for  both  diseases  is  appropriate.  This  treatment  can  be
accomplished by adding an appropriate 
parenteral penicillin or cephalosporin that has activity against 
N. meningitidis to doxycycline therapy.
 Preventive antibiotic therapy for rickettsial infection is not indicated for patients who
have had recent tick bites 
and are not ill. Limited numbers of ticks in areas where tickborne diseases are endemic
are infected with 
pathogenic rickettsiae. Approximately 1%--3% of vector ticks are 
infected with spotted fever group rickettsiae 
(71). However, less than 1% of these rickettsiae usually have been confirmed to be 
R. rickettsii (72,73). Approximately 
5%--15% of lone star ticks are infected with E. chaffeensis 
(47), and 10%--50% of I. 
scapularis ticks are reported to be infected 
with A. phagocytophilum (74,75) in endemic areas. Therefore, the risk for such infection
after a tick bite is low. Moreover, for 
RMSF, preventive therapy has been demonstrated to delay but not prevent the onset of
symptoms 
(76).
 The following is a summary of salient features of treatment and management:
 
Considerations for Management of Patients with Severe Manifestations 
of TBRD
 A substantial number of patients with TBRD require hospitalization 
(6,7,10). Severe manifestations of TBRD 
might  include  prolonged  fever,  renal  failure,  disseminated  intravascular  coagulopathy
(DIC), hemophagocytic 
syndrome, meningoencephalitis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
A notable exception is that HGA has not been 
associated with meningoencephalitis.
 RMSF is frequently a severe illness, and patients commonly require hospitalization. Up
to 20% of untreated cases 
and 5% of treated cases have fatal outcome, making RMSF the most commonly fatal
rickettsial disease in the United 
States (5,10). However, assessment of passive reporting of RMSF-associated death has
suggested that only one third of 
fatal cases of RMSF were reported to CDC during 1983--1998 
(77). Therefore, the actual case-fatality rate of RMSF 
might be closer to 5%--10%. Host factors associated with severe or fatal RMSF 
include  advanced  age,  male  gender,  black  race,  chronic  alcohol  abuse,  and
glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency 
(50). Deficiency of G6PD is a sex-linked genetic condition affecting approximately 12%
of the U.S. black male population; deficiency of this enzyme 
is associated with a high proportion of fulminant cases of RMSF 
(50,78). Fulminant cases follow a clinical course that 
is  fatal  within  5  days  of  onset.  Long-term  health  effects  persisting  for  >1  year  after
acute RMSF infection include 
partial  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities;  gangrene  requiring  amputation  of  fingers,
toes, arms, or legs; hearing loss; 
blindness; loss of bowel or bladder control; movement disorders; and speech disorders 
(79). These complications are observed most frequently in persons 
recovering  from  severe,  life-threatening  disease,  often  after  lengthy  hospitalizations.
Digital 
necrosis in a patient occurring late in the course of RMSF has been illustrated 
(Figure 18).
 Similarly, HME and HGA can cause serious or fatal disease as well, although at lower
rates than are observed 
for RMSF. At least 50% of patients with HGA and HME are hospitalized to rule out other
potentially 
life-threatening conditions and to manage the illness 
(34,47). Clinical indications for admission might include 
immunocompromised  state,  pain  management  (i.e.,  headache  and  myalgias),  mental
confusion, cough, infiltrate in chest radiograph, 
abnormal spinal fluid findings, or specific acute organ failure. Approximately 3% of HME
patients and less than 1% of 
HGA patients with symptoms severe enough to seek medical attention will die from the
infection 
(25,34,47). The severity of ehrlichiosis might be related, in part, to the immune status
of the patient. Persons with compromised immune 
systems  caused  by  immunosuppressive  therapies  (e.g.,  corticosteroids  or  cancer
chemotherapy), human 
immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  infection,  organ  transplantation,  or  splenectomy  appear
to develop more severe disease from 
E.  chaffeenis  infection,  and  case-fatality  rates  for  these  persons  are  characteristically
higher than 
case-fatality rates reported for the general population 
(30). Although the case fatality rate for HGA (0.5%--1.0%) is lower than that for HME, 
notable  complications,  including  respiratory  failure,  a  toxic-shock--like  syndrome,
rhabdomyolysis, pancreatitis, acute 
renal failure, and invasive infections caused by opportunistic viral or fungal agents can
occur, especially among patients 
who have co-morbid illnesses or who are actively immunosuppressed 
(45). In addition, advanced patient age and delay 
in diagnosis and the onset of specific antibiotic therapy are predictors of a more severe
course of HGA 
(53).
 Management of severely ill patients with TBRD should 
include careful assessment of fluid and electrolyte 
balance.  Vasopressors  and  rigorous  fluid  management  might  be  needed,  especially
when the illness is complicated by renal 
failure or hypotension. Patients might have pulmonary 
infiltrates because of vasculitis that are erroneously thought to be 
caused by cardiac failure or pneumonia. Seizures might require 
aggressive treatment, and arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation 
or  flutter)  will  frequently  respond  to  treatment  of  the  patient's  underlying  disease.
Consultation with an intensivist or 
an infectious disease subspecialist might be helpful in managing these complications.
 The following is a summary of salient features of severe manifestations:
 Rickettsial  infections  pose  difficult  diagnostic  challenges  to  both  clinicians  and
laboratorians. Rapid 
confirmatory  assays  are  not  commonly  available  to  guide  treatment  decisions  of
acutely ill patients. However, confirmatory assays 
provide the physician with vital information that retrospectively validates the accuracy
of the clinical diagnosis. 
Laboratory confirmation of infection is also vital to understanding the epidemiology and
public health impact of TBRD.
 Several laboratory methods are available to diagnose TBRD. However, they vary in the
time required to obtain 
results and in the type of information they provide the clinician. Therefore, treatment
decisions should be based 
on epidemiologic and clinical clues and should never be 
delayed while waiting for laboratory confirmation of a 
diagnosis.  Similarly,  test  results  should  be  interpreted  in  the  context  of  the  patient's
illness and the epidemiologic setting. 
Misuse of specialized tests for patients with a low probability of the disease and in areas
with a low prevalence of disease 
might  result  in  confusion.  A  fundamental  understanding  of  the  signs,  symptoms,  and
epidemiology of the disease is critical 
in  guiding  requests  for  tests  and  interpretation  of  test  results  for  ehrlichioses,
anaplasmosis, and RMSF. Studies 
have suggested that antibiotic therapy might diminish the development of convalescent
antibodies  in  RMSF  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2005).  However,  the  degree  to  which
doxycycline might cause this 
occurrence  is  uncertain.  If  molecular  or  culture  diagnostic  methods  are  conducted,
obtaining blood for testing before antibiotics are administered 
is essential to obtain the best results.
Blood-Smear Microscopy
 Microscopic  examination  of  blood  smears  stained  with  eosin-azure  type  dyes  (e.g.,
Wright-Giemsa stain) might 
reveal  morulae  in  the  cytoplasm  of  infected  circulating  leukocytes  (1%--  20%)  of
patients with HME and 20%--80% 
of patients with HGA (45,47) during the first week of 
infection, which is highly suggestive of ehrlichial or 
anaplasma infection. However, blood smear examination is 
insensitive and should be performed by an experienced 
microscopist. In addition, a negative blood smear examination should not dissuade the
caregiver from initiating treatment 
with doxycycline if the clinical presentation and routine laboratory findings support the
diagnosis of ehrlichiosis 
or anaplasmosis. Blood smear examination is not useful for diagnosis of RMSF.
Serologic Testing
 Serologic  assays  for  RMSF,  HME,  and  HGA  are  commonly  available  through  multiple
commercial and state 
public health laboratories. Serologic evaluations are commonly conducted by using the
indirect immunofluorescence 
antibody (IFA) assay. Antibodies in the serum bind to fixed antigens on a slide and are
detected by a fluorescein-labeled 
conjugate.  Although  IFA  remains  the  principle  diagnostic  tool  for  the  diagnosis  of
rickettsial and ehrlichial infections, no 
standardized antigens, conjugates, or agreement on what constitutes a positive result
among the various laboratories providing these 
tests  exist.  Individual  laboratories  should  be  consulted  regarding  their  test  threshold
levels. Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is becoming a more frequently used assay. Similar to IFA,
the accuracy of 
ELISA depends on the laboratory conducting the test, the quality and specificity of the
antigen, and the threshold levels at which a positive 
result is considered. Available ELISA tests are qualitative and cannot be used effectively
to monitor increases or 
decreases in antibody titer.
 The sensitivity of the IFA assay is substantially dependent on the timing of collection of
the sample. Early in 
any TBRD, a majority of serologic tests will be negative. Clinical illness nearly always
precedes laboratory diagnosis by 
any  method.  As  the  illness  progresses  to  7--10  days,  the  sensitivity  of  IFA  serology
increases. The IFA is estimated to 
be  94%--100%  sensitive  after  14  days,  and  that  sensitivity  is  increased  if  paired
samples are tested 
(80).  The  IFA  is  considered  to  be  the  gold  standard  of  serologic  testing  for  rickettsial
diseases, and other serologic tests have not 
been developed that surpass the sensitivity and specificity of these assays. Testing two
sequential serum or plasma 
samples  together  to  demonstrate  a  rising  IgG  or  IgM  antibody  level  is  essential  to
confirm acute infection. Paired 
serum specimens taken early (i.e., acute) and later (i.e., convalescent) in the disease
course represent the preferred specimens 
for evaluation. Typically, these specimens should be taken at least 2--3 weeks apart to
examine for a four-fold or 
greater increase in antibody titer 
(33).
The majority of patients demonstrate increased IgM or IgG titers by the second week of
the illness 
(patients  infected  with  certain  imported  rickettsiae  might  not  demonstrate  increased
titers until 4 weeks after illness onset). 
However, patients might lack diagnostic IgG and IgM antibody titers in the first 7 days
of illness, a period when the majority 
of patients initially seek medical care and laboratory testing is performed. The duration
of time that antibodies will 
persist  after  recovery  from  the  infection  is  variable.  In  certain  persons,  high  titers  of
antibodies against 
A. phagocytophilum have been observed for 3 years after the acute illness 
(81). For RMSF, IgG and IgM titers increase 
concurrently by the second week of illness, and IgM antibodies wane after 3--4 months,
whereas IgG titers persist for 7--8 months 
(82). The majority of commercial reference laboratories conduct testing for IgG and IgM
antibodies.
Cross-reactivity  of  antigens  results  in  antibody  responses  that  are  typically
group-specific, but not necessarily 
species-specific, after infections with these pathogens. For 
example, serologic tests that detect antibodies reactive with 
R. rickettsii might have resulted from previous infections with other spotted 
fever group rickettsial species. Similarly, 
antibodies reactive with E. chaffeensis or 
A. phagocytophilum occasionally react with the other ehrlichial species, which might 
impede epidemiologic distinction between the ehrlichial infections 
(83). Most patients with E. ewingii infections 
develop antibodies that react with E. chaffeensis 
antigens. Little cross-reactivity of 
Rickettsia with Ehrlichia or Anaplasma 
species exists. Certain serologically confirmed cases of infection thought to be RMSF,
HME, or HGA might represent 
infections  with  the  other  agent  or  with  another  antigenically  related  species.  The
predominance of 
non-R. rickettsii species in tick vectors collected in RMSF-endemic areas suggests that
related organisms of undetermined pathogenicity might play 
a  role  in  human  illness  (84).  This  occurrence  is  especially  true  for  persons  who  are
infected with rickettsial organisms 
from endemic areas outside of the United States.
Nucleic Acid Detection
Amplification  of  specific  DNA  by  PCR  provides  a  rapid  method  for  detecting  TBRD
infections. These tests 
are  available  from  CDC,  certain  state  health  laboratories,  and  a  limited  number  of
research and commercial 
laboratories (Box). Conventional PCR tests have no specified standard, and 
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity might vary 
among  individual  assays  (80).  Doxycyline  treatment,  in  particular,  can  also  decrease
the sensitivity of PCR 
(45). In studies of A. phagocytophilum 
infection, PCR was estimated as 60%--70% sensitive 
(53), and for diagnosis of infection with 
E. chaffeensis, PCR was estimated to be 52%--56% sensitive 
(25) to 87% sensitive (85). For RMSF, PCR is 
probably more useful for detecting the etiologic agent in a skin biopsy or autopsy tissue
specimen than it is in an acute 
blood sample because, typically, low numbers of rickettsiae circulate in the blood in the
absence of advanced disease 
or  fulminant  infection  (18).  PCR  testing  of  skin  biopsies  alone  does  not  offer  ideal
sensitivity, and a negative result 
does  not  exclude  the  diagnosis  because  of  focality  of  vessel  involvement.  Laboratory
confirmation of RMSF in the acute 
stage  is  improved  when  PCR  is  used  in  conjunction  with  IHC  staining.  PCR  of  whole
blood specimens is more useful 
for  confirming  HME,  HGA,  and  E.  ewingii  infection  because  of  the  tropism  of  these
pathogens for circulating 
WBC.  However,  no  optimal  time  frame  has  been  established  that  is  ideal  for  sample
collection to ensure the highest 
sensitivity for diagnosing ehrlichioses or anaplasmosis. New techniques (e.g., real-time
PCR) might offer the 
advantages  of  speed,  reproducibility,  quantitative  capability,  and  low  risk  for
contamination, compared with conventional PCR 
(86).
IHC Staining
Another  approach  to  diagnosing  TBRD  is  immunohistochemical  (IHC)  staining  of
antigens in 
formalin-fixed,  paraffin-embedded  biopsy  or  autopsy  tissues.  This  test  can  be
particularly useful to diagnose fatal TBRD in 
those  patients  for  whom  diagnostic  levels  of  antibodies  have  not  developed  before
death. For patients with a rash, IHC 
or immunofluorescence staining of a skin biopsy can be a critical diagnostic technique
for RMSF. Immunostaining of 
skin  biopsy  specimens  has  been  reported  to  be  100%  specific  and  70%  sensitive  in
diagnosing RMSF 
(35). This method has been used to diagnose fatal and nonfatal cases of RMSF 
(18,87--89). Because rickettsiae might be focally distributed 
in  tissue,  this  test  might  not  always  detect  the  agent.  Autopsy  tissues  also  are
appropriate for evaluation and 
include the liver, spleen, lung, heart, kidney, and brain. The IHC method is most useful
in documenting the presence of 
organisms in patients before initiation of antibiotic therapy or within the first 48 hours
after antibiotic therapy has been 
initiated.  IHC  techniques  also  are  available  for  diagnosing  cases  of  ehrlichioses  and
anaplasmosis from bone marrow biopsies 
and tissue obtained at autopsy of fatal cases, including the spleen, lymph nodes, liver,
and lung 
(90--92). Immunostaining for spotted fever group rickettsiae, 
E. chaffeensis, and A. 
phagocytophilum is offered by CDC and certain 
university-based hospitals and commercial laboratories in the United States (Box).
Culture
Because the agents that cause TBRD are obligate intracellular pathogens, they must be
isolated by using cell 
culture  techniques  that  are  typically  more  labor-intensive  and  time-consuming  than
serologic, molecular, or IHC 
assays.  Theoretically,  any  laboratory  capable  of  performing  routine  viral  isolations
might have the expertise to isolate 
these  pathogens.  However,  R.  rickettsii  is  classified  as  a  Biosafety  Level-3  (BSL-3)
agent, and attempts to isolate this agent 
should be made only in laboratories equipped to handle BSL-3 pathogens 
(93). Laboratories attempting culture of 
R. rickettsii bacteria need to comply completely with federal regulations 
(42 C.F.R. [2004]) regarding the registration and use 
of  select  agents  (93).  As  a  result,  culture  is  rarely  used  for  diagnosis,  and  other
methods (e.g., serology, PCR, 
or immunostaining) are used to confirm infection.
The following is a summary of salient features of diagnostic testing:
Blood  smear  microscopy  might  reveal  presence  of  morulae  in  infected  leukocytes,
which is highly suggestive of 
HGA or, less commonly, HME.
Blood smears are not useful to diagnose RMSF.
Examination  of  paired  serum  samples  obtained  2--3  weeks  apart  that  demonstrate  a
rise in antibody titer is the 
most appropriate approach to confirm TBRD.
Patients usually do not have diagnostic serum antibody titers during the first week of
illness; therefore, an 
inability to detect antibodies (IgG or IgM) in acute-phase 
serum does not exclude TBRD.
Immunohistochemistry of a biopsied skin lesion or 
autopsy tissues is useful for RMSF diagnosis in patients for whom 
diagnostic titers of antibodies have not yet 
developed.
Whole blood specimens might be useful for a PCR confirmation of HME, HGA, and 
E. ewingii infection; however, a negative result does not rule out the diagnosis.
Surveillance and Reporting
 The majority of patients demonstrate increased IgM or IgG titers by the second week of
the illness 
(patients  infected  with  certain  imported  rickettsiae  might  not  demonstrate  increased
titers until 4 weeks after illness onset). 
However, patients might lack diagnostic IgG and IgM antibody titers in the first 7 days
of illness, a period when the majority 
of patients initially seek medical care and laboratory testing is performed. The duration
of time that antibodies will 
persist  after  recovery  from  the  infection  is  variable.  In  certain  persons,  high  titers  of
antibodies against 
A. phagocytophilum have been observed for 3 years after the acute illness 
(81). For RMSF, IgG and IgM titers increase 
concurrently by the second week of illness, and IgM antibodies wane after 3--4 months,
whereas IgG titers persist for 7--8 months 
(82). The majority of commercial reference laboratories conduct testing for IgG and IgM
antibodies.
 Cross-reactivity  of  antigens  results  in  antibody  responses  that  are  typically
group-specific, but not necessarily 
species-specific, after infections with these pathogens. For 
example, serologic tests that detect antibodies reactive with 
R. rickettsii might have resulted from previous infections with other spotted 
fever group rickettsial species. Similarly, 
antibodies reactive with E. chaffeensis or 
A. phagocytophilum occasionally react with the other ehrlichial species, which might 
impede epidemiologic distinction between the ehrlichial infections 
(83). Most patients with E. ewingii infections 
develop antibodies that react with E. chaffeensis 
antigens. Little cross-reactivity of 
Rickettsia with Ehrlichia or Anaplasma 
species exists. Certain serologically confirmed cases of infection thought to be RMSF,
HME, or HGA might represent 
infections  with  the  other  agent  or  with  another  antigenically  related  species.  The
predominance of 
non-R. rickettsii species in tick vectors collected in RMSF-endemic areas suggests that
related organisms of undetermined pathogenicity might play 
a  role  in  human  illness  (84).  This  occurrence  is  especially  true  for  persons  who  are
infected with rickettsial organisms 
from endemic areas outside of the United States.
Nucleic Acid Detection
 Amplification  of  specific  DNA  by  PCR  provides  a  rapid  method  for  detecting  TBRD
infections. These tests 
are  available  from  CDC,  certain  state  health  laboratories,  and  a  limited  number  of
research and commercial 
laboratories (Box). Conventional PCR tests have no specified standard, and 
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity might vary 
among  individual  assays  (80).  Doxycyline  treatment,  in  particular,  can  also  decrease
the sensitivity of PCR 
(45). In studies of A. phagocytophilum 
infection, PCR was estimated as 60%--70% sensitive 
(53), and for diagnosis of infection with 
E. chaffeensis, PCR was estimated to be 52%--56% sensitive 
(25) to 87% sensitive (85). For RMSF, PCR is 
probably more useful for detecting the etiologic agent in a skin biopsy or autopsy tissue
specimen than it is in an acute 
blood sample because, typically, low numbers of rickettsiae circulate in the blood in the
absence of advanced disease 
or  fulminant  infection  (18).  PCR  testing  of  skin  biopsies  alone  does  not  offer  ideal
sensitivity, and a negative result 
does  not  exclude  the  diagnosis  because  of  focality  of  vessel  involvement.  Laboratory
confirmation of RMSF in the acute 
stage  is  improved  when  PCR  is  used  in  conjunction  with  IHC  staining.  PCR  of  whole
blood specimens is more useful 
for  confirming  HME,  HGA,  and  E.  ewingii  infection  because  of  the  tropism  of  these
pathogens for circulating 
WBC.  However,  no  optimal  time  frame  has  been  established  that  is  ideal  for  sample
collection to ensure the highest 
sensitivity for diagnosing ehrlichioses or anaplasmosis. New techniques (e.g., real-time
PCR) might offer the 
advantages  of  speed,  reproducibility,  quantitative  capability,  and  low  risk  for
contamination, compared with conventional PCR 
(86).
IHC Staining
 Another  approach  to  diagnosing  TBRD  is  immunohistochemical  (IHC)  staining  of
antigens in 
formalin-fixed,  paraffin-embedded  biopsy  or  autopsy  tissues.  This  test  can  be
particularly useful to diagnose fatal TBRD in 
those  patients  for  whom  diagnostic  levels  of  antibodies  have  not  developed  before
death. For patients with a rash, IHC 
or immunofluorescence staining of a skin biopsy can be a critical diagnostic technique
for RMSF. Immunostaining of 
skin  biopsy  specimens  has  been  reported  to  be  100%  specific  and  70%  sensitive  in
diagnosing RMSF 
(35). This method has been used to diagnose fatal and nonfatal cases of RMSF 
(18,87--89). Because rickettsiae might be focally distributed 
in  tissue,  this  test  might  not  always  detect  the  agent.  Autopsy  tissues  also  are
appropriate for evaluation and 
include the liver, spleen, lung, heart, kidney, and brain. The IHC method is most useful
in documenting the presence of 
organisms in patients before initiation of antibiotic therapy or within the first 48 hours
after antibiotic therapy has been 
initiated.  IHC  techniques  also  are  available  for  diagnosing  cases  of  ehrlichioses  and
anaplasmosis from bone marrow biopsies 
and tissue obtained at autopsy of fatal cases, including the spleen, lymph nodes, liver,
and lung 
(90--92). Immunostaining for spotted fever group rickettsiae, 
E. chaffeensis, and A. 
phagocytophilum is offered by CDC and certain 
university-based hospitals and commercial laboratories in the United States (Box).
Culture
 Because the agents that cause TBRD are obligate intracellular pathogens, they must
be isolated by using cell 
culture  techniques  that  are  typically  more  labor-intensive  and  time-consuming  than
serologic, molecular, or IHC 
assays.  Theoretically,  any  laboratory  capable  of  performing  routine  viral  isolations
might have the expertise to isolate 
these  pathogens.  However,  R.  rickettsii  is  classified  as  a  Biosafety  Level-3  (BSL-3)
agent, and attempts to isolate this agent 
should be made only in laboratories equipped to handle BSL-3 pathogens 
(93). Laboratories attempting culture of 
R. rickettsii bacteria need to comply completely with federal regulations 
(42 C.F.R. [2004]) regarding the registration and use 
of  select  agents  (93).  As  a  result,  culture  is  rarely  used  for  diagnosis,  and  other
methods (e.g., serology, PCR, 
or immunostaining) are used to confirm infection.
 The following is a summary of salient features of diagnostic testing:
 
Surveillance and Reporting
 National reporting requirements are determined collaboratively by the Council of State
and Territorial 
Epidemiologists  and  CDC.  RMSF,  anaplasmosis,  and  all  forms  of  ehrlichiosis  are
nationally notifiable diseases. RMSF 
became nationally notifiable in 1989 and anaplasmosis and ehrlichiosis, in 1998. When
health-care providers identify a potential case 
of TBRD, they should notify the local health department. The local health department,
in cooperation with the 
state health department, can assist the health-care provider in 
obtaining appropriate diagnostic testing to confirm 
the diagnosis. All confirmed or probable cases of RMSF, HME, HGA, and 
E. ewingii infection should be reported to 
the state health department. The case definitions for confirmed and probable cases of
RMSF, HME, and HGA have 
been  reported  (Table  4;  33,94).  Each  state  health  department  compiles  case  reports
and submits them to CDC, where 
data are compared and disseminated via the MMWR Weekly 
and annual Surveillance Summaries.
 Since 1981, CDC has collected and analyzed surveillance data on RMSF by using two
complementary systems. 
States  submit  reports  electronically  via  the  National  Electronic  Telecommunications
System for Surveillance (NETSS) as part 
of  the  National  Notifiable  Disease  Surveillance  System.  NETSS  reports  capture
diagnosis, date of onset, and 
basic demographic and geographic data related to the case. In addition, physicians are
encouraged to complete a 
standardized case report form (CRF; Appendix) and forward it to the state health 
department, where it is compiled with similar reports and forwarded to CDC. The CRF
summarizes demographic, epidemiologic, and outcome data that are 
not  reported  in  NETSS.  Data  collected  on  the  CRF  are  useful  in  summarizing  the
epidemiologic characteristics of 
disease and focusing on prevention and 
treatment. This process includes 
examining lesser understood aspects of these 
conditions  (e.g.,  the  role  of  immunosuppression  as  a  risk  factor  for  disease;  the
prevalence of severe outcomes of 
infection, including death; and hospitalization trends). In 2001, the form was expanded
to include reporting of other 
common TBRD, including HGA and HME, in addition to RMSF.
A surveillance system is critical for studying the changing epidemiology of TBRD and for
developing effective 
prevention strategies and public health education programs. The 
detection of a cluster of RMSF cases in a region of Arizona where 
the disease was not known to occur and subsequent prevention and control initiatives
underscore the vital role of 
surveillance  and  reporting  in  protecting  the  public's  health.  By  the  end  of  2004,  the
highest number of RMSF cases was 
reported to CDC (n = 1,514), suggesting potential increased 
activity. However, underreporting of TBRD is probably 
common.
The following is a summary of salient features of surveillance and reporting:
RMSF, HME, HGA, and other ehrlichioses are reportable diseases in the United States.
Physicians  who  identify  a  potential  case  of  TBRD  should  notify  the  local  health
department, which can assist 
with obtaining diagnostic testing to confirm the diagnosis.
Surveillance and reporting of TBRD are key components of public health education and
disease prevention efforts.
Prevention
 A surveillance system is critical for studying the changing epidemiology of TBRD and
for developing effective 
prevention strategies and public health education programs. The 
detection of a cluster of RMSF cases in a region of Arizona where 
the disease was not known to occur and subsequent prevention and control initiatives
underscore the vital role of 
surveillance  and  reporting  in  protecting  the  public's  health.  By  the  end  of  2004,  the
highest number of RMSF cases was 
reported to CDC (n = 1,514), suggesting potential increased 
activity. However, underreporting of TBRD is probably 
common.
 The following is a summary of salient features of surveillance and reporting:
 
Prevention
 No  licensed  vaccines  for  TBRD  exist.  Avoiding  tick  bites  and  promptly  removing
attached ticks remain the best 
disease  prevention  strategies.  Persons  should  limit  their  exposure  to  tick-infested
habitats, including wooded or grassy 
areas. Persons should walk on cleared trails and avoid brushing against tall grass and
other vegetation. This practice 
is  particularly  essential  during  periods  of  peak  tick  activity  (i.e.,  late  spring  and
summer) but should be 
observed,  regardless  of  the  season.  Protective  clothing,  including  a  hat,  long-sleeved
shirts, pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes 
are  helpful  in  preventing  ticks  from  reaching  the  skin  and  attaching.  Wearing
light-colored clothing is 
preferred because crawling ticks can be seen easily.
 Various over-the-counter products containing DEET 
(N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide) are available for application 
on exposed skin and clothing to repel ticks. The higher the concentration of DEET, the
longer the duration of 
protection per application. Products with DEET concentrations as low as 10% and those
containing 25%--35% concentrations 
are  considered  optimal.  No  evidence  exists  that  concentrations  >50%  are  more
efficacious or provide longer duration 
of protection (95). The American Academy of 
Pediatrics has recommended that DEET concentrations no greater than 
20%--30%  should  be  used  for  children  (96).  Products  containing  permethrin  (e.g.,
permanone) can be used to treat 
outer clothing (e.g., shirts and pants) and should not be applied to skin. Permethrin is
available commercially as a 
spray-on preparation. It should be applied evenly to outer clothing, according to label
directions in a 
well-ventilated area. Clothing should be allowed to completely dry before being worn.
Pre-treated clothing is available and remains effective for 
multiple launderings. The use of DEET and permethrin should be considered by persons
who enter heavily infested tick 
habitats  where  the  risk  for  being  bitten  is  high  and  the  potential  for  TBRD  infection
exists.
 Adults entering wooded or grassy areas should inspect themselves and their children
frequently for ticks. 
Because several hours might elapse before ticks attach and inject pathogens, frequent
checks increase the likelihood of 
finding ticks before they transmit an infectious agent. The 
duration of tick attachment necessary to transmit 
rickettsial organisms is substantially variable and has been reported to be as little as
2--10 hours 
(97) to 10--20 hours (98) for R. 
rickettsii. Limited data exist regarding the interval of transmission after tick attachment
for 
A. phagocytophilum, but animal studies indicate that 24--48 hours might elapse before
pathogen transmission 
(99,100). No comparable data exists for E. 
chaffeensis.  Sites  where  ticks  commonly  attach  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  the
scalp, waist, 
armpits, groin, and under socks and the beltline. Pets should also be checked for ticks
because they can carry ticks back to 
their  homes  and  human  companions.  Regular  application  of  ectoparasite  control  on
pets helps to reduce the risk for 
human exposure to ticks.
 If  an  attached  tick  is  found,  it  should  be  removed  by  grasping  with  tweezers  or
fine-tipped forceps close to the 
skin  and  gently  pulling  with  constant  pressure.  Folk  remedies,  including  gasoline,
kerosene, petroleum jelly, fingernail 
polish, or lit matches should never be used to extract ticks 
(101). Removing the tick with bare hands should be avoided 
because fluids containing infectious organisms might be present in the tick's body and
at the wound site. Ticks that have 
been  removed  should  not  be  crushed  between  the  fingers  to  prevent  contamination,
and hands should be washed to 
avoid potential conjunctival inoculation. The bite wound should then be disinfected.
 The following is a summary of salient features of prevention:
 
TBRD Cases
 The following TBRD cases were observed in health-care settings. Information from the
cases can be used to reinforce 
medical management information related to TBRD 
(3,22,102) and are intended to illustrate certain common pitfalls in the 
diagnosis  and  treatment  of  TBRD.  The  case  reports  include  a  description  of  the  case
and salient features that can be considered 
when dealing with a potential case of TBRD.
Case 1
 In June 2001, a girl aged 5 years was taken to an ED in Missouri with a 3-day history of
intermittent fever, 
headache, mild nausea, and a sore throat. On physical examination, the patient had a
fever of 
105F (40.6C) and a 
maculopapular rash on her legs, including the soles of her feet.
 Possible causes of fever and rash in this child 
include meningococcemia, RMSF, HME, enteroviral 
infections, Kawasaki disease, drug reactions, and streptococcal disease with exanthem.
 Case  1  synopsis.  This  patient's  clinical  history  suggested  exposure  to  ticks,
although no definitive indication of a 
tick bite was reported. Ticks are small (particularly in their nymphal and larval stages),
and bites frequently go 
unnoticed because ticks might attach in places that are difficult to observe (e.g., the
scalp, axillae, and inguinal regions). Up 
to 40% of patients with RMSF report no history of a tick bite 
(10,11). Therefore, the clinician should not be 
dissuaded from making a diagnosis of RMSF when no report 
of a tick bite is made. The clinical signs and laboratory values and 
a  history  that  are  compatible  with  tick  exposure  should  guide  the  diagnosis  and
therapeutic 
actions. Serum samples collected on days 7 and 35 of illness demonstrated rising IgG
antibody titers to 
R. rickettsii at 32 and 2,048, respectively.
Case 2
 In mid-August 2003, a male child aged 14 months was taken to a community health
clinic in Arizona after 1 day of 
fever 103.7F 
(39.8C). On physical examination, the child had a maculopapular rash that involved his
palms and soles. 
On  auscultation,  abnormal  breath  sounds  were  detected  in  the  right  lower  lung.  The
parent stated that they had not 
traveled out of the local area recently. No one else in the family was ill, and the child
was up-to-date on vaccinations. 
Chest  radiographic  evaluation  revealed  a  possible  right  lower  lobe  infiltrate.  On  the
basis of clinical and radiographic 
findings, pneumonia and roseola infantum were diagnosed. The child was administered
an intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone 
and sent home with a prescription for oral amoxicillin/clavulanate.
 The next day, the child was taken back to the clinic with vomiting and rash that was
petechial. His fever was 
105.7F  (41C).  He  was  admitted  to  the  hospital,  and  antibiotic  treatment  for
pneumonia was continued. On day 3 
of  hospitalization,  the  child  developed  DIC.  Remarkable  laboratory  findings  included:
WBC count, 16.2 x 
109 cells/L (normal: 4.5--11.0 x 
109 cells/L); platelet count, 46 x 
109 platelets/L (normal: 150--350 x 
109  cells/L);  aspartate  aminotransferase  (AST),  291  U/L  (normal:  10--40  U/L);  and
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 99 U/L (normal: 
10--55  U/L).  The  child's  condition  worsened,  and  7  days  after  the  onset  of  illness,  he
died of pulmonary hemorrhage.
 Case  2  synopsis.  A  serum  sample  collected  5  days  before  the  child's  death  tested
negative by IFA for IgM and 
IgG antibodies reactive with R. 
rickettsii. However, R. 
rickettsii DNA was detected in serum by PCR assay. RMSF can have 
a rapid course; 50% of RMSF deaths occur within 9 days 
of illness onset (10,11). IgM and IgG antibodies are 
typically not detectable before the second week of illness; therefore, serology will be
not useful in diagnosing the infection in 
its  earliest  stages.  Fever  and  rash  in  a  young  child  can  be  caused  by  various
enteroviruses, human herpesvirus 
6, N. meningitidis, measles virus, R. 
rickettsii, and E. chaffeensis, among other agents. Common causes of 
bacterial pneumonia in a child this age might include 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus 
pyogenes, and, less commonly, M. pneumoniae. 
Although this child lived in an area where RMSF is not common (e.g., Arizona), 
the  diagnosis  should  not  be  excluded  because  of  geography.  Although  RMSF  is  more
common in the south central 
and south Atlantic states, it should be considered endemic throughout the contiguous
United States 
(10).  TBRD  are  seldom  treated  with  the  appropriate  antibiotic,  unless  they  are
suspected. In this context, the majority of broad 
spectrum
 antimicrobials,
 including
 penicillins,
 cephalosporins,
 aminoglycosides,
erythromycin, and sulfa-containing drugs are 
not effective against rickettsiae, ehrlichiae, or anaplasmae.
Case 3
 In early June 1996, a man aged 52 years who was 
HIV-seropositive sought medical care at a hospital in Florida. He had a 
4-day history of fever, headache, myalgias, nausea, and vomiting. The patient had been
previously healthy, with no known 
previous opportunistic infections. An absolute CD4+ lymphocyte count of 164 
cells/l was documented 2 months before this 
visit. 
Physical examination revealed an acutely ill man; the patient had a fever of 
103.5F (39.7C) and experienced dizziness and 
low blood pressure when he stood up (orthostatic 
hypotension). He reported that 2 weeks before admission, he had been bitten by 
a tick while hiking in central Georgia.
A CBC and chemistry panel and, because of the history of a tick bite, serologic tests for 
E. chaffeensis were ordered. Remarkable laboratory findings included hemoglobin 11.5
g/dL (normal: 13--18 g/dL); WBC count, 
2.0 x 109 cells/L (normal: 4.5--11.0 x 
109 cells/L), with 66% neutrophils (normal: 45%--75%), 18% bands (normal: 0%--5%), 
8%  lymphocytes  (normal:  16%--46%),  and  8%  monocytes  (normal:  4%--11%);  and
platelet count, 16 x 
109 cells/L (normal: 150--350 x 
109 cells/L). Peripheral blood smears revealed ehrlichial morulae in 2.5% of all 
leukocytes, including monocytes, lymphocytes, atypical 
lymphocytes, neutrophils, and metamyelocytes. ALT was 
73 U/L (normal: 10--55 U/L), and AST was 358 U/L (normal: 
10--40 U/L).
On  the  basis  of  laboratory  and  clinical  findings,  a  diagnosis  of  HME  was  made,  and
intravenous doxycycline (100 
mg  every  12  hours)  was  initiated.  Despite  doxycycline  therapy,  the  patient  remained
febrile, severely thrombocytopenic, 
and  continued  to  have  elevated  liver  enzymes.  He  developed  right  lower  lobe
pneumonia and renal failure and died 6 
days after hospitalization.
Case 3 synopsis. Patient sera obtained on days 1 and 5 of hospitalization were negative
for IgG and IgM 
antibodies reactive with E. chaffeensis. However, the correct diagnosis was revealed on
admission by a finding of morulae in 
leukocytes, and this diagnosis was subsequently confirmed when 
E. chaffeensis DNA was detected by using PCR in whole 
blood specimens from the patient, and the agent was isolated in cell culture. HME can
be a severe disease, particularly 
in  immunosuppressed  persons.  HME  does  not  commonly  cause  rash  in  adults;
therefore, history of tick 
exposure  and  characteristic  leukopenia  and  thrombocytopenia  were  most  useful  in
arriving at a diagnosis. Although morulae 
were observed in the patient's peripheral blood, microscopy is 
generally insensitive, and morulae are reported to be 
observed in only 1%--20% of patients with HME 
(45,47). Therefore, a diagnosis of HME would need to be confirmed by PCR, serology, 
or immunostaining, or culture isolation.
Case 4
In mid-May 1999, a female aged 69 years went to her physician in upstate New York.
She had a 3-day history 
of nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and fever. She said that her dog had died 2 days earlier
after a brief illness characterized 
by  signs  similar  to  her  own.  Physical  examination  revealed  no  abnormalities.  Her
temperature was 
100.4F (38C).
What should be included in the differential diagnosis?
Possible diagnoses that should be considered include viral syndrome, foodborne illness,
and urinary tract 
infection.
What additional information would assist with the diagnosis?
Patient  should  be  queried  regarding  other  signs  and  symptoms,  recent  activities  and
travel, exposure to other 
ill persons, foods consumed, and contact with ticks. The patient had no other symptoms
to report and 
reported no unusual activities or recent travel.
What diagnostic tests, if any, are needed?
Because  the  patient's  symptoms  were  nonspecific,  a  CBC  should  be  ordered.  Results
will not be 
available until the next day.
On the basis of the signs present when the patient first went to her physician, she
was diagnosed 
with gastroenteritis and instructed to return within 24--48 hours, if her symptoms did
not improve. The patient 
would be contacted regarding her laboratory test 
results. The next day, the patient returned with continued 
fever and changes in mental status. Her temperature remained at 
100.4F (38C), but she was notably confused 
and lethargic. Her physical examination was unremarkable 
and did not reveal the presence of a rash.
Laboratory tests obtained on the previous day revealed 
a WBC count of 3.8 x 109 cells/L (normal: 4.5--11.0 x 
109 cells/L); a platelet count of 99 x 
109 cells/L (normal: 150--350 x 
109 cells/L); and a hemoglobin concentration of 
12.7 g/dL (normal: 12--16 g/dL). 
How does this information assist with the diagnosis?
On  the  basis  of  the  patient's  thrombocytopenia,  leukopenia,  and  worsening  clinical
condition, encephalitis 
and sepsis should be included in the differential diagnosis.
What actions, including treatment, should be taken?
On the basis of presenting signs and laboratory tests, the patient was hospitalized
and intravenous 
levofloxacin therapy was initiated for fever of unknown cause. Blood, urine, and stool
cultures were ordered as well as 
serologic assays for B. burgdorferi, E. 
chaffeensis, and A. phagocytophilum, and PCR for E. chaffeensis and 
A. 
phagocytophilum.
The  patient's  temperature  returned  to  normal  within  48  hours,  her  nausea  and
vomiting resolved, and her 
blood counts returned to normal. She was discharged after 
3 days. Blood, urine, and stool cultures revealed no 
specific pathogens, and serologic assays were negative for 
antibodies reactive with B. burgdorferi, 
E. chaffeensis, and A. 
phagocytophilum.
Case  4  synopsis.  IHC  staining  of  tissues  from  the  patient's  dog,  submitted  by  the
veterinarian to CDC, 
demonstrated abundant spotted fever group rickettsial 
antigens, and rickettsiae were identified within and around blood vessels 
in  multiple  tissues,  including  brain  and  testes.  The  cause  of  the  dog's  illness  was
identified as RMSF. This information 
was communicated to the patient's physician. When the physician contacted the 
patient, she reported that her fatigue and headache had persisted after discharge from
the hospital. The patient was treated with oral doxycycline, and all 
symptoms  resolved  within  1  week.  Subsequent  testing  of  the  patient's  sera  for  early
and late convalescent-phase antibody 
titer confirmed a diagnosis of RMSF. Titers of IgM and IgG antibodies were 1,024 and
512, respectively, on day 17 
and declined to 256 and 256, respectively, on day 89 after illness onset. The 
patient did not recall a tick bite and had not seen 
or removed ticks from her dog, although her dog roamed freely in wooded areas before
its illness. Dogs can serve as sentinels 
for RMSF in human populations, and infections in canines 
have been associated with increased risk for infection in their 
owners (22).
Case 5 
In May 2001, a man aged 38 years sought medical 
attention in Tennessee with complaints of headache, fever, 
sore  throat,  and  vomiting.  He  was  treated  3  days  previously  by  his  primary  care
physician who diagnosed pneumonia 
and prescribed azithromycin and levofloxacin, but his fevers persisted. He was taken to
the ED by his wife, and she said 
that he had new onset of confusion. He had no pets or animal exposures. He worked as
a construction manager and 
was frequently outdoors in wooded areas but did not recall a tick bite. 
What should be included in the differential diagnosis?
The initial signs and symptoms were nonspecific, but the patient's confused state raised
concern for 
possible involvement of the CNS. During the summer months, the differential diagnosis
included viral 
meningitis (particularly enteroviral), arboviral meningoencephalitis (West Nile virus and
others), TTP, and TBRD. 
Bacterial meningitis and herpes simplex virus (HSV) encephalitis do not have confined
seasonality 
but  also  could  cause  this  presentation.  Sepsis  and  other  multisystem  illnesses  are
associated with 
encephalopathy, however, so the differential diagnosis 
remained broad. 
The patient had an oral temperature of 
103.4F (39.7C); blood pressure, 100/60 mmHg; and heart rate, 
120 beats/minute. The skin examination revealed diffuse erythema with a several scabs
on the lower legs. Examination of 
the  abdomen  revealed  moderate  epigastric  tenderness  with  deep  palpation  but  no
rebound tenderness or 
organomegaly. Neurologic examination was nonfocal, 
except for altered mentation (i.e., Glasgow coma score: 13). 
Laboratory testing revealed the following: WBC, 
11.9 x 109 cells/L (normal: 4.5--11.0 x 
109  cells/L);  84%  segmented  neutrophils  (normal:  45%--75%);  8%  band  neutrophils
(normal: 0%--5%); 3% lymphocytes 
(normal: 16%--46%); 5% monocytes (normal: 4%--11%); 
platelets, 50 x 109 cells/L (normal: 150--350 x 
109 cells/L); total bilirubin, 3.5 mg/dL (normal: 0--1.0 mg/dL); AST, 439 
U/L (normal: 10--40 U/L); ALT, 471 U/L (normal: 
10--55 U/L); and alkaline phosphatase, 236 U/L (normal: 45--115 
U/L). Lumbar puncture revealed a WBC of 0, RBC of 1 
with normal glucose of 55 mg/dL and normal protein of 20 
mg/dL. Creatinine was elevated at 3.9 mg/dL (normal: 
0.6--1.5 mg/dL). Computed tomography scan of the head 
did not demonstrate an acute abnormality.
How does the physical examination and laboratory information change the differential
diagnosis?
Because of the normal lumbar puncture, meningitis (i.e., viral or bacterial) was a less
likely diagnosis. 
However, examination of the CSF might be unremarkable in patients with encephalitis.
The presence of thrombocytopenia 
and  elevated  transaminases  was  suggestive  of  TBRD.  Additional  considerations
included acute cholecystitis, sepsis 
(possibly associated with DIC), toxic-shock syndrome (rash with multiple organ failure),
and TTP (i.e., acute renal failure 
with fever, altered mental status, and thrombocytopenia).
What additional tests should be performed?
Appropriate  diagnostic  studies  should  include  blood  culture,  serologic  testing  for
RMSF and HME (and PCR 
for these if available), prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time, examination
of the peripheral blood 
smear (with particular attention for 
schistocytes or intracellular morulae), and ultrasound of the gallbladder to evaluate 
for inflammation.
The coagulation studies were within normal limits, and no schistocytes or morulae
were observed on 
smear.  Abdominal  ultrasound  revealed  a  normal  gallbladder  but  mild  splenomegaly.
Therapy was initiated with 
ceftriaxone and vancomycin. Approximately 6 hours later, the 
patient developed seizures, and acyclovir and doxycycline 
were added to the course of medicine to effectively treat 
herpesvirus infection and TBRD. A magnetic resonance 
imaging scan of the brain was normal, and electroencephalography 
revealed nonspecific slowing. Antibodies to R. 
rickettsii and E. chaffeensis were not detected 
in acute sera. HSV PCR on CSF was negative. Blood cultures did not grow 
bacteria. The patient defervesced, and mental status normalized over the next 3 days.
Case  5  synopsis.  Serum  obtained  31  days  after  the  initial  signs  and  symptoms
contained no antibodies 
to R. rickettsii but had an IgG titer of 256 to 
E. chaffeensis, retrospectively confirming the diagnosis of HME. 
Whereas  headache  is  a  nearly  universal  complaint  among  patients  with  HME,  altered
sensorium might be observed in up to 
20%  of  cases  (6).  Other  CNS  manifestations  include  seizures,  meningismus,  cranial
nerve palsies, focal weakness, and coma. 
A lymphocytic pleocytosis can be observed in the CSF in approximately 50% of patients
with HME who undergo 
lumbar puncture (103). Neutrophilic pleocytosis can be observed early in the course of
the illness. Neuroimaging studies 
are usually normal or nonspecific. TBRD should be included in the differential 
diagnosis of patients presenting with clinical evidence of CNS infection or CSF findings
suggestive of aseptic meningitis.
Case 6 
In July 1994, a man aged 44 years went to see his physician in central Minnesota. He
complained of a 
1-week history of fever, chills, generalized myalgias, and right temporomandibular joint
pain. When he became ill, he 
treated  himself  empirically  with  ampicillin,  which  was  available  at  home,  for  2  days.
Because the patient experienced no 
clinical  improvement,  he  sought  medical  care.  The  patient  worked  outdoors  and  was
frequently in wooded areas. Fourteen 
days before he went to his physician, he removed two deer ticks that had been 
attached to his skin for an unknown period.
Physical examination findings. The patient had a low-grade fever of 
100.6F (38.1C). Examination of heart, 
lungs, and abdomen were normal. No lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or skin
rash were noted. 
Cardiovascular,  pulmonary,  gastrointestinal,  or  neurological  symptoms  were  not
present. Overall, physical examination 
was unremarkable, except for fever.
Laboratory  findings.  No  laboratory  evaluations  were  performed  during  the  visit.  A
presumptive diagnosis of 
acute  Lyme  disease  was  made,  and  empirical  treatment  with  amoxicillin  and
probenecid was initiated; a 1-week follow-up 
visit was scheduled. Five days after the outpatient visit, the patient died suddenly at
home. He had complained of 
shortness of breath the day before his death.
Case  6  synopsis.  Histopathologic  examination  of  the  patient's  heart  revealed
widespread transmural myocarditis 
with  neutrophilic  and  lymphocytic  infiltrates.  Postmortem  serum  specimens  were
evaluated initially for presumptive 
carditis as a result of B. burgdorferi infection. Serum titers of IgG and IgM antibodies to 
B.  burgdorferi  were  not  detected  by  ELISA  and  western  blotting.  PCR  assays  of
serum and whole blood 
for B. burgdorferi also were negative. 
However, antibody titers to A. phagocytophilum 
(formerly known as E. equi) were significantly elevated at titer >256 by 
IFA  methods.  Detection  of  DNA  extracted  by  PCR  from  whole  blood  and  positive  IHC
staining of cardiac tissue confirmed 
a diagnosis of anaplasmosis. Although infection with 
A. phagocytophilum was demonstrated in this case, the pathogenesis 
of the associated carditis was less clear 
(104).
The diagnosis of HGA can be difficult because of the nonspecific nature of the febrile
illness frequently observed 
when the patient first seeks medical care. In regions where both Lyme disease and HGA
are known to occur, 
distinguishing  between  the  diseases  in  the  early  stages  of  illness  might  be  difficult.
Because treatment should be initiated before 
a  definitive  diagnosis  is  made,  selection  of  an  antimicrobial  effective  against  both
rickettsial organisms and 
B. burgdorferi (e.g., doxycycline) is recommended. This case also underscores the
importance of close follow-up of 
patients treated for TBRD on an outpatient basis. Because these diseases can rapidly
progress, clinicians should 
emphasize to patients the need to return for reevaluation if substantial improvement is
not observed within 24--48 hours of initiation 
of treatment.
Conclusion
TBRD  continue  to  cause  severe  illness  and  death  in  otherwise  healthy  adults  and
children, despite the availability 
of low cost, effective antimicrobial therapy. The greatest challenge to clinicians is the
difficult diagnostic dilemma posed 
by  these  infections  early  in  their  clinical  course  when  antibiotic  therapy  is  most
effective.
Early clinical presentations of HME, HGA, RMSF, and 
E. ewingii infection include fever, headache, myalgia, and 
malaise and are difficult to distinguish from other infectious and noninfectious diseases.
Rash is observed frequently in 
RMSF, occasionally in HME, and rarely in HGA. TBRD tend to occur seasonally, with the
majority of cases occurring during 
the warmer spring and summer months. However, cases might develop year-round. A
detailed history of recent recreational 
or  occupational  activities  might  reveal  potential  exposure  to  ticks,  although  the
absence of a history of a 
recent tick bite should not dissuade clinicians from considering a diagnosis of TBRD.
TBRD can be life-threatening. Severe manifestations of TBRD include prolonged fever,
renal failure, 
myocarditis,  meningoencephalitis,  hypotension,  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome,
and multiple organ failure. Patients usually do 
not have diagnostic serum antibody levels during the first week of illness; therefore, an
inability to detect antibodies (IgG or 
IgM)  in  acute-phase  serum  does  not  exclude  TBRD.  Health-care  providers  should  not
delay treatment while waiting for a 
diagnosis;  rather,  they  should  empirically  provide  treatment  if  they  suspect  TBRD.
Doxycycline is the drug of choice for the treatment 
of presumptive or confirmed TBRD in both adults and children.
Examination of paired serum samples obtained during 
acute illness and 2--3 weeks later that demonstrate a rise 
in  antibody  titer  is  the  most  appropriate  approach  to  confirm  TBRD.  Physicians  who
identify a potential case of 
TBRD  should  notify  the  local  health  department,  which  can  assist  with  obtaining
diagnostic testing to confirm the diagnosis.
No  licensed  vaccines  for  TBRD  are  available.  Avoiding  tick  bites  and  promptly
removing attached ticks remain 
the best disease prevention strategies.
Acknowledgments 
The  preparers  acknowledge  Jim  Gathany,  CDC,  for  the  tick  photographs  and  Karoyle
Colbert, CDC, for creating the tick distribution map.
* Mountain: Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Nevada.
East South Central: Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi. 
East  North  Central:  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Michigan,  Wisconsin.  West  South  Central:
Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas. West North Central: 
Minnesota,  Iowa,  Missouri,  North  Dakota,  South  Dakota,  Nebraska,  Kansas.  Pacific:
Washington, Oregon, California. New England: Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
Rhode Island, New Hampshire. South Atlantic: Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, District of
Columbia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, 
Florida. Mid-Atlantic: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania.
References  Physical  examination  revealed  an  acutely  ill  man;  the  patient  had  a
fever of 
103.5F (39.7C) and experienced dizziness and 
low blood pressure when he stood up (orthostatic 
hypotension). He reported that 2 weeks before admission, he had been bitten by 
a tick while hiking in central Georgia.
 A CBC and chemistry panel and, because of the history of a tick bite, serologic tests for
E. chaffeensis were ordered. Remarkable laboratory findings included hemoglobin 11.5
g/dL (normal: 13--18 g/dL); WBC count, 
2.0 x 109 cells/L (normal: 4.5--11.0 x 
109 cells/L), with 66% neutrophils (normal: 45%--75%), 18% bands (normal: 0%--5%), 
8%  lymphocytes  (normal:  16%--46%),  and  8%  monocytes  (normal:  4%--11%);  and
platelet count, 16 x 
109 cells/L (normal: 150--350 x 
109 cells/L). Peripheral blood smears revealed ehrlichial morulae in 2.5% of all 
leukocytes, including monocytes, lymphocytes, atypical 
lymphocytes, neutrophils, and metamyelocytes. ALT was 
73 U/L (normal: 10--55 U/L), and AST was 358 U/L (normal: 
10--40 U/L).
 On  the  basis  of  laboratory  and  clinical  findings,  a  diagnosis  of  HME  was  made,  and
intravenous doxycycline (100 
mg  every  12  hours)  was  initiated.  Despite  doxycycline  therapy,  the  patient  remained
febrile, severely thrombocytopenic, 
and  continued  to  have  elevated  liver  enzymes.  He  developed  right  lower  lobe
pneumonia and renal failure and died 6 
days after hospitalization.
 Case  3  synopsis.  Patient  sera  obtained  on  days  1  and  5  of  hospitalization  were
negative for IgG and IgM 
antibodies reactive with E. chaffeensis. However, the correct diagnosis was revealed on
admission by a finding of morulae in 
leukocytes, and this diagnosis was subsequently confirmed when 
E. chaffeensis DNA was detected by using PCR in whole 
blood specimens from the patient, and the agent was isolated in cell culture. HME can
be a severe disease, particularly 
in  immunosuppressed  persons.  HME  does  not  commonly  cause  rash  in  adults;
therefore, history of tick 
exposure  and  characteristic  leukopenia  and  thrombocytopenia  were  most  useful  in
arriving at a diagnosis. Although morulae 
were observed in the patient's peripheral blood, microscopy is 
generally insensitive, and morulae are reported to be 
observed in only 1%--20% of patients with HME 
(45,47). Therefore, a diagnosis of HME would need to be confirmed by PCR, serology, 
or immunostaining, or culture isolation.
Case 4
 In mid-May 1999, a female aged 69 years went to her physician in upstate New York.
She had a 3-day history 
of nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and fever. She said that her dog had died 2 days earlier
after a brief illness characterized 
by  signs  similar  to  her  own.  Physical  examination  revealed  no  abnormalities.  Her
temperature was 
100.4F (38C).
 Laboratory tests obtained on the previous day revealed 
a WBC count of 3.8 x 109 cells/L (normal: 4.5--11.0 x 
109 cells/L); a platelet count of 99 x 
109 cells/L (normal: 150--350 x 
109 cells/L); and a hemoglobin concentration of 
12.7  g/dL  (normal:  12--16  g/dL).   Case  4  synopsis.  IHC  staining  of  tissues  from  the
patient's dog, submitted by the veterinarian to CDC, 
demonstrated abundant spotted fever group rickettsial 
antigens, and rickettsiae were identified within and around blood vessels 
in  multiple  tissues,  including  brain  and  testes.  The  cause  of  the  dog's  illness  was
identified as RMSF. This information 
was communicated to the patient's physician. When the physician contacted the 
patient, she reported that her fatigue and headache had persisted after discharge from
the hospital. The patient was treated with oral doxycycline, and all 
symptoms  resolved  within  1  week.  Subsequent  testing  of  the  patient's  sera  for  early
and late convalescent-phase antibody 
titer confirmed a diagnosis of RMSF. Titers of IgM and IgG antibodies were 1,024 and
512, respectively, on day 17 
and declined to 256 and 256, respectively, on day 89 after illness onset. The 
patient did not recall a tick bite and had not seen 
or removed ticks from her dog, although her dog roamed freely in wooded areas before
its illness. Dogs can serve as sentinels 
for RMSF in human populations, and infections in canines 
have been associated with increased risk for infection in their 
owners (22).
Case 5  In May 2001, a man aged 38 years sought medical 
attention in Tennessee with complaints of headache, fever, 
sore  throat,  and  vomiting.  He  was  treated  3  days  previously  by  his  primary  care
physician who diagnosed pneumonia 
and prescribed azithromycin and levofloxacin, but his fevers persisted. He was taken to
the ED by his wife, and she said 
that he had new onset of confusion. He had no pets or animal exposures. He worked as
a construction manager and 
was frequently outdoors in wooded areas but did not recall a tick bite.  Case 5 synopsis.
Serum obtained 31 days after the initial signs and symptoms contained no antibodies 
to R. rickettsii but had an IgG titer of 256 to 
E. chaffeensis, retrospectively confirming the diagnosis of HME. 
Whereas  headache  is  a  nearly  universal  complaint  among  patients  with  HME,  altered
sensorium might be observed in up to 
20%  of  cases  (6).  Other  CNS  manifestations  include  seizures,  meningismus,  cranial
nerve palsies, focal weakness, and coma. 
A lymphocytic pleocytosis can be observed in the CSF in approximately 50% of patients
with HME who undergo 
lumbar puncture (103). Neutrophilic pleocytosis can be observed early in the course of
the illness. Neuroimaging studies 
are usually normal or nonspecific. TBRD should be included in the differential 
diagnosis of patients presenting with clinical evidence of CNS infection or CSF findings
suggestive of aseptic meningitis.
Case  6   In  July  1994,  a  man  aged  44  years  went  to  see  his  physician  in  central
Minnesota. He complained of a 
1-week history of fever, chills, generalized myalgias, and right temporomandibular joint
pain. When he became ill, he 
treated  himself  empirically  with  ampicillin,  which  was  available  at  home,  for  2  days.
Because the patient experienced no 
clinical  improvement,  he  sought  medical  care.  The  patient  worked  outdoors  and  was
frequently in wooded areas. Fourteen 
days before he went to his physician, he removed two deer ticks that had been 
attached to his skin for an unknown period.
 Physical examination findings. The patient had a low-grade fever of 
100.6F (38.1C). Examination of heart, 
lungs, and abdomen were normal. No lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or skin
rash were noted. 
Cardiovascular,  pulmonary,  gastrointestinal,  or  neurological  symptoms  were  not
present. Overall, physical examination 
was unremarkable, except for fever.
 Laboratory  findings.  No  laboratory  evaluations  were  performed  during  the  visit.  A
presumptive diagnosis of 
acute  Lyme  disease  was  made,  and  empirical  treatment  with  amoxicillin  and
probenecid was initiated; a 1-week follow-up 
visit was scheduled. Five days after the outpatient visit, the patient died suddenly at
home. He had complained of 
shortness of breath the day before his death.
 Case  6  synopsis.  Histopathologic  examination  of  the  patient's  heart  revealed
widespread transmural myocarditis 
with  neutrophilic  and  lymphocytic  infiltrates.  Postmortem  serum  specimens  were
evaluated initially for presumptive 
carditis as a result of B. burgdorferi infection. Serum titers of IgG and IgM antibodies to 
B.  burgdorferi  were  not  detected  by  ELISA  and  western  blotting.  PCR  assays  of
serum and whole blood 
for B. burgdorferi also were negative. 
However, antibody titers to A. phagocytophilum 
(formerly known as E. equi) were significantly elevated at titer >256 by 
IFA  methods.  Detection  of  DNA  extracted  by  PCR  from  whole  blood  and  positive  IHC
staining of cardiac tissue confirmed 
a diagnosis of anaplasmosis. Although infection with 
A. phagocytophilum was demonstrated in this case, the pathogenesis 
of the associated carditis was less clear 
(104).
 The diagnosis of HGA can be difficult because of the nonspecific nature of the febrile
illness frequently observed 
when the patient first seeks medical care. In regions where both Lyme disease and HGA
are known to occur, 
distinguishing  between  the  diseases  in  the  early  stages  of  illness  might  be  difficult.
Because treatment should be initiated before 
a  definitive  diagnosis  is  made,  selection  of  an  antimicrobial  effective  against  both
rickettsial organisms and 
B. burgdorferi (e.g., doxycycline) is recommended. This case also underscores the
importance of close follow-up of 
patients treated for TBRD on an outpatient basis. Because these diseases can rapidly
progress, clinicians should 
emphasize to patients the need to return for reevaluation if substantial improvement is
not observed within 24--48 hours of initiation 
of treatment.
Conclusion
 TBRD  continue  to  cause  severe  illness  and  death  in  otherwise  healthy  adults  and
children, despite the availability 
of low cost, effective antimicrobial therapy. The greatest challenge to clinicians is the
difficult diagnostic dilemma posed 
by  these  infections  early  in  their  clinical  course  when  antibiotic  therapy  is  most
effective.
 Early clinical presentations of HME, HGA, RMSF, and 
E. ewingii infection include fever, headache, myalgia, and 
malaise and are difficult to distinguish from other infectious and noninfectious diseases.
Rash is observed frequently in 
RMSF, occasionally in HME, and rarely in HGA. TBRD tend to occur seasonally, with the
majority of cases occurring during 
the warmer spring and summer months. However, cases might develop year-round. A
detailed history of recent recreational 
or  occupational  activities  might  reveal  potential  exposure  to  ticks,  although  the
absence of a history of a 
recent tick bite should not dissuade clinicians from considering a diagnosis of TBRD.
 TBRD  can  be  life-threatening.  Severe  manifestations  of  TBRD  include  prolonged
fever, renal failure, 
myocarditis,  meningoencephalitis,  hypotension,  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome,
and multiple organ failure. Patients usually do 
not have diagnostic serum antibody levels during the first week of illness; therefore, an
inability to detect antibodies (IgG or 
IgM)  in  acute-phase  serum  does  not  exclude  TBRD.  Health-care  providers  should  not
delay treatment while waiting for a 
diagnosis;  rather,  they  should  empirically  provide  treatment  if  they  suspect  TBRD.
Doxycycline is the drug of choice for the treatment 
of presumptive or confirmed TBRD in both adults and children.
Examination of paired serum samples obtained during 
acute illness and 2--3 weeks later that demonstrate a rise 
in  antibody  titer  is  the  most  appropriate  approach  to  confirm  TBRD.  Physicians  who
identify a potential case of 
TBRD  should  notify  the  local  health  department,  which  can  assist  with  obtaining
diagnostic testing to confirm the diagnosis.
No  licensed  vaccines  for  TBRD  are  available.  Avoiding  tick  bites  and  promptly
removing attached ticks remain 
the best disease prevention strategies.
Acknowledgments   The  preparers  acknowledge  Jim  Gathany,  CDC,  for  the  tick
photographs and Karoyle Colbert, CDC, for creating the tick distribution map.
 *  Mountain:  Montana,  Idaho,  Wyoming,  Colorado,  New  Mexico,  Arizona,  Utah,
Nevada. East South Central: Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi. 
East  North  Central:  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Michigan,  Wisconsin.  West  South  Central:
Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas. West North Central: 
Minnesota,  Iowa,  Missouri,  North  Dakota,  South  Dakota,  Nebraska,  Kansas.  Pacific:
Washington, Oregon, California. New England: Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
Rhode Island, New Hampshire. South Atlantic: Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, District of
Columbia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, 
Florida. Mid-Atlantic: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania.
References Table 1
Return to top.
Figure 1
Return to top. Table 2
Return to top. Figure 2
Return to top. Table 3
Return to top. Figure 3
Return to top. Table 4
Return to top. Figure 4
Return to top. Figure 5
Return to top. Figure 6
Return to top. Figure 7
Return to top. Figure 8
Return to top. Figure 9
Return to top. Figure 10
Return to top. Figure 11
Return to top. Figure 12
Return to top. Figure 13
Return to top. Figure 14
Return to top. Figure 15
Return to top. Figure 16
Return to top. Figure 17
Return to top. Figure 18
Return to top. Box
Return to top.  
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting
should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification
only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 3/16/2006
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5504a1.htm?links=false
