Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Production  of  one  tetanus  and  diphtheria  (Td)  vaccine,
TdVaxTM,  has  been  discontinued.  As  a  result,  CDC  anticipates  that  the  supply  of  Td
vaccine  in  the  U.S.  market  will  be  constrained  during  2024.  CDC  has  developed
guidance to help vaccination providers. Below are summaries of recommendations from
CDC’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  For  the  full  text  of  the
recommendations,
 see
 DTaP/Tdap/Td
 ACIP
 Vaccine
 Recommendations.
 CDC
recommends  diphtheria,  tetanus,  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccination  across  the
lifespan. Children younger than 7 years of age receive DTaP, while older children and
adults receive Tdap and Td. Give infants and children 5 doses of DTaP. Give one dose at
each of these ages: Give adolescents a single dose of Tdap, preferably at 11 to 12 years
of age. Give women a single dose of Tdap during every pregnancy, preferably during
the early part of gestational weeks 27 through 36. CDC only recommends Tdap in the
immediate postpartum period for mothers who did not receive Tdap during their current
pregnancy  and  did  not  receive  a  prior  dose  of  Tdap  ever  (i.e.,  during  adolescence,
adulthood,  or  a  previous  pregnancy).  If  a  woman  did  not  receive  Tdap  during  her
current pregnancy but did receive a prior dose of Tdap, then she should not receive a
dose of Tdap postpartum. Give adults who have never received Tdap a single dose of
Tdap. This can be given at any time, regardless of when they last got Td. This should be
followed by either a Td or Tdap booster every 10 years. Production of one Td vaccine
has  been  discontinued.  Read  CDC’s  guidance  on  using  Tdap  in  lieu  of  Td  whenever
possible while Td supplies are constrained. When feasible, Boostrix® should be used for
adults 65 years or older. Adacel® is only approved for use up through 64 years of age.
However, providers should not miss an opportunity to vaccinate persons aged 65 years
or  older  with  Tdap.  Therefore,  providers  may  administer  the  Tdap  vaccine  they  have
available  and  it  will  be  valid.  HCP  should  follow  the  same  immunization  guidance
provided for all adults. There are no unique vaccination recommendations for HCP with
Tdap or Td. The following “job-aids” provide catch-up guidance for diphtheria, tetanus,
and pertussis vaccination for children 4 months through 18 years of age. They include
detailed scenarios by age group and previous number of doses received. These should
assist  healthcare  professionals  in  interpreting  Table  2  of  the  Child  and  Adolescent
Immunization  Catch-up  Schedule.  You  should  not  administer  diphtheria,  tetanus,  and
pertussis vaccines to: You may administer diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis vaccines if
you and the parent or patient deem the benefits of vaccination to outweigh the risks, to
patients who have: You should not administer acellular pertussis-containing vaccines to:
You  may  administer  acellular  pertussis-containing  vaccines  to  patients  with  the
following conditions once a treatment regimen has been established and the condition
has  stabilized:  Considerations  for  Young  Children  with  a  Contraindication  to
Pertussis-Containing Vaccines CDC’s guidance on using Td for infants and children who
should not receive acellular pertussis-containing vaccines. Historically, two tetanus and
diphtheria  (Td)  vaccine  products  have  been  available  for  use  in  the  United  States:
MassBiologics has discontinued production of TdVaxTM, which is exclusively distributed
by Grifols. Sanofi is taking steps to augment their available U.S. supply of Tenivac®.
Despite these efforts, it’s anticipated that the supply of Td vaccine in the U.S. market
will be constrained during 2024. Temporary ordering controls are in place in the public
and private sectors to help manage the gap in supply. Diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular
pertussis  (Tdap)  vaccines  are  available  without  supply  constraints  at  this  time.  The
limited supply of Td vaccine needs to be preserved for those with a contraindication to
receiving  pertussis-containing  vaccines.  To  assist  vaccination  providers,  CDC  has
developed the following guidance: This guidance will remain in place until the period of
temporary ordering controls for Td vaccine ends.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/dtap-tdap-td/hcp/recommendations.html
