A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  The  United  States  uses  three  types  of
combination  vaccines  that  include  protection  against  diphtheria:  DTaP,  Tdap,  and  Td.
DT  vaccine  is  no  longer  available  in  the  United  States.  DTaP  and  Tdap  also  include
protection  against  tetanus  and  pertussis.  Td  also  includes  protection  against  tetanus.
Children  younger  than  7  years  of  age  receive  DTaP,  while  older  children  and  adults
receive
 Tdap
 or
 Td.
 The
 following
 summarizes
 CDC's
 current
 age-based
recommendations for DTaP, Tdap, and Td. Access the official, full text of CDC's current
and historical DTaP/Tdap/Td vaccine recommendations. CDC recommends routine DTaP
vaccination for all infants and children younger than 7 years old. Administer a 5-dose
DTaP  series,  1  dose  at  each  of  the  following  ages:  CDC  recommends  routine  Tdap
vaccination for all adolescents. Administer a single dose of Tdap at 11 to 12 years of
age.  Vaccinate  children  who  miss  their  shots  or  start  the  series  later  than
recommended.  Depending  on  the  child's  age  when  vaccination  begins,  the
recommendation  varies  for  Use the following  job  aids  to  help  interpret  table 2 of  the
child and adolescent immunization schedule. Give a single dose of Tdap during every
pregnancy, preferably during the early part of gestational weeks 27 through 36. CDC
recommends a booster (Td or Tdap) every 10 years for all adults. CDC recommends a
single dose of Tdap for adults who've never received Tdap. It can be given at any time,
regardless  of  when  they  last  got  Td.  When  feasible,  administer  Boostrix®  (Tdap)  to
adults 65 years or older. Adacel® (Tdap) is only approved for use up through 64 years
of age. However, vaccine providers shouldn't miss an opportunity to vaccinate adults 65
years or older with Tdap. Therefore, providers may administer the Tdap vaccine they
have  available,  and  it  will  be  valid.  Healthcare  personnel  should  follow  the  same
immunization guidance provided for all adults.  A history of a severe allergic reaction
(anaphylaxis) to a vaccine component or following a prior dose is a contraindication to
further  doses.   For  patients  with  a  contraindication  specific  to  pertussis-containing
vaccines,  follow  these  age-based  recommendations:  Children  <7  years  of  age:  See
About young children with a contraindication to pertussis-containing vaccines. Persons
≥7  years  of  age:  Use  Td  instead  of  Tdap.  Find  more  resources  below  about
contraindications. Historically, two Td vaccine products have been available for use in
the  United  States:  MassBiologics  has  discontinued  production  of  TdVaxTM,  which  is
exclusively distributed by Grifols. Sanofi is taking steps to augment their available U.S.
supply of Tenivac®. Despite these efforts, it's anticipated that the supply of Td vaccine
in the U.S. market will be constrained during 2024. Temporary ordering controls are in
place in the public and private sectors to help manage the gap in supply. Tdap vaccines
are available without supply constraints at this time. The limited supply of Td vaccine
needs
 to
 be
 preserved
 for
 those
 with
 a
 contraindication
 to
 receiving
pertussis-containing  vaccines.  While  Td  vaccine  supplies  are  constrained,  CDC
recommends  vaccine  providers  transition  to  use  of  Tdap  in  lieu  of  Td  whenever
possible. Tdap vaccine is an acceptable alternative to Td vaccine. This includes when a
tetanus booster is indicated for wound management. Tdap vaccine isn't an acceptable
alternative  only  when  a  person  has  a  specific  contraindication  to  pertussis-containing
vaccines,  which  is  very  rare.  This  guidance  will  remain  in  place  until  the  period  of
temporary  ordering  controls  for  Td  ends.  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for
Immunization Pink Book chapter on Child and adolescent immunization schedule Adult
immunization  schedule  DTaP:  English  |  Other  languages  Tdap:  English  |  Other
languages Td: English | Other languages Diphtheria is a serious bacterial disease that's
uncommon  in  the  United  States  and  usually  associated  with  international  travel.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/diphtheria/hcp/vaccine-recommendations/index.html
