Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. View Large Version A disability is any condition of the body or
mind (impairment) that makes it more difficult for the person with the condition to do
certain  activities  (activity  limitation)  and  interact  with  the  world  around  them
(participation  restrictions).  There  are  many  types  of  disabilities,  such  as  those  that
affect  a  person’s:  Although  “people  with  disabilities”  sometimes  refers  to  a  single
population, this is actually a diverse group of people with a wide range of needs. Two
people  with  the  same  type  of  disability  can  be  affected  in  very  different  ways.  Some
disabilities  may  be  hidden  or  not  easy  to  see.  According  to  the  World  Health
Organization,  disability  has  three  dimensions:1  Disability  can  be:  The  following  links
provide  information  from  CDC’s  National  Center  on  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental
Disabilities on certain disability-related health conditions:   Impairment is an absence of
or significant difference in a person’s body structure or function or mental functioning.2
For example, problems in the structure of the brain can result in difficulty with mental
functions, or problems with the structure of the eyes or ears can result in difficulty with
the functions of vision or hearing. The World Health Organization (WHO) published the
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) in 2001. The ICF
provides  a  standard  language  for  classifying  body  function  and  structure,  activity,
participation  levels,  and  conditions  in  the  world  around  us  that  influence  health.  This
description  helps  to  assess  the  health,  functioning,  activities,  and  factors  in  the
environment that either help or create barriers for people to fully participate in society.
According  to  the  ICF:  The  ICF  acknowledges  that  the  distinction  between  these  two
categories is somewhat unclear and combines them, although basically, activities take
place at a personal level and participation involves engagement in life roles, such as
employment,  education,  or  relationships.   Activity  limitations  and  participation
restrictions  have  to  do  with  difficulties  an  individual  experiences  in  performing  tasks
and engaging in social roles.  Activities and participation can be made easier or more
difficult  as  a  result  of  environmental  factors,  such  as  technology,  support  and
relationships, services, policies, or the beliefs of others. The ICF includes the following
in  the  categories  of  activities  and  participation:  It  is  very  important  to  improve  the
conditions  in  communities  by  providing  accommodations  that  decrease  or  eliminate
activity limitations and participation restrictions for people with disabilities, so they can
participate in the roles and activities of everyday life. To receive email updates about
this topic, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/disability.html
