A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Discussion  of  the  Management  of
Multidrug-Resistant  Organisms  in  Healthcare  Settings  (2006)  guideline.  This  review
demonstrates the depth of published science on the prevention and control of MDROs.
Using a combination of interventions, MDROs in endemic, outbreak, and non-endemic
settings have been brought under control. However, despite the volume of literature, an
appropriate set of evidence-based control measures that can be universally applied in
all  healthcare  settings  has  not  been  definitively  established.  This  is  due  in  part  to
differences  in  study  methodology  and  outcome  measures,  including  an  absence  of
randomized,  controlled  trials  comparing  one  MDRO  control  measure  or  strategy  with
another. Additionally, the data are largely descriptive and quasi-experimental in design
(311).  Few  reports  described  preemptive  efforts  or  prospective  studies  to  control
MDROs before they had reached high levels within a unit or facility. Furthermore, small
hospitals  and  LTCFs  are  infrequently  represented  in  the  literature.  A  number  of
questions  remain  and  are  discussed  below.  Only  one  report  described  control  efforts
directed at more than one MDRO, i.e., MDR-GNB and MRSA (312). Several reports have
shown  either  decreases  or  increases  in  other  pathogens  with  efforts  to  control  one
MDRO.  For  example,  two  reports  on  VRE  control  efforts  demonstrated  an  increase  in
MRSA  following  the  prioritization  of  VRE  patients  to  private  rooms  and  cohort  beds
(161). Similarly an outbreak of Serratia marcescens was temporally associated with a
concurrent, but unrelated, outbreak of MRSA in an NICU (313). In contrast, Wright and
colleagues reported a decrease in MRSA and VRE acquisition in an ICU during and after
their successful effort to eradicate an MDR-strain of A. baumannii from the unit (210).
Colonization with multiple MDROs appears to be common (314, 315). One study found
that nearly 50% of residents in a skilled-care unit in a LTCF were colonized with a target
MDRO and that 26% were co-colonized with >1 MDRO; a detailed analysis showed that
risk factors for colonization varied by pathogen (316). One review of the literature (317)
reported  that  patient  risk  factors  associated  with  colonization  with  MRSA,  VRE,
MDR-GNB, C. difficile and Candida sp were the same. This review concluded that control
programs  that  focus  on  only  one  organism  or  one  antimicrobial  drug  are  unlikely  to
succeed  because  vulnerable  patients  will  continue  to  serve  as  a  magnet  for  other
MDROs.  Several  authors  have  provided  evidence  for  the  cost-effectiveness  of
approaches that use ASC (153, 191, 253, 318, 319). However, the supportive evidence
often  relied  on  assumptions,  projections,  and  estimated  attributable  costs  of  MDRO
infections. Similar limitations apply to a study suggesting that gown use yields a cost
benefit  in  controlling  transmission  of  VRE  in  ICUs  (320).  To  date,  no  studies  have
directly  compared  the  benefits  and  costs  associated  with  different  MDRO  control
strategies. The subject of feasibility, as it applies to the extrapolation of results to other
healthcare settings, has not been addressed. For example, smaller hospitals and LTCFs
may lack the on-site laboratory services needed to obtain ASC in a timely manner. This
factor  could  limit  the  applicability  of  an  aggressive  program  based  on  obtaining  ASC
and  preemptive  placement  of  patients  on  Contact  Precautions  in  these  settings.
However, with the growing problem of antimicrobial resistance, and the recognized role
of all healthcare settings for control of this problem, it is imperative that appropriate
human  and  fiscal  resources  be  invested  to  increase  the  feasibility  of  recommended
control  strategies  in  every  setting.  Although  some  common  principles  apply,  the
preceding literature review indicates that no single approach to the control of MDROs is
appropriate  for  all  healthcare  facilities.  Many  factors  influence  the  choice  of
interventions to be applied within an institution, including: Differences of opinion on the
optimal strategy to control MDROs. Published guidance on the control of MDROs reflects
areas of ongoing debate on optimal control strategies. A key issue is the use of ASC in
control  efforts  and  preemptive  use  of  Contact  Precautions  pending  negative
surveillance culture results (107, 321, 322). The various guidelines currently available
exhibit a spectrum of approaches, which their authors deem to be evidence-based. One
guideline  for  control  of  MRSA  and  VRE,  the  Society  for  Healthcare  Epidemiology  of
America (SHEA) guideline from 2003 (107), emphasizes routine use of ASC and Contact
Precautions.  That  position  paper  does  not  address  control  of  MDR-GNBs.  The  salient
features
 of
 SHEA
 recommendations
 for
 MRSA
 and
 VRE
 control
 and
 the
recommendations in this guideline for control of MDROs, including MRSA and VRE, have
been compared (323); recommended interventions are similar. Other guidelines for VRE
and MRSA, e.g., those proffered by the Michigan Society for Infection Control ([This link
is no longer active www.msiconline.org/resource_sections/aro_guidelines.]), emphasize
consistent  practice  of  Standard  Precautions  and  tailoring  the  use  of  ASC  and  Contact
Precautions  to  local  conditions,  the  specific  MDROs  that  are  prevalent  and  being
transmitted, and the presence of risk factors for transmission. A variety of approaches
have reduced MDRO rates (3, 164, 165, 209, 214, 240, 269, 324). Therefore, selection
of interventions for controlling MDRO transmission should be based on assessments of
the local problem, the prevalence of various MDRO and feasibility. Individual facilities
should  seek  appropriate  guidance  and  adopt  effective  measures  that  fit  their
circumstances and needs. Most studies have been in acute care settings; for non-acute
care  settings  (e.g.,  LCTF,  small  rural  hospitals),  the  optimal  approach  is  not  well
defined.  Reports  describing  successful  control  of  MDRO  transmission  in  healthcare
facilities  have  included  seven  categories  of  interventions  (Table  3).  As  a  rule,  these
reports  indicate  that  facilities  confronted  with  an  MDRO  problem  selected  a
combination of control measures, implemented them, and reassessed their impact. In
some cases, new measures were added serially to further enhance control efforts. This
evidence  indicates  that  the  control  of  MDROs  is  a  dynamic  process  that  requires  a
systematic approach tailored to the problem and healthcare setting. The nature of this
evidence gave rise to the two-tiered approach to MDRO control recommended in this
guideline. This approach provides the flexibility needed to prevent and control MDRO
transmission  in  every  kind  of  facility  addressed  by  this  guideline.  Detailed
recommendations  for  MDRO  control  in  all  healthcare  settings  follow  and  are
summarized  in  Table  3  (Tier  1).  Table  3,  which  applies  to  all  healthcare  settings,
contains two tiers of activities. In the first tier are the baseline level of MDRO control
activities  designed  to  ensure  recognition  of  MDROs  as  a  problem,  involvement  of
healthcare  administrators,  and  provision  of  safeguards  for  managing  unidentified
carriers of MDROs. With the emergence of an MDRO problem that cannot be controlled
with the basic set of infection control measures, additional control measures should be
selected from the second tier of interventions presented in Table 3 (Tier 2). Decisions to
intensify MDRO control activity arise from surveillance observations and assessments of
the risk to patients in various settings. Circumstances that may trigger these decisions
include: The combination of new or increased frequency of MDRO isolates and patients
at  risk  necessitates  escalation  of  efforts  to  achieve  or  re-establish  control,  i.e.,  to
reduce  rates  of  transmission  to  the  lowest  possible  level.  Intensification  of  MDRO
control activities should begin with an assessment of the problem and evaluation of the
effectiveness  of  measures  in  current  use.  Once  the  problem  is  defined,  appropriate
additional  control  measures  should  be  selected  from  the  second  tier  of  Table  3.  A
knowledgeable
 infection
 prevention
 and
 control
 professional
 or
 healthcare
epidemiologist  should  make  this  determination.  This  approach  requires  support  from
the  governing  body  and  medical  staff  of  the  facility.  Once  interventions  are
implemented,  ongoing  surveillance  should  be  used  to  determine  whether  selected
control measures are effective and if additional measures or consultation are indicated.
The  result  of  this  process  should  be  to  decrease  MDRO  rates  to  minimum  levels.
Healthcare facilities must not accept ongoing MDRO outbreaks or high endemic rates as
the  status  quo.  With  selection  of  infection  control  measures  appropriate  to  their
situation,  all  facilities  can  achieve  the  desired  goal  and  reduce  the  MDRO  burden
substantially. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help
reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/mdro-management/discussion.html
