Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  October  6,  2023  /  72(40);1083–1088  Diya  Surie,
MD1,*; Katharine A. Yuengling, MPH1,*; Jennifer DeCuir, MD, PhD1,*; Yuwei Zhu, MD2;
Manjusha Gaglani, MBBS3,4,5; Adit A. Ginde, MD6; H. Keipp Talbot, MD2; Jonathan D.
Casey, MD2; Nicholas M. Mohr, MD7; Shekhar Ghamande, MD3,4; Kevin W. Gibbs, MD8;
D. Clark Files, MD8; David N. Hager, MD, PhD9; Harith Ali, MBChB9; Matthew E. Prekker,
MD10; Michelle N. Gong, MD11; Amira Mohamed, MD11; Nicholas J. Johnson, MD12; Jay
S.  Steingrub,  MD13;  Ithan  D.  Peltan,  MD14;  Samuel  M.  Brown,  MD14;  Aleda  M.  Leis,
PhD15; Akram Khan, MD16; Catherine L. Hough, MD16; William S. Bender, MD17; Abhijit
Duggal,  MD18;  Jennifer  G.  Wilson,  MD19;  Nida  Qadir,  MD20;  Steven  Y.  Chang,  MD,
PhD20;  Christopher  Mallow,  MD21;  Jennie  H.  Kwon,  DO22;  Matthew  C.  Exline,  MD23;
Adam S. Lauring, MD, PhD24; Nathan I. Shapiro, MD25; Cristie Columbus, MD4,5; Ivana
A. Vaughn, PhD26; Mayur Ramesh, MD26; Basmah Safdar, MD27; Natasha Halasa, MD2;
James D. Chappell, MD, PhD2; Carlos G. Grijalva, MD2; Adrienne Baughman2; Todd W.
Rice, MD2; Kelsey N. Womack, PhD2; Jin H. Han, MD2; Sydney A. Swan, MPH2; Indrani
Mukherjee,  MS1;  Nathaniel  M.  Lewis,  PhD28;  Sascha  Ellington,  PhD28;  Meredith  L.
McMorrow, MD1; Emily T. Martin, PhD15; Wesley H. Self, MD2; IVY Network (View author
affiliations) What is already known about this topic? In June 2023, CDC recommended
the  first  respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)  vaccines  for  adults  aged  ≥60  years  using
shared clinical decision-making. Understanding the severity of RSV disease is needed to
guide  this  clinical  decision-making.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  During  February
2022–May 2023, hospitalizations for RSV were less frequent but were associated with
more  severe  disease  than  were  hospitalizations  for  COVID-19  or  influenza,  including
receipt  of  standard  flow  oxygen  therapy,  high-flow  nasal  cannula  or  noninvasive
ventilation,  and  intensive  care  unit  admission.  What  are  the  implications  for  public
health practice? The potential for severe RSV disease among older adults is important
to consider as part of shared clinical decision-making when assessing the benefit of RSV
vaccination  among  adults  aged  ≥60  years.  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF
downloads  Table  1  Table  2  On  June  21,  2023,  CDC’s  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization Practices recommended respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccination for
adults
 aged
 ≥60
 years,
 offered
 to
 individual
 adults
 using
 shared
 clinical
decision-making.  Informed  use  of  these  vaccines  requires  an  understanding  of  RSV
disease severity. To characterize RSV-associated severity, 5,784 adults aged ≥60 years
hospitalized with acute respiratory illness and laboratory-confirmed RSV, SARS-CoV-2,
or  influenza  infection  were  prospectively  enrolled  from  25  hospitals  in  20  U.S.  states
during  February  1,  2022–May  31,  2023.  Multivariable  logistic  regression  was  used  to
compare RSV disease severity with COVID-19 and influenza severity on the basis of the
following outcomes: 1) standard flow (<30 L/minute) oxygen therapy, 2) high-flow nasal
cannula (HFNC) or noninvasive ventilation (NIV), 3) intensive care unit (ICU) admission,
and  4)  invasive  mechanical  ventilation  (IMV)  or  death.  Overall,  304  (5.3%)  enrolled
adults were hospitalized with RSV, 4,734 (81.8%) with COVID-19 and 746 (12.9%) with
influenza.  Patients  hospitalized  with  RSV  were  more  likely  to  receive  standard  flow
oxygen, HFNC or NIV, and ICU admission than were those hospitalized with COVID-19 or
influenza.  Patients  hospitalized  with  RSV  were  more  likely  to  receive  IMV  or  die
compared  with  patients  hospitalized  with  influenza  (adjusted  odds  ratio  =  2.08;  95%
CI  =  1.33–3.26).  Among  hospitalized  older  adults,  RSV  was  less  common,  but  was
associated with more severe disease than COVID-19 or influenza. High disease severity
in  older  adults  hospitalized  with  RSV  is  important  to  consider  in  shared  clinical
decision-making  regarding  RSV  vaccination.  Top  Respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)  is
increasingly  recognized  as  an  important  cause  of  severe  respiratory  disease  in  older
adults.
 In
 the
 United
 States,
 an
 estimated
 60,000–160,000
 RSV-associated
hospitalizations  and  6,000–10,000  RSV-associated  deaths  occur  each  year  among
adults  aged  ≥65  years  (1).  On  June  21,  2023,  CDC’s  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization Practices recommended RSV vaccination for adults aged ≥60 years using
shared  clinical  decision-making†  (1).  Understanding  the  severity  of  RSV  disease
compared with that of other respiratory viral diseases in older adults is needed to guide
this shared patient-provider clinical decision-making. Top During February 1, 2022–May
31,
 2023,
 adults
 aged
 ≥60
 years
 with
 acute
 respiratory
 illness§
 and
laboratory-confirmed RSV, SARS-CoV-2, or influenza infection who were admitted to any
of 25 hospitals in 20 U.S. states participating in the Investigating Respiratory Viruses in
the Acutely Ill (IVY) Network¶ were eligible for inclusion in this analysis. Demographic
and  clinical  data  were  obtained  from  patient  or  proxy  interview  and  medical  records,
including in-hospital outcomes observed by day 28 of hospitalization. Upper respiratory
specimens were collected from enrolled patients near the time of admission and tested
at a central laboratory (Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee) by
reverse  transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction  for  RSV,  SARS-CoV-2,  and  influenza.
Patients who received a positive RSV, SARS-CoV-2 or influenza result based on either
hospital or central laboratory testing within 10 days of illness onset or within 3 days of
hospital  admission  were  included.  Severity  of  RSV  disease  was  compared  with
COVID-19 and influenza severity using the following in-hospital outcomes: 1) standard
flow  oxygen  therapy,  defined  as  receipt  of  supplemental  oxygen  at  <30  L/minute;  2)
receipt of high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) or noninvasive ventilation (NIV); 3) intensive
care  unit  (ICU)  admission;  and  4)  receipt  of  invasive  mechanical  ventilation  (IMV)  or
death.  For  this  analysis,  enrolled  patients  were  excluded  if  they  had  confirmed  or
inconclusive  laboratory  test  results  indicating  coinfection  with  RSV,  SARS-CoV-2,  or
influenza  or  if  data  for  in-hospital  outcomes  were  missing.  In-hospital  outcomes  were
compared among patients hospitalized with RSV disease, COVID-19, and influenza using
multivariable logistic regression. Models were adjusted for age, sex, self-reported race
and Hispanic or Latino (Hispanic) ethnicity, number of organ systems associated with a
chronic  medical  condition,  and  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services
geographic  region.  Differences  among  respiratory  viruses  were  assessed  for  each
outcome;  p-values  <0.05  were  considered  statistically  significant.  All  analyses  were
conducted using SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute). This activity was reviewed by
CDC, deemed not research, and was conducted consistent with applicable federal law
and CDC policy.** Top During February 1, 2022–May 31, 2023, a total of 6,061 adults
aged  ≥60  years  were  enrolled  in  IVY  Network  with  acute  respiratory  illness  and
laboratory-confirmed  infection  with  RSV,  SARS-CoV-2,  or  influenza.  After  exclusion  of
277  patients,††  5,784  were  included  in  this  analysis,  among  whom  304  (5.3%)  were
hospitalized with RSV, 4,734 (81.8%) with COVID-19, and 746 (12.9%) with influenza.
Substantial  seasonal  variation  in  hospital  admissions  was  observed  for  RSV  and
influenza,  but  SARS-CoV-2  admissions  exhibited  less  seasonal  variation  (Figure).  The
median age of adults hospitalized with RSV (72 years) was similar to the age of those
hospitalized  with  COVID-19  (74  years)  and  influenza  (71  years)  (Table  1).  Among
patients  hospitalized  with  RSV  or  COVID-19,  percentages  of  non-Hispanic  Black  or
African  American  (Black)  patients  were  similar  (18.1%  and  16.8%,  respectively);
however, among patients hospitalized with influenza, the percentage of Black patients
was higher (188; 25.2%). Patients hospitalized with RSV had chronic medical conditions
associated with a median of two organ systems, a finding similar to that for patients
hospitalized  with  COVID-19  or  influenza.  Among  the  5,784  included  patients,  4,713
(81.5%) had received ≥1 dose of original (ancestral) monovalent or bivalent (ancestral
and  BA.4/5)  COVID-19  vaccine,  and  2,795  (48.3%)  had  received  seasonal  influenza
vaccination.§§  In  adjusted  analyses  comparing  RSV  severity  with  COVID-19,  patients
hospitalized  with  RSV  were  more  likely  than  hospitalized  COVID-19  patients  or
hospitalized  influenza  patients  were  to  receive  standard  flow  oxygen  (adjusted  odds
ratio  [aOR]  =  2.97  [COVID-19]  and  2.07  [influenza]),  HFNC  or  NIV  (aOR  =  2.25
[COVID-19] and 1.99 [influenza]), or to be admitted to an ICU (aOR = 1.49 [COVID-19]
and  1.55  [influenza])  (Table  2).  The  odds  of  the  composite  outcome  of  IMV  or  death
between  patients  hospitalized  with  RSV  and  patients  hospitalized  with  COVID-19  was
similar (aOR 1.39; 95% CI = 0.98–1.96); however, among hospitalized adults aged ≥60
years  with  RSV,  the  odds  of  IMV  or  death  were  significantly  higher  compared  with
hospitalized influenza patients (aOR 2.08; 95% CI = 1.33–3.26). Top The findings from
this study demonstrate that RSV is an important cause of respiratory virus–associated
morbidity  and  mortality  in  older  adults.  In  this  prospective,  multicenter  analysis  in
which all enrolled older adults hospitalized in 20 U.S. states during 2022–2023 received
testing  for  RSV,  SARS-CoV-2,  and  influenza,  RSV-associated  hospitalizations  were  less
frequent  than  were  COVID-19–associated  and  influenza-associated  hospitalizations;
however,  clinical  outcomes  in  patients  hospitalized  with  RSV  were  worse  than  those
among  patients  hospitalized  with  COVID-19  or  influenza.  Because  RSV  disease  is  less
common  than  COVID-19  or  influenza  disease  among  hospitalized  patients,  clinicians
might  be  less  aware  of  RSV  as  a  serious  respiratory  pathogen  in  older  adults.  The
findings  in  this  analysis  are  consistent  with  those  from  earlier  studies  that  compared
RSV disease severity among hospitalized adults with influenza disease (2–4). Although
outcome  definitions  vary  across  studies,  most  demonstrate  that  patients  hospitalized
with RSV disease are more likely to be treated with supplemental oxygen, mechanical
ventilation, or ICU admission than are patients hospitalized with influenza disease (2–4).
An important finding in this analysis is that older adults hospitalized with RSV were also
more likely to receive standard flow oxygen therapy, HFNC or NIV, or be admitted to an
ICU,  compared  with  patients  hospitalized  with  COVID-19.  Few  studies  have  compared
RSV severity with that associated with COVID-19, and those that have were completed
in  2020,  before  emergence  of  the  Omicron  variant  and  introduction  of  COVID-19
vaccines  (4,5).  Those  studies  demonstrated  that  patients  hospitalized  with  RSV  were
less  likely  to  experience  ICU  admission,  mechanical  ventilation,  and  in-hospital  death
than were patients hospitalized with COVID-19. Higher RSV severity relative to that of
COVID-19 observed in this analysis is likely due to a combination of factors, including 1)
reduced  severity  of  Omicron  variant  sublineages  circulating  during  the  period  of  this
analysis, 2) substantial increases in vaccine- and infection-conferred immunity against
SARS-CoV-2, and 3) increases in use of antiviral treatments (6,7). The high RSV disease
severity  observed  among  older  adults  in  this  analysis  is  important  to  guide
decision-making  for  RSV  vaccination  in  this  population.  Although  neither  of  the  two
clinical trials that led to Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of RSV vaccines
for  older  adults  was  powered  to  assess  protection  of  RSV  vaccination  against
hospitalization in adults aged ≥60 years, both trials showed moderate to high efficacy
of  RSV  vaccination  against  lower  respiratory  tract  disease,  which  is  in  the  causal
pathway  leading  to  severe  disease  (8,9).  Although  additional  studies  are  needed  to
assess protection of these vaccines against severe respiratory disease in older adults,
RSV vaccination has the potential to prevent severe respiratory disease and is currently
the  only  approved  prevention  product  available  for  older  adults.  The  findings  in  this
report  are  subject  to  at  least  three  limitations.  First,  it  is  possible  that  RSV  was
preferentially  detected  among  more  severely  ill  patients  who  were  more  likely  to
receive clinical testing for RSV at participating hospitals and be subsequently enrolled.
However, all patients with acute respiratory illness who were enrolled in IVY Network
also received central testing for RSV, SARS-CoV-2, and influenza. During the period of
this  analysis,  IVY  Network  enrolled  5,955  patients  aged  ≥60  years  with  acute
respiratory  illness  who  did  not  have  a  clinical  diagnosis  of  RSV,  SARS-CoV-2,  or
influenza,  and  only  25  (0.4%)  received  a  positive  RSV  test  result,  based  on  central
testing. Thus, any potential selection bias related to increased detection of RSV among
more severely ill patients is likely minimal. In addition, the consistency of RSV severity
findings  in  this  analysis  compared  with  findings  from  other  studies  that  have  used
different  methods  lessens  these  concerns  (2,3).  Second,  although  COVID-19  and
influenza vaccination, as well as antiviral or immunomodulatory treatments, have been
shown  to  reduce  severity  of  in-hospital  outcomes,  results  were  presented  as
unstratified  respiratory  virus  groups  to  represent  the  overall  population  hospitalized
with RSV, COVID-19, or influenza during the analysis period. Finally, although sample
size was sufficient for the results presented, a larger sample size would have allowed
for  evaluation  of  mortality  as  an  independent  outcome  or  adjustment  for  additional
patient characteristics (e.g., immunocompromising conditions). These findings suggest
that  although  RSV  hospitalizations  occur  less  frequently  than  COVID-19  or  influenza
hospitalizations, RSV disease among hospitalized adults aged ≥60 years in the United
States  during  February  2022–May  2023  was  more  severe  than  that  associated  with
COVID-19  and  influenza.  New  FDA-approved  RSV  vaccines  for  adults  aged  ≥60  years
are expected to prevent lower respiratory tract disease (1). Health care providers and
older  adults  should  consider  RSV  disease  severity  when  making  a  shared  clinical
decision  about  RSV  vaccination  (1).  Top  Corresponding  author:  Diya  Surie,
media@cdc.gov.  Top  1Coronavirus  and  Other  Respiratory  Viruses  Division,  National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 2Vanderbilt University Medical
Center,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  3Baylor  Scott  &  White  Health,  Temple,  Texas;  4Texas
A&M  University  College  of  Medicine,  Temple,  Texas;  5Baylor,  Scott  &  White  Health,
Dallas, Texas; 6University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado; 7University
of  Iowa,  Iowa  City,  Iowa;  8Wake  Forest  University  Baptist  Medical  Center,
Winston-Salem,  North  Carolina;  9Johns  Hopkins  Hospital,  Baltimore,  Maryland;
10Hennepin  County  Medical  Center,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota;  11Montefiore  Healthcare
Center,  Albert  Einstein  College  of  Medicine,  New  York,  New  York;  12University  of
Washington  School  of  Medicine,  Seattle,  Washington;  13Baystate  Medical  Center,
Springfield, Massachusetts; 14Intermountain Medical Center and University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah; 15University of Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
16Oregon Health & Science University Hospital, Portland, Oregon; 17Emory University
School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  18Cleveland  Clinic,  Cleveland,  Ohio;  19Stanford
University  School  of  Medicine,  Stanford,  California;  20Ronald  Reagan-UCLA  Medical
Center,  Los  Angeles,  California;  21University  of  Miami,  Miami,  Florida;  22Washington
University,  St.  Louis,  Missouri;  23The  Ohio  State  University  Wexner  Medical  Center,
Columbus,  Ohio;  24University  of  Michigan  School  of  Medicine,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan;
25Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 26Henry Ford Health,
Detroit,  Michigan;  27Yale  University  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;
28Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC.
Top All authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical
Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  Samuel  M.  Brown
reports that ReddyPort pays royalties on his invention of an airway device, outside the
submitted  work.  Jonathan  D.  Casey  reports  a  travel  grant  from  Fisher  and  Paykel,
outside  the  submitted  work.  Steven  Y.  Chang  reports  consulting  fees  from  PureTech
Health and Kiniksa Pharmaceuticals and participation as a data safety monitoring board
member for a study at University of California, Los Angeles outside the submitted work.
James  D.  Chappell  reports  participating  as  a  coinvestigator  for  a  Merck  investigator
studies  program,  where  he  supported  surveillance  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection among hospitalized children in Jordan, outside the submitted work. Manjusha
Gaglani reports grants from Abt Associates and Westat, having served as cochair of the
Infectious Diseases and Immunization Committee for the Texas Pediatric Society (TPS),
and  receiving  an  honorarium  for  serving  as  a  TPS  Project  Firstline  webinar  speaker
panelist for Respiratory Virus Review: Clinical Considerations and IPC Guidance, outside
the submitted work. Adit A. Ginde reports receiving grants from the National Institutes
of  Health  (NIH),  U.S.  Department  of  Defense,  AbbVie,  and  Faron  Pharmaceuticals
outside  the  submitted  work.  Michelle  N.  Gong  reports  a  grant  from  NIH  outside  the
submitted work. Carlos G. Grijalva reports grants from NIH, the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, Food and Drug Administration, and Syneos Health, and receipt of
compensation  for  participation  in  an  advisory  board  for  Merck  outside  the  submitted
work. Natasha Halasa reports receiving grants from Sanofi, Merck, and Quidel outside
the  submitted  work.  Akram  Khan  reports  receiving  grants  from  United  Therapeutics,
Johnson & Johnson, 4D Medical, Eli Lily, Dompe Pharmaceuticals, and GSK outside the
submitted  work.  Adam  S.  Lauring  reports  receiving  grants  from  FluLab,  NIH/National
Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases,  and  Burroughs  Wellcome  Fund  and  fees
from Sanofi and Roche for consulting on oseltamivir and baloxavir respectively, outside
the submitted work. Emily T. Martin reports a grant from Merck outside the submitted
work. Christopher Mallow reports medical legal consulting outside the submitted work.
Ithan D. Peltan reports grants from NIH and Janssen Pharmaceuticals and institutional
support  from  Asahi  Kasei  Pharma  and  Regeneron  outside  the  submitted  work.  Mayur
Ramesh  reports  participating  in  a  nonbranded  speaker  program  supported  by
AstraZeneca and serving on an advisory board for Moderna outside the submitted work.
No other potential conflicts of interest were disclosed. Top * These authors contributed
equally  to  this  report.  †  Unlike  age-  and  risk-based  recommendations,  for  which  the
default
 decision
 should
 be
 to
 vaccinate
 the
 patient
 unless
 vaccination
 is
contraindicated, shared clinical decision-making recommendations have no default. The
decision  whether  to  vaccinate  may  take  into  account  the  best  available  evidence
regarding who would benefit from vaccination; the individual patient’s characteristics,
values,  and  preferences;  the  vaccine  characteristics;  and  the  clinician’s  discretion.
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/acip-scdm-faqs.html  §  Acute  respiratory  illness  was
defined  as  one  including  any  of  the  following  signs  and  symptoms:  fever,  cough,
shortness  of  breath,  new  or  worsening  findings  on  chest  imaging  consistent  with
pneumonia, or hypoxemia (defined as SpO2 <92% on room air or supplemental oxygen
to  maintain  SpO2  ≥92%).  For  patients  receiving  chronic  oxygen  therapy,  hypoxemia
was  defined  as  SpO2  below  baseline  or  an  escalation  in  supplemental  oxygen  use  to
maintain a baseline SpO2. ¶ https://www.cdc.gov/flu/vaccines-work/ivy.htm ** 45 C.F.R.
part  46.102(l)(2),  21  C.F.R.  part  56;  42  U.S.C.  Sect.  241(d);  5  U.S.C.  Sect.  552a;  44
U.S.C.  Sect.  3501  et  seq.  ††  A  total  of  120  patients  were  excluded  because  of
laboratory-confirmed coinfections, 226 patients were excluded because of inconclusive
laboratory test results, preventing confirmation of coinfections, and five patients were
excluded because of missing in-hospital clinical outcomes, yielding 277 total exclusions.
These 277 exclusions were not mutually exclusive. §§ Patients were classified as having
been vaccinated against COVID-19 based on receipt of ≥1 dose of original (ancestral)
monovalent
 vaccines
 (BNT1262b2,
 [Pfizer-BioNTech],
 mRNA-1273
 [Moderna],
NVX-CoV2373 [Novavax], or Ad26.COV2.S [Janssen (Johnson & Johnson)]) or receipt of
≥1  dose  of  bivalent  (ancestral  and  BA.4/5)  vaccine  (BNT1262b2  bivalent  vaccine
[Pfizer-BioNTech]  or  mRNA-1273.222  [Moderna]  bivalent  vaccine).  Patients  who
received  bivalent  vaccine  might  have  previously  received  1–6  doses  of  the  original
(ancestral)  monovalent  vaccines.  Patients  were  classified  as  having  been  vaccinated
against  influenza  if  they  had  received  season-specific  influenza  vaccination  based  on
the period during which they were enrolled. Top Top Abbreviation: RSV = respiratory
syncytial  virus.  *  https://www.cdc.gov/flu/vaccines-work/ivy.htm  Top  Abbreviations:
HHS  =  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services;  RSV  =  respiratory  syncytial
virus.
*  Hospitals  by  HHS  region  include  Region  1:  Baystate  Medical  Center  (Springfield,
Massachusetts),  Beth  Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center  (Boston,  Massachusetts),  and
Yale  University  (New  Haven,  Connecticut);  Region  2:  Montefiore  Medical  Center  (New
York,  New  York);  Region  3:  Johns  Hopkins  Hospital  (Baltimore,  Maryland);  Region  4:
Emory University Medical Center (Atlanta, Georgia), University of Miami Medical Center
(Miami, Florida), Vanderbilt University Medical Center (Nashville, Tennessee), and Wake
Forest  University  Baptist  Medical  Center  (Winston-Salem,  North  Carolina);  Region  5:
Cleveland  Clinic  (Cleveland,  Ohio),  Hennepin  County  Medical  Center  (Minneapolis,
Minnesota),  Henry  Ford  Health  (Detroit,  Michigan);  The  Ohio  State  University  Wexner
Medical  Center  (Columbus,  Ohio),  and  University  of  Michigan  Hospital  (Ann  Arbor,
Michigan); Region 6: Baylor Scott & White Medical Center (Temple, Texas) and Baylor
University Medical Center (Dallas, Texas); Region 7: Barnes-Jewish Hospital (St. Louis,
Missouri)  and  University  of  Iowa  Hospitals  (Iowa  City,  Iowa);  Region  8:  Intermountain
Medical Center (Murray, Utah) and UCHealth, University of Colorado Hospital (Aurora,
Colorado); Region 9: University of Arizona Medical Center (Phoenix, Arizona), Stanford
University Medical Center (Stanford, California), and UCLA Medical Center (Los Angeles,
California);  and  Region  10:  Oregon  Health  &  Science  University  Hospital  (Portland,
Oregon) and University of Washington (Seattle, Washington).
† Other race, non-Hispanic includes American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, and Native
Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, which were combined because of small counts.
§  Other  includes  patients  who  self-reported  their  race  and  ethnicity  as  “other”  and
those for whom race and ethnicity were unknown.
¶  Organ  systems  with  chronic  medical  conditions  include  cardiovascular  disease,
neurologic  disease,  pulmonary  disease,  gastrointestinal  disease,  endocrine  disease,
kidney disease, hematologic disease, autoimmune disease, and immunocompromising
conditions.
**  A  total  of  74  (1.3%)  patients  were  missing  COVID-19  vaccination  status,  including
one  (0.3%)  among  RSV  patients,  63  (1.3%)  among  COVID-19  patients,  and  10  (1.3)
among influenza patients.
†† Includes patients with receipt of ≥1 dose of original (ancestral) monovalent vaccines,
specifically  BNT1262b2,  (Pfizer-BioNTech),  mRNA-1273  (Moderna),  NVX-CoV2373
(Novavax), Ad26.COV2.S (Janssen [Johnson & Johnson]) or patients with receipt of ≥1
dose bivalent (ancestral and BA.4/5) vaccines, specifically BNT1262b2 bivalent vaccine
(Pfizer-BioNTech)  and  mRNA-1273.222  (Moderna)  bivalent  vaccine.  Patients  who
received bivalent vaccination might have previously received 1–6 doses of the original
(ancestral) monovalent vaccines.
§§ A total of 441 (7.6%) patients were missing influenza vaccination status, including 26
(8.6%) RSV patients, 365 (7.7%) COVID-19 patients, and 50 (6.7%) influenza patients.
¶¶  Patients  were  classified  as  vaccinated  against  influenza  if  they  received
season-specific influenza vaccination based on the period in which they were enrolled.
Top  Abbreviations:  aOR  =  adjusted  odds  ratio;  HFNC  =  high-flow  nasal  cannula;
ICU  =  intensive  care  unit;  IMV  =  invasive  mechanical  ventilation;  NIV  =  noninvasive
ventilation; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus.
* https://www.cdc.gov/flu/vaccines-work/ivy.htm
† Multivariable logistic regression models were adjusted for age, sex, race and ethnicity,
number  of  organ  systems  with  chronic  medical  conditions,  and  U.S.  Department  of
Health and Human Services region.
§ Standard flow oxygen therapy was defined as receipt of supplemental oxygen therapy
at  a  flow  rate  <30  L/minute  as  the  highest  level  of  oxygen  support  received  during
hospitalization.
¶ HFNC or NIV was defined as patients who received either HFNC (oxygen therapy at a
flow rate ≥30 L/minute) or NIV as the highest level of oxygen support received during
hospitalization. Top Suggested citation for this article: Surie D, Yuengling KA, DeCuir J,
et  al.  Disease  Severity  of  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus  Compared  with  COVID-19  and
Influenza  Among  Hospitalized  Adults  Aged  ≥60  Years  —  IVY  Network,  20  U.S.  States,
February  2022–May  2023.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2023;72:1083–1088.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7240a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7240a2.htm
