Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  [Pthirus  pubis]  Pthirus  pubis,  the  pubic  or  crab  louse,  is  an
insect of the order Psocodea and is an ectoparasite whose only host are humans.  Pubic
lice (Pthirus pubis) have three stages: egg, nymph and adult. Eggs (nits) are laid on a
hair shaft . Females will lay approximately 30 eggs during their 3-4 week life span. Eggs
hatch after about a week and become nymphs, which look like smaller versions of the
adults.  The  nymphs  undergo  three  molts  (,  ,  )  before  becoming  adults  .  Adults  are
1.5-2.0 mm long and flattened. They are much broader in comparison to head and body
lice. Adults are found only on the human host and require human blood to survive. If
adults are forced off the host, they will die within 24-48 hours without a blood feeding.
Pubic  lice  are  transmitted  from  person  to  person  most-commonly  via  sexual  contact,
although  fomites  (bedding,  clothing)  may  play  a  minor  role  in  their  transmission.
Pthiriais  is  common  and  is  distributed  worldwide.   The  majority  of  infestations  are
asymptomatic.  When  symptoms  are  noted  they  may  include  a  tickling  feeling  of
something moving in the hair, itching, caused by the an allergic reaction to louse saliva,
and  irritability.  Pruritis  caused  by  the  bites  of  pubic  lice  may  be  very  intense,  and
discoloration of the skin may occur if the infestation is left untreated for an extended
length of time. The main mode of transmission is person to person by sexual contact
with  someone  who  is  already  infested.  Fomites  (bedding,  clothing)  may  play  a  minor
role, although rare.       The diagnosis of pthiriasis is best made by finding a live nymph,
adult  louse,  or  a  nit  on  the  hair  of  a  person,  usually  in  the  pubic  or  perianal  area,
although  they  may  also  be  found  on  armpit,  moustache  and  chest  hairs.   Treatment
information can be found at: https://www.cdc.gov/lice/treatment/pubic-lice.html  DPDx
is an educational resource designed for health professionals and laboratory scientists.
For
 an
 overview
 including
 prevention,
 control,
 and
 treatment
 visit
www.cdc.gov/parasites/.  To  receive  email  updates  about  this  page,  enter  your  email
address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/pthiriasis/index.html
