Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Unequivocal  identification  of  genus/species  is  frequently
dependent on direct morphological examination of the entire organism or diagnostically
useful  portions  (e.g.,  proglottids).  Ideally  this  is  performed  prior  to  histological
sectioning  and  staining,  which  can  be  informative  in  some  instances  but  often
precludes or complicates specific diagnosis. Please submit the entire intact organism if
it is available. If histological sectioning is indicated, it can be performed at CDC after
examining  the  whole  specimen.  Please  note  that  receipt  of  the  whole  specimen  is
critical  for  accurate  diagnosis.  If  multiple  whole  specimens  are  in  question,  please
submit  all  available  specimens,  as  examination  of  different  life  stages  and  sexes  of
helminths/arthropods  may  assist  in  accurate  diagnosis.  If  you  would  like  your
specimens  returned  to  you,  please  state  this  on  the  submission  form  and  it  will  be
arranged. Please be advised that CDC offers diagnostic testing on specimens collected
from human patients. Specimens of animal origin will be considered on a case-by-case
basis. Helminths (cestodes, trematodes, nematodes, and acanthocephalans) Attn: DPDx
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
RDSB/STAT
ATTN: Unit 52
1600 Clifton Road, NE
Atlanta, GA 30329-4027
(404) 718-4110 Arthropods Attn: DPDx
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
RDSB/STAT
ATTN: Unit 52
1600 Clifton Road, NE
Atlanta, GA 30329-4027
(404) 718-4110 DPDx is an educational resource designed for health professionals and
laboratory scientists. For an overview including prevention, control, and treatment visit
www.cdc.gov/parasites/.  To  receive  email  updates  about  this  page,  enter  your  email
address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/diagnosticprocedures/other/organisms.html
