Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  [Dipylidium  caninum]  Dipylidium  caninum  is  a  common
tapeworm of dogs and cats, but is occasionally found in humans. It has many common
names  including  the  “flea  tapeworm”,  “cucumber  tapeworm”,  and  “double-pored
tapeworm”.  Gravid  proglottids  are  passed  intact  in  the  feces  or  emerge  from  the
perianal  region  of  the  host   .  In  the  environment,  the  proglottids  disintegrate  and
release  egg  packets,  which  are  also  occasionally  found  free  in  the  feces   .  The
intermediate host (most often larval stages of the dog or cat flea Ctenocephalides spp.)
ingests  egg  packets,  and  the  oncosphere  within  is  released  into  the  larval  flea’s
intestine. The oncosphere penetrates the intestinal wall, invades the insect’s hemocoel
(body cavity), and develops into a cysticercoid  . The cysticercoid remains in the flea as
it  matures  from  a  larva  into  an  adult   .  The  vertebrate  host  becomes  infected  by
ingesting  the  adult  flea  containing  the  cysticercoid   .  In  the  small  intestine  of  the
vertebrate  host,  the  cysticercoid  develops  into  the  adult  tapeworm  after  about  one
month.  The  adult  tapeworms  (measuring  up  to  60  cm  in  length  and  3  mm  in  width)
reside  in  the  small  intestine  of  the  host,  where  they  each  attach  by  their  scolex   .
Gravid,  double-pored  proglottids  detach  from  the  strobila  (body)  and  are  shed  in  the
feces. Humans also acquire infection by ingesting the cysticercoid contaminated flea.
Children are most frequently infected, possibly due to close contact with flea-infested
pets  . Canids and felids are the normal hosts for Dipylidium caninum. The intermediate
host  is  usually  the  larval  stages  of  the  dog  or  cat  flea  (Ctenocephalides  spp.)  and
occasionally Trichodectes canis (the dog louse). Worldwide; this tapeworm is ubiquitous
and common among pet dogs and cats. Human infection is rare, but has been reported
from  every  inhabited  continent.   Most  infections  with  Dipylidium  caninum  are
asymptomatic. Pets may exhibit behavior to relieve anal pruritis (such as scraping anal
region  across  grass  or  carpeting).  Mild  gastrointestinal  disturbances  may  occur.  The
most  striking  feature  in  animals  and  children  consists  of  the  passage  of  proglottids.
These can be found in the perianal region, in the feces, on diapers, and occasionally on
floor covering and furniture. The proglottids are motile when freshly passed and may be
mistaken for maggots or fly larvae.    D. caninum eggs are round to oval (average size
35 to 40 µm; range 31 to 50 µm by 27 to 48 µm) and contain an oncosphere that has 6
hooklets. Proglottids of D. caninum contain characteristic egg packets that are round to
ovoid and contain 5 to 15 or more eggs each.       The scolex of Dipylidium caninum is
conical-shaped and has four suckers. There is also a retractable rostellum armed with
several  rings  of  small  rose  thorn-shaped  hooks,  used  for  anchoring  into  the  host’s
tissue.    The diagnosis is made by demonstrating the typical proglottids or egg packets
in  the  stool  or  the  environment.  Although  concentration  methods  are  usually  not
necessary  due  to  the  large  size  of  the  proglottids,  flotation  methods  may  miss
infections as egg packets are heavy and may fail to float. Standard precautions for the
processing of stool samples. D. caninum eggs are not infectious to humans.    Molina,
C.P., Ogburn, J. and Adegboyega, P., 2003. Infection by Dipylidium caninum in an infant.
Archives  of  pathology  &  laboratory  medicine,  127(3),  pp.e157-e159.   DPDx  is  an
educational resource designed for health professionals and laboratory scientists. For an
overview including prevention, control, and treatment visit www.cdc.gov/parasites/. To
receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/dipylidium/index.html
