Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  March  7,  2024  /  73(9);209–214  Please  note:  This
report has been corrected. Heidi L. Moline, MD1; Ayzsa Tannis, MPH1; Ariana P. Toepfer,
MPH1; John V. Williams, MD2,3; Julie A. Boom, MD4,5; Janet A. Englund, MD6; Natasha
B.  Halasa,  MD7;  Mary  Allen  Staat,  MD8,9;  Geoffrey  A.  Weinberg,  MD10;  Rangaraj
Selvarangan, PhD11; Marian G. Michaels, MD2,3; Leila C. Sahni, PhD4,5; Eileen J. Klein,
MD6;  Laura  S.  Stewart,  PhD7;  Elizabeth  P.  Schlaudecker,  MD8,9;  Peter  G.  Szilagyi,
MD10; Jennifer E. Schuster, MD12; Leah Goldstein, MPH1; Samar Musa, MPH2,3; Pedro
A. Piedra, MD4,5; Danielle M. Zerr, MD6; Kristina A. Betters, MD7; Chelsea Rohlfs, MBA9;
Christina  Albertin,  MPH10;  Dithi  Banerjee,  PhD12;  Erin  R.  McKeever,  MPH1;  Casey
Kalman, MPH1; Benjamin R. Clopper, MPH1; New Vaccine Surveillance Network Product
Effectiveness Collaborators; Meredith L. McMorrow, MD1,*; Fatimah S. Dawood, MD1,*
(View author affiliations) What is already known about this topic? Respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) is the leading cause of hospitalization among U.S. infants. In August 2023,
CDC  recommended  nirsevimab,  a  long-acting  monoclonal  antibody,  to  protect  infants
aged <8 months against RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection in their first
RSV season. What is added by this report? Nirsevimab effectiveness was 90% against
RSV-associated  hospitalization  in  infants  in  their  first  RSV  season.  Median  time  from
receipt of nirsevimab to symptom onset was start highlight45 days (IQR = 19–76). What
are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?  To  reduce  the  risk  for  RSV-associated
hospitalization,  infants  should  be  protected  by  maternal  RSV  vaccination  or  infant
receipt  of  nirsevimab.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)  is  the  leading  cause  of
hospitalization  among  infants  in  the  United  States.  In  August  2023,  CDC’s  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  recommended  nirsevimab,  a  long-acting
monoclonal  antibody,  for  infants  aged  <8  months  to  protect  against  RSV-associated
lower respiratory tract infection during their first RSV season and for children aged 8–19
months at increased risk for severe RSV disease. In phase 3 clinical trials, nirsevimab
efficacy  against  RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  with  hospitalization
was  81%  (95%  CI  =  62%–90%)  through  150  days  after  receipt;  post-introduction
effectiveness  has  not  been  assessed  in  the  United  States.  In  this  analysis,  the  New
Vaccine
 Surveillance
 Network
 evaluated
 nirsevimab
 effectiveness
 against
RSV-associated hospitalization among infants in their first RSV season during October 1,
2023–February 29, 2024. Among 699 infants hospitalized with acute respiratory illness,
59 (8%) received nirsevimab ≥7 days before symptom onset. Nirsevimab effectiveness
was  90%  (95%  CI  =  75%–96%)  against  RSV-associated  hospitalization  with  a  median
time  from  receipt  to  symptom  onset  of  45  days  (IQR  =  19–76  days).  The  number  of
infants  who  received  nirsevimab  was  too  low  to  stratify  by  duration  from  receipt;
however, nirsevimab effectiveness is expected to decrease with increasing time after
receipt because of antibody decay. Although nirsevimab uptake and the interval from
receipt  of  nirsevimab  were  limited  in  this  analysis,  this  early  estimate  supports  the
current  nirsevimab  recommendation  for  the  prevention  of  severe  RSV  disease  in
infants.  Infants  should  be  protected  by  maternal  RSV  vaccination  or  infant  receipt  of
nirsevimab. Top Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the leading cause of hospitalization
in U.S. infants, responsible for 50,000–80,000 hospitalizations annually in children aged
<5 years (1,2). The highest hospitalization rates occur during the first months of life,
and  risk  declines  with  increasing  age  in  infancy  and  during  early  childhood  (3).  In
August
 2023,
 CDC’s
 Advisory
 Committee
 on
 Immunization
 Practices
 (ACIP)
recommended nirsevimab, a long-acting monoclonal antibody, for all infants aged <8
months  born  during  or  entering  their  first  RSV  season,  and  for  children  aged  8–19
months at increased risk for severe RSV disease and entering their second RSV season
(4).  In  a  pooled  analysis  of  data  from  prelicensure  randomized  placebo-controlled
clinical trials, 1 dose of nirsevimab given at age <8 months was 79% efficacious against
medically attended RSV-associated lower respiratory tract infection and 81% efficacious
against  RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  with  hospitalization  through
150 days after injection (4). In September 2023, a maternal RSV vaccine also became
available to prevent RSV disease in young infants. ACIP recommends either nirsevimab
or maternal RSV vaccination to protect infants born during or entering their first RSV
season (5). In October 2023, in response to nirsevimab shortages, CDC recommended
that  health  care  settings  with  limited  supply  of  nirsevimab  prioritize  nirsevimab  for
infants  aged  <6  months  and  infants  with  underlying  conditions  at  highest  risk  for
severe disease (6). In January 2024, additional doses of nirsevimab became available,
and  CDC  recommended  that  health  care  settings  with  adequate  nirsevimab  supply
return  to  the  original  ACIP  recommendations  for  nirsevimab  use  (7).  This  analysis
provides  the  first  U.S.  estimate  for  post-introduction  nirsevimab  effectiveness  among
U.S. infants during their first RSV season. Top The New Vaccine Surveillance Network
(NVSN)  is  a  population-based,  prospective  surveillance  platform  for  acute  respiratory
illness  (ARI)  in  infants,  children,  and  adolescents  aged  <18  years  that  monitors
pediatric respiratory viruses at seven U.S. pediatric academic medical centers to assess
immunization  effectiveness.†  Demographic,  clinical,  and  immunization  data  were
systematically
 collected
 through
 parent/guardian
 interviews,
 medical
 record
abstraction, and state immunization information systems. Respiratory specimens were
collected  from  enrolled  children  and  tested  for  RSV  and  other  common  respiratory
viruses  by  real-time  reverse  transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction.§  Receipt  of
nirsevimab  was  ascertained  through  parent  report  and  verified  through  state
immunization  information  systems,  birth  hospital,  or  primary  care  provider  records.¶
Infants  were  eligible  for  this  analysis  if  they  were  aged  <8  months  as  of  October  1,
2023,  or  born  after  October  1,  2023,  were  hospitalized  with  ARI**  during  October  1,
2023–February 29, 2024, and had verified nirsevimab status, reported gestational age
at birth, and medical record review to assess for underlying medical conditions. Infants
were excluded if they were enrolled before nirsevimab became available at their site,††
received  any  doses  of  palivizumab,  had  reported  maternal  RSV  vaccination  during
pregnancy, or inconclusive or unknown RSV test results. For a site to be included in this
analysis, at least five infants enrolled at the site had to have received nirsevimab ≥7
days  before  symptom  onset.  Nirsevimab  effectiveness  against  RSV-associated
hospitalization was estimated using a test-negative, case-control design. Case-patients
were infants who received a positive RSV test result. Control patients were infants who
received  a  negative  RSV  test  result.  Infants  were  considered  nirsevimab  recipients  if
they received nirsevimab ≥7 days before symptom onset to account for RSV incubation
period and time to peak antibody concentration.§§ Infants who received nirsevimab <7
days  before  symptom  onset  were  excluded.  Pearson’s  chi-square  tests  were  used  to
compare demographic characteristics among case-patients and control patients and by
nirsevimab status. Effectiveness was estimated using multivariable logistic regression
models, comparing the odds of receipt of nirsevimab among case-patients and control
patients.  Regression  models  controlled  for  age  at  enrollment  in  months,  month  of
illness,  enrollment  site,  and  presence  of  one  or  more  high-risk  medical  conditions  for
severe  RSV  disease.¶¶  Preterm  status  (birth  at  <28,  28–31,  32–33,  34–36,  and  ≥37
weeks’ gestation) and insurance type were evaluated as potential confounders but did
not  change  estimates  and  were  not  included  in  the  final  model.  Effectiveness  was
calculated  as  (1− adjusted  odds  ratio)  ×  100%.  Analyses  were  conducted  using  SAS
software (version 9.4; SAS Institute). This activity was reviewed by CDC, deemed not
research, and was conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC policy.***
Top  Among  1,036  eligible  infants,  699  infants  at  four  sites  met  inclusion  criteria,†††
including  407  (58%)  case-patients  and  292  (42%)  control  patients  (Table).  Receipt  of
nirsevimab  was  more  frequent  among  infants  with  high-risk  medical  conditions  than
those without these conditions (46% versus 6%, p<0.001). There was no difference in
the frequency of receipt of nirsevimab by preterm status or insurance type. Time since
receipt of nirsevimab to ARI symptom onset ranged from 7 to 127 days with a median
of 45 days (IQR = 19–76 days) (Figure). Overall, six (1%) case-patients and 53 (18%)
control patients received nirsevimab; among all included infants, receipt of nirsevimab
ranged from 4% to 12% by site. Nirsevimab effectiveness was 90% (95% CI = 75–96)
against  RSV-associated  hospitalization.  Top  In  this  multisite  analysis  of  699  infants
hospitalized  with  ARI  during  their  first  RSV  season,  receipt  of  nirsevimab  was  90%
effective against RSV-associated hospitalization at a median of 45 days from receipt of
nirsevimab to ARI symptom onset. This early effectiveness estimate supports existing
recommendations for the prevention of severe RSV disease in infants in their first RSV
season.  The  strengths  of  this  first  estimate  of  U.S.  post-introduction  nirsevimab
effectiveness  include  enrollment  of  infants  using  a  standardized  ARI  definition,
systematic RSV testing, and receipt of nirsevimab verification with state immunization
information systems or medical records for all infants. However, it is important to note
that nirsevimab effectiveness during a full RSV season is expected to be lower than the
estimate reported here, because antibody levels from passive immunization wane over
time.  In  this  analysis,  the  median  interval  from  receipt  of  nirsevimab  was  45  days,
whereas  the  median  duration  of  the  U.S.  RSV  season  before  the  COVID-19  pandemic
was  189  days  (8).  In  clinical  trials,  nirsevimab  remained  highly  efficacious  against
RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  in  infants  through  150  days  after
receipt  of  nirsevimab,  consistent  with  an  extended  half-life  of  63–73  days  (9).
Estimating  effectiveness  under  real-world  conditions  for  the  full  duration  of  an  RSV
season and in children aged 8–19 months at high risk for severe RSV disease who are
recommended  to  receive  nirsevimab  before  their  second  RSV  season  remains
important. Thus, CDC will continue to monitor nirsevimab effectiveness. The findings in
this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  five  limitations.  First,  only  a  small  proportion  of
hospitalized  infants  with  ARI  received  nirsevimab,  likely  in  part  because  of  delayed
availability  in  this  first  season  of  introduction  and  intermittent  supply  shortages,  and
infants  who  received  nirsevimab  were  more  likely  to  have  underlying  conditions.§§§
Thus,  results  might  not  be  fully  generalizable  to  all  infants  eligible  for  receipt  of
nirsevimab  in  their  first  RSV  season.  Second,  the  low  number  of  case-patients  who
received  nirsevimab  did  not  allow  for  stratified  estimates  by  time  since  receipt  of
nirsevimab.  Third,  because  nirsevimab  became  available  at  most  sites  in  the  United
States after seasonal RSV circulation began, some infants in this analysis might have
had  RSV  infection  before  receipt  of  nirsevimab,  which  might  have  affected  estimated
effectiveness. Fourth, nirsevimab effectiveness was not estimated by dosage (50 mg for
infants  weighing  <5  kg  or  100  mg  for  infants  weighing  ≥5  kg)  because  nirsevimab
dosage was not ascertained. Finally, the effectiveness estimate in this report is limited
to the prevention of RSV-associated hospitalization. RSV among infants also causes a
considerable  increase  in  outpatient  and  emergency  department  visits;  additional
studies  are  warranted  to  assess  nirsevimab  effectiveness  against  these  outcomes.
Receipt  of  a  single  dose  of  nirsevimab  was  highly  effective  against  RSV-associated
hospitalization in infants entering their first RSV season. This finding supports current
CDC recommendations that all infants should be protected by maternal RSV vaccination
or infant receipt of nirsevimab, to reduce the risk for RSV-associated hospitalization in
their  first  RSV  season  (4,6).  Top  Ruth  Link-Gelles,  Coronavirus  and  Other  Respiratory
Viruses  Division,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;
Amanda Payne, Coronavirus and Other Respiratory Viruses Division, National Center for
Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;  Ryan  Wiegand,  Coronavirus  and  Other
Respiratory  Viruses  Division,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases, CDC; Ximena Aguilera Correa, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center; Claudia Guevara Pulido, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University
Medical  Center;  Hanna  Grioni,  Department  of  Pediatrics,  Seattle  Children’s  Hospital;
Bonnie  Strelitz,  Department  of  Pediatrics,  Seattle  Children’s  Hospital;  Vasanthi
Avadhanula, Baylor College of Medicine; Flor M. Munoz, Texas Children’s Hospital and
Baylor  College  of  Medicine;  Wende  Fregoe,  Department  of  Pediatrics,  University  of
Rochester  Medical  Center  and  University  of  Rochester–Golisano  Children’s  Hospital;
Saranya  Peri,  Department  of  Pathology  and  Laboratory  Medicine,  Children’s  Mercy
Kansas  City;  Anjana  Sasidharan,  Department  of  Pathology  and  Laboratory  Medicine,
Children’s Mercy Kansas City; Monika Johnson, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pittsburgh  School  of  Medicine;  Klancie  Dauer,  Department  of  Pediatrics,  University  of
Pittsburgh
 School
 of
 Medicine.
 Top
 Corresponding
 author:
 Heidi
 L.
 Moline,
ick6@cdc.gov.  Top  1Coronavirus  and  Other  Respiratory  Viruses  Division,  National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 2UPMC Children’s Hospital of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh
School  of  Medicine,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania;  4Texas  Children’s  Hospital,  Houston,
Texas; 5Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 6Department of Pediatrics, Seattle
Children’s  Hospital,  Seattle,  Washington;  7Department  of  Pediatrics,  Vanderbilt
University  Medical  Center,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  8Division  of  Infectious  Diseases,
Cincinnati  Children’s  Hospital  Medical  Center,  Cincinnati,  Ohio;  9Department  of
Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio; 10Department
of
 Pediatrics,
 University
 of
 Rochester
 Medical
 Center
 and
 University
 of
Rochester–Golisano  Children’s  Hospital,  Rochester,  New  York;  11Department  of
Pathology  and  Laboratory  Medicine,  Children’s  Mercy  Hospital,  Kansas  City,  Missouri;
12Department  of  Pediatrics  Children’s  Mercy  Hospital,  Kansas  City,  Missouri.  Top  All
authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  John  V.  Williams  reports
institutional  support  from  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH);  compensation  for
service  on  Quidel’s  scientific  advisory  board  through  2022  and  service  on  GSK
Independent  Data  Monitoring  Committee;  honorarium  for  Infectious  Diseases  of
Children  conference  lecture;  payments  for  participation  on  Independent  Data
Monitoring  Committee,  GSK,  Data  Safety  Monitoring  Board,  and  National  Institute  of
Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  IMPAACT  study.  Janet  A.  Englund  reports  institutional
support  from  GSK,  and  consulting  fees  from  AstraZeneca,  Meissa  Vaccines,  Moderna,
and  Sanofi  Pasteur.  Natasha  B.  Halasa  reports  grants  from  Sanofi  and  Quidel  and
consulting fees from Genetech. Mary Allen Staat reports institutional support from NIH
and  receipt  of  royalties  from  UpToDate.  Geoffrey  A.  Weinberg  reports  institutional
support  from  the  New  York  State  Department  of  Health  AIDS  Institute  and  honoraria
from Merck & Co. for writing and editing textbook chapters in the Merck & Co. Merck
Manual. Rangaraj Selvarangan reports grants from Hologic, BioFire, Becton Dickinson,
Luminex,  and  Cepheid  and  honoraria  for  serving  on  a  GSK  advisory  board.  Marian  G.
Michaels  reports  support  from  NIH.  Elizabeth  P.  Schlaudecker  reports  institutional
support  from  Pfizer-BioNTech,  support  for  attending  a  Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases
Society  meeting,  uncompensated  service  on  NIH  Data  Safety  Monitoring  Board  and
Division  of  Microbiology  and  Infectious  Diseases  Data  Safety  Monitoring  Board,
honorarium from Sanofi Pasteur, uncompensated membership in the World Society of
Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases,  and  uncompensated  service  as  committee  chair  for  the
Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society. Jennifer E. Schuster reports institutional support
from NIH, Food and Drug Administration, and State of Missouri; speaking honoraria from
the  Missouri  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics;  and  payment  for  participation  on  the
board  of  the  Association  of  American  Medical  Colleges  Advisory  (AAMC)  for  a  grant
awarded to AAMC for vaccine confidence. Pedro A. Piedra reports grants or contracts
from  Icosavax,  Mapp  Biologics,  Merck,  Sanofi-Pasteur,  GSK,  Blue  Lake  Biotechnology,
Shionogi,  and  IgM  Biosciences;  and  reports  consulting  fees  from  Takada,  Pfizer,
Moderna,  Merck,  and  Sanofi-Pasteur.  No  other  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were
disclosed.  Top  *  These  senior  authors  contributed  equally  to  this  report.  †  Children’s
Mercy  Hospital,  Kansas  City,  Missouri;  Cincinnati  Children’s  Hospital  Medical  Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio; Golisano Children’s Hospital, Rochester, New York; Seattle Children’s
Hospital,  Seattle,  Washington;  Texas  Children’s  Hospital,  Houston,  Texas;  UPMC
Children’s  Hospital  of  Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania;  Vanderbilt  University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. § All enrolled children are tested for the following
viruses:
 adenoviruses,
 SARS-CoV-2,
 rhinovirus/enterovirus,
 RSV,
 human
metapneumovirus,  enterovirus-D68,  parainfluenza  viruses,  human  coronaviruses,  and
influenza  viruses.  ¶  Primary  care  provider  record  verification  was  performed  in  sites
without  mandatory  reporting  of  nirsevimab  administration  to  state  immunization
information  systems.  **  ARI  is  defined  as  one  or  more  of  the  following  signs  or
symptoms  present  for  <14  days  before  enrollment  encounter:  fever,  cough,  earache,
nasal  congestion,  runny  nose,  sore  throat,  vomiting  after  coughing,  wheezing,
shortness of breath, rapid or shallow breathing, apnea, apparent life-threatening event,
or  brief  resolved  unexplained  event.  ††  2023:  Houston,  Texas,  October  5;  Nashville,
Tennessee,  October  8;  Seattle,  Washington,  October  8;  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  October  10;
Kansas City, Missouri, November 1; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, November 2; Rochester,
New  York  November  6.  §§  In  clinical  trials,  peak  neutralizing  antibody  concentration
levels  were  reached  in  adults  by  day  6  after  intramuscular  administration.
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2023/761328s000lbl.pdf
 ¶¶
High-risk  medical  conditions  were  defined  as  chronic  lung  disease  of  prematurity
(bronchopulmonary  dysplasia,  bronchiolitis  obliterans,  chronic  respiratory  failure  with
continuous  positive  airway  pressure/bilevel  positive  airway  pressure/ventilator,
pulmonary hypertension, or interstitial lung disease) (11); hemodynamically significant
congenital heart disease (abnormalities of aortic arch, hypoplastic left heart syndrome,
pulmonary  atresia,  tricuspid  atresia,  Tetralogy  of  Fallot,  transposition  of  the  great
arteries,  partial  or  total  anomalous  pulmonary  venous  return,  other  abnormalities  of
heart  valves,  double  outlet  right  ventricle,  or  other  severe  congenital  heart
malformations)  (21);  severe  immunocompromise  (one);  severe  cystic  fibrosis  (two);
neuromuscular  disease  (autonomic  dysfunction,  instability  or  dysautonomia,  agenesis
or hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, muscular dystrophy or spinal muscular atrophy,
disorders  of  tone,  or  other  neuromuscular  condition)  (11);  or  congenital  pulmonary
abnormalities that impair the ability to clear secretions (none). *** 45 C.F.R. part 46, 21
C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a; 44 U.S.C. Sect. 3501 et seq.
††† Among the 337 infants excluded from this analysis, reasons for exclusion included
enrollment at a site with fewer than five infants who had received nirsevimab (296 from
Rochester, Cincinnati, and Kansas City), receipt of nirsevimab <7 days before symptom
onset (20), missing or inconclusive RSV test result (20), maternal receipt of RSV vaccine
during pregnancy (22), and receipt of palivizumab (10); reasons for exclusion are not
mutually
 exclusive.
 §§§
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/imz-managers/coverage/rsvvaxview/index.html
(Accessed  January  30,  2024).  Top  Top  Abbreviations:  BPAP  =  bilevel  positive  airway
pressure;  CPAP  =  continuous  positive  airway  pressure;  NA  =  not  applicable;
RSV = respiratory syncytial virus.
* Overall, 337 infants enrolled during the analysis period were excluded. Reasons for
exclusion  included  enrollment  at  sites  with  fewer  than  five  infants  who  had  received
nirsevimab (296 from Rochester, Cincinnati, and Kansas City), receipt of nirsevimab <7
days before symptom onset (20), missing or inconclusive RSV test result (20), maternal
receipt of RSV vaccine during pregnancy (22), and receipt of palivizumab (10); reasons
for exclusion are not mutually exclusive.
† Current season receipt of nirsevimab documented by registry or provider (654: 94%)
or medical record only (45: 6%).
§ Pearson’s chi-square tests were used to compare demographic characteristics among
case-patients and control patients and by receipt of nirsevimab.
¶ <28 weeks (12: 2%); 28–31 weeks (12: 2%); 32–33 weeks (48: 7%); 34–36 weeks (74:
11%).
**  High-risk  medical  conditions  were  defined  as  chronic  lung  disease  of  prematurity
(bronchopulmonary  dysplasia,  bronchiolitis  obliterans,  chronic  respiratory  failure  with
CPAP/BIPAP/ventilator,  pulmonary  hypertension  [neonatal,  primary,  or  secondary],  or
interstitial  lung  disease)  (12);  hemodynamically  significant  congenital  heart  disease
(abnormalities  of  aortic  arch,  hypoplastic  left  heart  syndrome,  pulmonary  atresia,
tricuspid atresia, Tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, partial or total
anomalous pulmonary venous return, other abnormalities of heart valves, double outlet
right
 ventricle,
 or
 other
 congenital
 heart
 malformations)
 (21);
 severe
immunocompromise  (one);  severe  cystic  fibrosis  (two);  neuromuscular  disease
(autonomic  dysfunction,  instability  or  dysautonomia,  agenesis  or  hypoplasia  of  the
corpus callosum, muscular dystrophy or spinal muscular atrophy, disorders of tone, or
other neuromuscular condition) (12); or congenital pulmonary abnormalities that impair
the ability to clear secretions (none).
††  Persons  of  Hispanic  or  Latino  (Hispanic)  origin  might  be  of  any  race  but  are
categorized  as  Hispanic;  all  racial  groups  are  non-Hispanic.  Top  Abbreviation:  RSV  =
respiratory syncytial virus. * Days 0–6 are not included because infants with receipt of
nirsevimab  within  7  days  of  symptom  onset  were  excluded  from  this  analysis.  Top
Suggested citation for this article: Moline HL, Tannis A, Toepfer AP, et al. Early Estimate
of  Nirsevimab  Effectiveness  for  Prevention  of  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus–Associated
Hospitalization Among Infants Entering Their First Respiratory Syncytial Virus Season —
New Vaccine Surveillance Network, October 2023–February 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2024;73:209–214. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7309a4. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/73/wr/mm7309a4.htm
