A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Ebola disease is caused by a group of viruses, known as orthoebolaviruses (formally
ebolavirus)1. These viruses can cause serious illness that, without treatment, can cause
death.  Orthoebolaviruses  were  discovered  in  1976  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  the
Congo and are found primarily in sub-Saharan Africa. There are four orthoebolaviruses
that  cause  illness  in  people:  Some  orthoebolaviruses  do  not  cause  illness  in  people.
Reston  virus  (species  Orthoebolavirus  restonense)  can  cause  illness  in  nonhuman
primates and pigs. Bombali virus (species Orthoebolavirus bombaliense) was identified
in bats, but scientists don't know if it causes illness in animals or people. People with
Ebola  disease  may  experience  "dry"  symptoms  early  in  the  course  of  illness.  These
symptoms may include fever, aches, pains, and fatigue. As the person becomes sicker,
the illness typically progresses to "wet" symptoms and may include diarrhea, vomiting,
and unexplained bleeding.  Someone with Ebola disease may start getting sick 2 to 21
days after contact with an orthoebolavirus. However, on average, symptoms begin 8 to
10 days after exposure. Healthcare providers and family members caring for someone
with  Ebola  disease  without  proper  infection  control  methods  have  the  highest  risk  of
infection.   The  viruses  that  cause  Ebola  disease  pose  little  risk  to  travelers  or  the
general public. People can get Ebola disease through contact with the body fluids of an
infected  sick  or  dead  person.  Rarely,  some  people  can  get  the  disease  from  contact
with  an  infected  animal,  like  a  bat  or  primate.  When  living  in  or  traveling  to  regions
where viruses that spread Ebola disease may be present, take steps to protect yourself.
Avoid  contact  with  body  fluids  from  people  and  animals,  including  Wear  protective
equipment  if  you  come  in  contact  with  people  who  are  sick  or  have  died  from  Ebola
disease, their blood and bodily fluids, or objects covered with their blood or body fluids.
If you return from an area with an ongoing Ebola outbreak, monitor your health for 21
days.  Seek  medical  care  immediately  if  you  develop  symptoms  of  Ebola  disease.
Healthcare  providers  use  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  testing  to  diagnose  Ebola
disease.  They  can  also  test  for  orthoebolavirus  antibodies.  Someone  being  tested  for
Ebola  disease  should  be  separated  from  other  people  in  a  healthcare  facility  until
results are confirmed. Two FDA-approved treatments2 are currently available to treat
Ebola  disease  (species  orthoebolavirus  zairense):  Inmazeb™ and  Ebanga™.  Patients
have  a  much  better  chance  of  surviving  if  they  receive:   Learn  about  Ebola  disease,
caused by an infection with one of a group of viruses, known as ebolaviruses, that are
found  primarily  in  sub-Saharan  Africa.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/ebola/about/index.html
