A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Effect of Cleaning on Sterilization Efficacy
from the Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities (2008). The
effect  of  salt  and  serum  on  the  efficacy  of  low-temperature  sterilization  technologies
has raised concern regarding the margin of safety of these technologies. Experiments
have  shown  that  salts  have  the  greatest  impact  on  protecting  microorganisms  from
killing426, 469. However, other studies have suggested that these concerns may not be
clinically relevant. One study evaluated the relative rate of removal of inorganic salts,
organic  soil,  and  microorganisms  from  medical  devices  to  better  understand  the
dynamics of the cleaning process426. These tests were conducted by inoculating Alfa
soil  (tissue-culture  media  and  10%  fetal  bovine  serum)  469  containing  106  G.
stearothermophilus  spores  onto  the  surface  of  a  stainless-steel  scalpel  blade.  After
drying  for  30  minutes  at  35°C  followed  by  30  minutes  at  room  temperature,  the
samples  were  placed  in  water  at  room  temperature.  The  blades  were  removed  at
specified times, and the concentration of total protein and chloride ion was measured.
The results showed that soaking in deionized water for 60 seconds resulted in a >95%
release rate of chloride ion from NaCl solution in 20 seconds, Alfa soil in 30 seconds,
and fetal bovine serum in 120 seconds. Thus, contact with water for short periods, even
in  the  presence  of  protein,  rapidly  leads  to  dissolution  of  salt  crystals  and  complete
inactivation of spores by a low-temperature sterilization process (Table 10). Based on
these experimental data, cleaning procedures would eliminate the detrimental effect of
high  salt  content  on  a  low-temperature  sterilization  process.  These  articles  426,  469,
721  assessing  low-temperature  sterilization  technology  reinforce  the  importance  of
meticulous  cleaning  before  sterilization.  These  data  support  the  critical  need  for
healthcare facilities to develop rigid protocols for cleaning contaminated objects before
sterilization472. Sterilization of instruments and medical devices is compromised if the
process  is  not  preceded  by  meticulous  cleaning.  The  cleaning  of  any  narrow-lumen
medical device used in patient care presents a major challenge to reprocessing areas.
While  attention  has  been  focused  on  flexible  endoscopes,  cleaning  issues  related  to
other
 narrow-lumen
 medical
 devices
 such
 as
 sphinctertomes
 have
 been
investigated913. This study compared manual cleaning with that of automated cleaning
with a narrow-lumen cleaner and found that only retro-flushing with the narrow lumen
cleaner provided adequate cleaning of the three channels. If reprocessing was delayed
for  more  than  24  hours,  retro-flush  cleaning  was  no  longer  effective  and  ETO
sterilization  failure  was  detected  when  devices  were  held  for  7  days  913.  In  another
study  involving  simulated-use  cleaning  of  laparoscopic  devices,  Alfa  found  that
minimally  the  use  of  retro-flushing  should  be  used  during  cleaning  of  non-ported
laparoscopic  devices914.  CDC  provides  information  on  infection  control  and  clinical
safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and
visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/cleaning-effect-sterilization.html
