Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Photos by Shutterstock 
 Elastomeric half mask respirators (EHMRs) are a type of air-purifying respirator and are
reusable devices with exchangeable filter elements (cartridges or filters) that may be
selected to provide the needed level of filtration (e.g., N95). The facepieces are made of
synthetic or natural rubber material that allow repeated cleaning, disinfection, storage,
and  reuse.  EHMRs  can  be  used  to  protect  against  gases,  vapors,  and  particles  if
equipped with the appropriate filters or cartridges. Because the facepiece must form a
tight  seal  against  the  user’s  face,  EHMRs  require  fit  testing  at  least  annually.  Learn
more about NIOSH’s studies and the EHMR resources available in the sections below.
NIOSH  is  currently  conducting  several  studies  related  to  elastomeric  half  mask
respirators  (EHMRs).  These  studies  are  summarized  below.   JET  FIT  –  Just-in-time
Elastomeric Training and Fit Testing
This  project  aims  to  test  the  feasibility  of  rapidly  fit  testing  and  training  healthcare
personnel to use EHMRs in place of N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) and other
respiratory  protection  devices  (RPDs)  during  a  public  health  emergency.  NIOSH
completed  data  collection  at  three  acute  care  hospitals  (affiliated  with  Emory
University, Wayne State University, and The University of Texas) between October 2017
and September 2020. NIOSH published early results (two of three hospitals) from this
study  in  March  2020.  More  complete  methods  and  results  are  in  development  by
NIOSH. Outputs from Study:
Training  and  Fit  Testing  of  Health  Care  Personnel  for  Reusable  Elastomeric  Half-Mask
Respirators Compared With Disposable N95 Respirators Pompeii, L A, Kraft, CS, et al.
JAMA Research Letter. March 25, 2020. 
RESPONSE  –  Randomized-controlled  Elastomeric  Studies  with  PCR  technology,  to
determine disinfection Safety and Effectiveness
The  purpose  of  this  project  is  to  identify  how  effective  various  disinfectants  are  at
removing microorganisms from EHMRs as well as develop a protocol to train healthcare
personnel to use disinfectant wipes to clean these respirators and check the efficacy of
the cleaning. The project is currently underway, and it is being conducted at two acute
care hospitals (affiliated with Emory University and The University of Texas). 
REUSE – Routine Elastomeric Use and Evaluations in Healthcare
This  3-6  month  project  will  focus  on  demonstrating  how  an  acute  care  hospital
implements  and  uses  EHMRs  including  an  evaluation  of  a  single  disinfection  method.
This project is scheduled to begin in early 2021 at three acute care hospitals (Emory
University, Wayne State University, and The University of Texas). 
Elastomeric Half Mask Respirator Implementation Guides
Two  acute  care  hospitals  are  developing  an  implementation  guide  describing  the
logistics for how they developed and implemented elastomeric respirator use at their
institutions. The hospitals (affiliated with the University of Maryland and the Allegheny
Health Network) are experienced EHMR users and currently use elastomeric half mask
respirators in healthcare delivery. This project is currently underway and is expected to
be completed by the end of February 2021. Outputs from Study:
University of Maryland Implementation Guide to Support Use of Elastomeric Half Mask
Respirators in Healthcare 
Examination of Healthcare Personnel Perspectives and Concerns Regarding EHMR use
in  a  Healthcare  Setting  and  Current  EHMR  use  Strategies  due  to  the  COVID-19
Pandemic
Two  acute  care  hospitals  (affiliated  with  the  University  of  Maryland  and  Allegheny
Health  Network)  will  survey  and  examine  healthcare  personnel  perceptions  and
concerns from wearing EHMRs. NIOSH expects nearly 1,000 healthcare personnel to be
surveyed from these two hospitals. This project is currently underway and expected to
be completed by the end of 2021. 
NIOSH Nationwide EHMR Demonstration Projects
NIOSH is continuing to explore strategies to increase the availability of disposable N95
FFRs  by  leveraging  reusable  EHMRs  and  appropriate  filter  cartridges.  The  Strategic
National Stockpile (SNS) plans to purchase EHMRs and filter cartridges for storage and
distribution.  NIOSH  is  assisting  the  SNS  to  develop  this  nation-wide  distribution
strategy.  In  collaboration  with  the  SNS,  NIOSH  prepared  a  Federal  Register  Notice  to
request  information  from  the  public  regarding  the  deployment  and  use  of  EHMRs  in
healthcare  settings  and  emergency  medical  services  organizations  during  infectious
disease  outbreaks.  To  learn  more  about  this  effort,  please  view  the  Federal  Register
Notice and archived webinar recording, NIOSH Elastomeric Half Mask Respirator (EHMR)
Federal Register Notice Webinar. 
Elastomeric  Half  Mask  Respirator  and  Filtering  Facepiece  Respirator  Exhalation  Valve
Research Studies
NIOSH  is  conducting  several  studies  on  respirator  exhalation  valves.  Additional
information  about  these  studies  is  available  on  our  Respirator  Exhalation  Valve
Research webpage. What are Air-Purifying Respirators? (2017)
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon Understanding the Difference (Surgical masks, N95 FFRs,
and Elastomerics) (2019)
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon Types of Respiratory Protection (2019)
PDFpdf  icon,  Image  Evaluation  of  Exhalation  Resistance  and  Inspired  Carbon  Dioxide
Concentration in Elastomeric Half-Mask Respirators with Modified or Covered Exhalation
Valves
Though  modifying  or  covering  the  exhalation  valve  of  an  elastomeric  half-mask
respirator  (EHMR)  may  improve  its  potential  efficacy  for  source  control,  it  could  also
result in higher exhalation resistance or elevated concentrations of carbon dioxide gas
(CO2) in the respirator facepiece and subsequently increase user discomfort and reduce
user  acceptance.  This  study  explores  two  approaches  for  modifying  or  covering  the
exhalation  valves  of  EHMRs:  (1)  modifying  EHMRs  to  filter  the  exhaled  breath  by
removing  the  inhalation  valve  membranes  and  blocking  the  exhalation  valve;  (2)
covering EHMR exhalation valves with surgical masks. Hospital Respiratory Protection
Program Toolkit
This toolkit was developed to assist hospitals in developing and implementing effective
respiratory  protection  programs,  with  an  emphasis  on  preventing  the  transmission  of
aerosol  transmissible  diseases  (ATDs)  to  healthcare  personnel.  Healthcare  personnel
are paid and unpaid persons who provide patient care in a healthcare setting or support
the  delivery  of  healthcare  by  providing  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
security, or maintenance services. Healthcare personnel may potentially be exposed to
ATD pathogens. Aerosols are particles or droplets suspended in air. ATDs are diseases
transmitted  when  infectious  agents,  which  are  suspended  or  present  in  particles  or
droplets,  contact  the  mucous  membranes  or  are  inhaled.  A  Guide  to  Air-Purifying
Respirators
Air-purifying  respirators  (APRs),  such  as  elastomeric  respirators,  work  by  removing
gases,  vapors,  aerosols  (airborne  droplets  and  solid  particles),  or  a  combination  of
contaminants  from  the  air  through  the  use  of  filters,  cartridges,  or  canisters.  These
respirators  do  not  supply  oxygen  from  other  than  the  working  atmosphere,  and
therefore  cannot  be  used  in  an  atmosphere  that  is  oxygen-deficient  or  immediately
dangerous to life or health (IDLH). The appropriate respirator for a particular situation
will depend on the environment and the contaminant(s). Advancements in Elastomeric
Respirator Technology for Use as Source Control
Elastomeric  half  mask  respirators  (EHMRs)  are  being  used  more  widely  in  U.S.
healthcare  systems  because  they  can  be  cleaned,  disinfected,  and  reused.
Manufacturers  have  developed  innovative  NIOSH-approved  EHMR  designs  that  both
protect  the  wearer  as  well  as  provide  adequate  source  control.  Understanding
respiratory protection options in Healthcare: The Overlooked Elastomeric
In the healthcare industry, the importance of respiratory protection is often overlooked.
Choosing  the  correct  respirator  for  the  exposure  level  and  work  task  is  a  critical
component of a respiratory protection program. Supplementing the Supply of N95s with
Reusable Elastomeric Half Mask Respirators
The  high  demand  and  limited  supply  of  N95  FFRs  during  a  public  health  emergency
have led organizations to rely on other types of respirators, such as reusable EHMRs.
Certified Equipment List
The  Certified  Equipment  List  is  a  tool  to  help  respirator  users,  safety  managers,
industrial  hygienists,  and  others  find  NIOSH-approved  respirators.  Cleaning  and
Disinfection  Perceptions  and  Use  Practices  Among  Elastomeric  Respirator  Users  in
Healthcare
Hines,  SE  et  al.  Workplace  Health  and  Safety  Disinfection  of  reusable  elastomeric
respirators  by  health  care  workers:  A  feasibility  study  and  development  of  standard
operating procedures
Bessesen, M. T., Adams, J. C., Radonovich, L., & Anderson, J. (2015). American journal of
infection  control,  43(6),  629-634.  Elastomeric  half  mask  respirators:  An  alternative  to
disposable respirators and a solution to shortages during public health emergencies
Greenawald LA; Haas EJ; D’Alessandro MM. (2021). Journal of the International Society
of  Respiratory  Protection.  2021  Dec;  38(2):74-91  Hospital  respiratory  protection
practices in 6 US states: A public health evaluation study
Peterson,  K.,  Novak,  D.,  Stradtman,  L.,  Wilson,  D.,  &  Couzens,  L.  (2015).  American
journal  of  infection  control,  43(1),  63-71.  Implementation  Guide  to  Support  Use  of
Elastomeric Half Mask Respirators in Healthcare
Hines  S,  Thurman  P,  McDiarmid  M.  University  of  Maryland  Implementation  Guide,
February  3,  2021.  Implementation  of  an  Elastomeric  Mask  Program  as  a  Strategy  to
Eliminate Disposable N95 Mask Use and Resterilization: Results from a Large Academic
Medical Center
Chalikonda S, Waltenbaugh H, Angelilli S, Dumont T, Kvasager C, Sauber T, Servello N,
Singh  A,  Diaz-Garcia  R,  Journal  of  the  American  College  of  Surgeons  (2020)
Implementing  Reusable  Elastomeric  Respirators  in  Health  Care:  Considerations  for
Routine and Surge Use
National Academy of Medicine Consensus Study. Clever, L.H., Rogers, B.M., Yost, O.C.,
and Liverman, C.T. Editors, The National Academies Press, 2018. Qualitative Analysis of
Origins  and  Evolution  of  an  Elastomeric  Respirator-based  Hospital  Respiratory
Protection Program
Hines,  SE,  Mueller,  N,  Oliver,  M,  Gucer,  P,  McDiarmid,  M.  Journal  of  the  International
Society  for  Respiratory  Protection.  2017:34:95-111.  Stockpiling  supplies  for  the  next
influenza pandemic
Radonovich  LJ,  Magalian  PD,  Hollingsworth  MK,  Baracco  G.  Emerg  Infect  Dis.
2009;15(6):e1.  doi:10.3201/eid1506.081196  Storage  and  Availability  of  Elastomeric
Respirators in Health Care
Hines,
 SE,
 Brown,
 C,
 Oliver,
 M,
 et
 al.
 Health
 Security.
 2019:
17:DOI:10.1089/hs.2019.0039.  Training  and  Fit  Testing  of  Health  Care  Personnel  for
Reusable Elastomeric Half Mask Respirators Compared With Disposable N95 Respirators
Pompeii, L A, Kraft, CS, et al. JAMA Research Letter. March 25, 2020. User Acceptance of
Reusable Respirators in Healthcare
Hines,  SE,  Brown,  C,  Oliver,  M,  Gucer,  P,  Frisch,  M,  Hogan,  R,  Roth,  T,  Chang,  J,
McDiarmid, M. User acceptance of reusable respirators in healthcare. American Journal
of  Infection  Control.  2019:47:648-655.  Using  public  feedback  about  the  use  of
elastomeric half mask respirators to inform a national deployment study within health
settings
Haas EJ; Greenawald LA; Furek A; D’Alessandro MM. (2021). Journal of the International
Society
 of
 Respiratory
 Protection.
 2021
 Dec;
 38(2):92-106
 CDC—Elastomeric
Respirators  for  U.S.  Healthcare  Delivery  (4/8/2020)  American  College  of  Medical
Toxicology  (ACMT)—An  Alternative  to  Disposable  N95s:  The  Reusable  Elastomeric
Half-Mask Respirator Experience (8/19/2020)
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/respirators/elastomeric/default.html
