Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Available for Download [PDF – 323 KB] Well-being is the ability
of individuals to address normal stresses, work productively, and realize one’s highest
potential.1  Research  shows  that  employees  in  good  health  are  more  likely  to  deliver
optimal  performance  in  the  workplace.1,2,3  Healthy  employees  not  only  have  better
quality of life, they also benefit from having a lower risk of disease, illness, and injury,
as well as increased work productivity and a greater likelihood of contributing to their
communities.  Beyond  helping  workers  uphold  work-life  balance  and  improve  overall
health,  organizations  are  exploring  additional  wellness  benefits  such  as  recognition,
paid time off, leadership training, and community volunteer projects that improve both
well-being and overall engagement in the workplace.3 Wellness program engagement
is about more than just showing up at a health screening or other activity to receive an
incentive  or  avoid  a  financial  penalty.  Although  participation  is  necessary  to  be
engaged,  employees  do  have  to  be  engaged  to  participate.  Engagement  involves
creating and maintaining a sincere interest and involvement in living a healthy life—at
home and at work. Workplace wellness programs are only as effective as the proportion
of  employees  who  are  truly  engaged  in  the  program.  Although  industry  leaders  and
researchers  vary  in  their  definition  of  wellness  program  engagement,  engagement  is
commonly viewed as the level of enrollment and sustained participation in a program.
This  includes:  Active  participation  in  these  offerings  results  in  employees  making
healthy decisions (e.g., choosing healthy foods, quitting tobacco, exercising regularly,
managing  stress).  Engagement  also  includes  employee  input  and  involvement  in  the
design  and  execution  of  the  wellness  program.  According  to  the  Gallup  Organization,
“Companies are most successful at creating a culture of well-being when they provide
managers with the right tools for a holistic, multifaceted approach.”4 Organizations can
develop  a  comprehensive  culture  of  health  and  well-being  for  their  employees.  They
can not only address individuals’ health risk factors, but also organizational factors such
as:  They  can  tailor  program  offerings  to  create  value  for  participants  and  the
organization.  Surveys  on  needs  and  interests,  interviews,  and  focus  groups  are  good
ways  to  understand  what  is  important  to  employees.  Employers  also  can  learn  what
kind  of  rewards,  from  water  bottles  to  gift  cards,  might  be  good  incentives  for
employees to attend an event or take a survey. They also can gain insight into what
might motivate employees to make changes for a healthier lifestyle. Communication is
key to successful employee engagement.5 Organizations can benefit from focus groups
that  provide  information  on  the  best  methods  and  frequency  of  communication  and
marketing.6  Increasing  program  engagement  requires  different  strategies  to  involve
employees. Consider the following examples of ways to help employees participate and
sustain  involvement  in  workplace  wellness  while  improving  overall  health.5-8  Step  1:
Design  &  Analyze  Seek  and  support  employees’  input  and  participation  in:  Step  2:
Implement Work with employees to: Step 3: Evaluate Success Work with and support
managers  and  senior  leaders  to:  Although  the  number  of  employers  with  well  being
programs in the United States is growing, most employees are unaware of the offerings
and associated benefits.
There is an opportunity to help employees connect to company resources.4,5 Reaching
out  and  involving  the  families  too  is  beneficial  for  the  health  of  employees  and  their
loved  ones.  Tools  and  Resources  for  Engagement  in  the  Wellness  Program  The  CDC
Workplace Health Resource Center (WHRC) is a one-stop shop for organizations to find
credible tools, guides, case studies, and other resources to design, develop, implement,
evaluate,
 and
 sustain
 workplace
 health
 promotion
 programs.
 Visit
https://www.cdc.gov/WHRC to find more case studies of workplace health programs in
the field. To receive email updates about Workplace Health Promotion, enter your email
address:
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/workplacehealthpromotion/initiatives/resource-center/case-studies/engage-employe
es-health-wellness.html
