Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Available  for  download  [PDF  –  255  KB]  Today’s  workplace  is
ever-changing.  Modern  organizations  require  the  whole  person  to  be  engaged  in  the
workplace  intellectually,  emotionally,  and  physically.  Research  has  shown  that
increased  work-related  engagement  results  in  improved  employee  and  customer
satisfaction,  safety,  and  overall  performance  and  profits.1,2  Engaged  employees  are
more  willing  to  learn  new  skills  and  ways  to  be  innovative,  adaptable,  resilient,
team-oriented,  and  open  to  diverse  perspectives.  In  addition,  company  performance
and  employee  engagement  are  closely  linked  to  employee  health.3,4,5  The  changing
workplace  and  workforce,  along  with  the  emergence  of  positive  psychology  and  the
need to connect work to the whole person, created the focus on employee engagement
in  the  workplace.  This  approach  is  essential  for  overall  employee  productivity  and
organizational  performance.  Although  industry  leaders  define  employee  engagement
differently, the term has been referred to as the intention of commitment with purpose
and to “place in gear.”6 William Kahn, an academician and recognized as the founding
father  of  the  concept  of  engagement,  described  “personal  engagement”  as  “the
harnessing of organization members’ selves to their work roles; in engagement, people
employ  and  express  themselves  physically,  cognitively,  and  emotionally  during  role
performances.”7  Kahn  believed  that  employees  become  engaged  when  three
psychological  needs  are  met:  (1)  personal  feelings  of  meaningfulness  (one  is  valued
and  appreciated),  (2)  psychological  safety  (one  can  do  and  work  without  fear  of
negative  consequences),  and  (3)  availability  (one  has  the  physical  and  mental
resources  without  distractions  to  engage  at  work).  Varying  terms,  definitions,
descriptions,  measurement  tools,  and  models  have  since  been  associated  with
employee engagement. From a review of over 200 published articles, four approaches
emerge  related  to  defining  employee  engagement.8  Work  or  Job  Engagement.  This
approach  focuses  on  greater  satisfaction  and  involvement  by  achieving  “a  positive,
fulfilling,  work-related  state  of  mind”  that  is  characterized  by:  Employers  continue  to
explore  ways  to  gain  optimal  levels  of  performance  from  their  employees.  For
businesses,  successful  employee  engagement  can  provide  numerous  benefits  to  the
organization. Although research related to evidence-based practices in the workplace is
ongoing,  research  from  the  last  three  decades  reveals  a  positive  relationship  among
employee attitudes, engagement with safety, job satisfaction and employee retention,
customer satisfaction, and financials. Better employee engagement is also associated
with  reduced  absenteeism  and  merchandise  shrinkage.  Below  is  a  list  of  favorable
outcomes for individuals and an organization.2,9–13   Employee engagement actually
begins  before  the  employee  is  hired.  Ensuring  the  right  fit  of  individual,  work,  and
organization is essential. High performers who excel at their craft may not fit well into
the  organizational  culture.  Evaluating  this  in  advance  of  hiring  is  beneficial  for  all
parties.  Once  an  employee  is  hired,  organizational  engagement  is  essential.  This
involves  coworkers,  managers,  and  executives,  as  well  as  the  company’s  culture  and
values.  Below  are  five  elements  of  a  highly  engaged  employee  workplace.  The
workplace allows for social connections that can either enhance employee engagement
or  diminish  it.  Working  with  individuals  who  respect,  admire,  and  enjoy  one  another
makes for a better work environment. Employees value a boss who appreciates them
and  shares  this  through  simple  or  more  involved  recognition.  The  best  leaders  and
managers  understand  that  their  success  and  that  of  the  organization  rely  on
employees’ achievements. They seek to know not only the person’s job, but the whole
person—including  their  strengths  and  goals.  Great  managers  empower  employees  by
recognizing and valuing employees’ contributions, and actively seeking their ideas and
opinions. Employee expect leaders and managers to lead by example and demonstrate
appreciation for employees. In addition to pay, employees are motivated to work for an
employer  because  of  the  additional  benefits,  which  may  include  health  insurance,
profit-sharing,  flexible  work  schedules,  and  recognition  and  rewards  for  performance.
More employees also are asking for wellness offerings such as on-site fitness centers,
cafeterias or food access, and health coaching services. Organizations and individuals
benefit from personal and professional growth and development. It is important to train
leaders and managers on how to retain talented employees. From career development
and  leadership  courses  to  coordinated  skill  building,  training  is  essential  for  all
employees.
 Other
 engagement
 strategies
 include
 internal
 promotion,
 travel
opportunities, and work exchanges. Organizations can use existing tools to encourage
employee input on the design or improvements to their program. Employers not only
should invite employees to participate in a workplace experience survey, they should
ask  them  to  help  modify  or  improve  tools  to  make  them  relevant  to  their  work  and
company  culture.  When  a  company  invites  its  employees  to  share  their  feedback
through regular surveys or focus groups, the employees’ expectation is that leadership
will  follow  through  and  take  action.  Employers  should  use  the  data  to  monitor  key
performance metrics and identify needs or areas for improvement. In developing action
plans, the steps should be realistic and include concrete examples of how those steps
will  enhance  employee  experience  and  engagement,  while  achieving  company  goals.
There are a rising number of tools for measuring employee engagement, from research
instruments  to  commercial  surveys.  Gaining  insight  on  employee  engagement  to
include employee satisfaction, effect on client satisfaction, and overall engagement of
the  whole  person  at  work  is  an  opportunity  for  all  employers.  Ultimately,  employee
engagement is a connection of intellectual, physical, and emotional energy—a state of
mind, body, and spirit—at the workplace with favorable impact to both the individual
and the organization. Below are a few tools and resources for employers interested in
learning  more  about  employee  engagement.  The  CDC  Workplace  Health  Resource
Center (WHRC) is a one-stop shop for organizations to find credible tools, guides, case
studies,  and  other  resources  to  design,  develop,  implement,  evaluate,  and  sustain
workplace  health  promotion  programs.  Visit  the  CDC  Workplace  Health  Resource
Center to learn more about and strategies for employee engagement.  Back to top of
page  To  receive  email  updates  about  Workplace  Health  Promotion,  enter  your  email
address:
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/workplacehealthpromotion/initiatives/resource-center/case-studies/engaging-employ
ees.html
