A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Enhanced Pertussis Surveillance (EPS) is
part of CDC's Emerging Infections Program. These additional data go beyond what CDC
receives  through  the  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS).  EPS
builds on the existing NNDSS for pertussis in seven states participating in the Emerging
Infections  Program.   EPS  activities  are  characterized  by  improved  completeness  and
quality of data, augmented data collection, and routine isolate collection. EPS primarily
collects  epidemiologic  data  and  isolates  from  cases  of  Bordetella  pertussis.  However,
EPS  also  captures  case  data  and  isolates  for  other  Bordetella  species,  including  B.
parapertussis, B. bronchiseptica, and B. holmesii.  After a pertussis case is identified,
EPS sites The number of pertussis isolates available for laboratory characterization has
declined nationally. EPS sites use various methods to increase isolate collection in their
catchment areas. These methods range from establishing sentinel clinics to promoting
free,  centralized  testing  at  state  public  health  laboratories.  ABCs  encourages  sites  to
incorporate methods to increase the yield of identified pertussis cases in the catchment
area. For example, sites can encourage providers to submit specimens directly to state
public health laboratories for centralized testing. Sites can also educate providers and
public health personnel within the catchment area about pertussis and the goals of EPS.
The Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) published the most recent
case definition for pertussis in 2020. National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System
Emerging  Infections  Program  ABCs  is  an  active  laboratory-  and  population-based
surveillance  system  for  five  invasive  bacterial  pathogens.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/abcs/enhanced-pertussis-surv/index.html
