A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Current best practices for environmental cleaning procedures in patient care areas, as
well as cleaning for specific situations (e.g., blood spills) and for noncritical patient care
equipment. This chapter provides the current best practices for environmental cleaning
procedures in patient care areas, as well as cleaning for specific situations (e.g., blood
spills)  and  for  noncritical  patient  care  equipment;  see  summary  in  Appendix  B1  –
Cleaning procedure summaries for general patient areas and Appendix B2 – Cleaning
procedure summaries for specialized patient areas. The determination of environmental
cleaning procedures for individual patient care areas, including frequency, method, and
process, should be based on the risk of pathogen transmission. This risk is a function of
the: These three elements combine to determine low, moderate, and high risk—more
frequent  and  rigorous  (with  a  different  method  or  process)  environmental  cleaning  is
required  in  areas  with  high  risk.  Risk  determines  cleaning  frequency,  method,  and
process in routine and contingency cleaning schedules for all patient care areas. This
risk-based  approach  is  outlined  in  Appendix  A  –  Risk-assessment  for  determining
environmental  cleaning  method  and  frequency.  Probability  of  contamination:  Heavily
contaminated  surfaces  and  items  require  more  frequent  and  thorough  environmental
cleaning than moderately contaminated surfaces, which in turn require more frequent
and  rigorous  environmental  cleaning  than  lightly  or  non-contaminated  surfaces  and
items. Vulnerability of patients to infection: Surfaces and items in care areas containing
vulnerable  patients  (e.g.,  immunosuppressed)  require  more  frequent  and  rigorous
environmental cleaning than surfaces and items in areas with less vulnerable patients.
Potential for exposure to pathogens: High-touch surfaces (e.g., bed rails) require more
frequent  and  rigorous  environmental  cleaning  than  low-touch  surfaces  (e.g.,  walls).
Every  facility  should  develop  cleaning  schedules,  including:  Checklists  and  other  job
aids are also required to ensure that cleaning is thorough and effective. These aspects
are  covered  in  more  detail  in  2.4.3  Cleaning  checklists,  logs,  and  job  aids.  For  all
environmental  cleaning  procedures,  always  use  the  following  general  strategies:
Proceed only after a visual preliminary site assessment to determine if: Proceed from
cleaner to dirtier areas to avoid spreading dirt and microorganisms. Examples include:
Proceed from high to low to prevent dirt and microorganisms from dripping or falling
and contaminating already cleaned areas. Examples include: Proceed in a systematic
manner to avoid missing areas—for example, left to right or clockwise (Figure 10). In a
multi-bed area, clean each patient zone in the same manner—for example, starting at
the  foot  of  the  bed  and  moving  clockwise.  Clean  spills  of  blood  or  body  fluids
immediately, using the techniques in 4.5 Spills of blood or body fluids. The identification
of high-touch surfaces and items in each patient care area is a necessary prerequisite
to the development of cleaning procedures, as these will often differ by room, ward and
facility. See Appendix C – Example of high-touch surfaces in a specialized patient area.
Perform assessments and observations of workflow in consultation with clinical staff in
each  patient  care  area  to  determine  key  high-touch  surfaces.  Include  identified
high-touch surfaces and items in checklists and other job aids to facilitate completing
cleaning procedures. See 2.4.3 Cleaning checklists, logs, and job aids. General patient
areas  include:  Three  types  of  cleaning  are  required  for  these  areas:  Generally,  the
probability of contamination or the vulnerability of the patients to infection is low, so
these  areas  may  require  less  frequent  and  rigorous  (e.g.,  method,  process)  cleaning
than  specialized  patient  areas.  General  outpatient  or  ambulatory  care  wards  include
waiting areas, consultation areas, and minor procedural areas.   Footnote e:
If  there  is  prolonged  time  between  procedures  or  local  conditions  that  create  risk  for
dust  generation/dispersal,  re-wipe  surfaces  with  disinfectant  solution  immediately
before the subsequent procedure.   Handwashing sinks, thoroughly clean (scrub) and
disinfect  Sluice  areas/sinks  or  scrub  areas  Routine  cleaning  of  inpatient  areas  occurs
while the patient is admitted, focuses on the patient zones and aims to remove organic
material and reduce microbial contamination to provide a visually clean environment.
Note:  This  occurs  when  the  room  is  occupied,  and  systems  should  be  established  to
ensure  that  cleaning  staff  have  reasonable  access  to  perform  routine  cleaning.
Handwashing sinks Terminal cleaning of inpatient areas, which occurs after the patient
is discharged/transferred, includes the patient zone and the wider patient care area and
aims  to  remove  organic  material  and  significantly  reduce  and  eliminate  microbial
contamination to ensure that there is no transfer of microorganisms to the next patient.
Terminal  cleaning  requires  collaboration  between  cleaning,  IPC,  and  clinical  staff  to
delineate  responsibility  for  every  surface  and  item,  including  ensuring  that:  It  is
important that the staff responsible for these tasks are identified in checklists and SOPs
to  ensure  that  items  are  not  overlooked  because  of  confusion  in  responsibility.
Scheduled cleaning occurs concurrently with routine or terminal cleaning and aims to
reduce dust and soiling on low touch items or surfaces. Perform scheduled cleaning on
items  or  surfaces  that  are  not  at  risk  for  soiling  under  normal  circumstances,  using
neutral  detergent  and  water.  But  if  they  are  visibly  soiled  with  blood  or  body  fluids,
clean  and  disinfect  these  items  as  soon  as  possible.  Walls,  baseboards  and  corners
Toilets in patient care areas can be private (within a private patient room) or shared
(among  patients  and  visitors).  They  have  high  patient  exposure  (i.e.,  high-touch
surfaces)  and  are  frequently  contaminated.  Therefore,  they  pose  a  higher  risk  of
pathogen transmission than in general patient areas. Toileting practices vary, in terms
of both the types of toilets in use (e.g., squat or sit, wet or dry) and the adherence to
correct use. Therefore, needs for cleaning and disinfection vary. In some cases, more
than  twice  daily  cleaning  and  disinfection  may  be  warranted.  Depending  on  resource
and  staffing  levels,  dedicated  cleaning  staff  posted  at  shared  toilets  in  healthcare
facilities  could  reduce  risk  associated  with  these  areas.  Floors  generally  have  low
patient  exposure  (i.e.,  are  low-touch  surfaces)  and  pose  a  low  risk  for  pathogen
transmission. Therefore, under normal circumstances they should be cleaned daily, but
the use of a disinfectant is not necessary. There are situations where there is higher
risk  associated  with  floors  (e.g.,  high  probability  of  contamination),  so  review  the
specific procedures in 4.2 General patient areas and 4.6 Specialized patient areas for
guidance on frequency of environmental cleaning of floors and when they should also
be  disinfected.  Regardless  of  the  risk-level  of  an  area,  spills  or  contamination  from
blood or body fluid (e.g., vomitus), must be cleaned and disinfected immediately using
a two-step process. Specialized patient areas include those wards or units that provide
service to: This vulnerable population is more prone to infection and the probability of
contamination  is  high,  making  these  areas  higher  risk  than  general  patient  areas.
Unless otherwise indicated, environmental surfaces and floors in the following sections
require  cleaning  and  disinfection  with  a  facility-approved  disinfectant  for  all  cleaning
procedures  described.  Operating  rooms  are  highly  specialized  areas  with  a
mechanically  controlled  atmosphere  where  surgical  procedures  are  performed.  These
require environmental cleaning at three distinct intervals throughout the day: Because
operating  rooms  are  highly  specialized  areas,  the  surgery  department  clinical  staff
usually  manages  environmental  cleaning.  Operating  room  nurses  and  their  assistants
sometimes  perform  cleaning  duties  along  with,  or  sometimes  instead  of,  general
cleaning  staff.  Critical  and  semi-critical  equipment  in  the  operating  rooms  require
specialized reprocessing procedures and are never the responsibility of environmental
cleaning  staff.  The  processes  described  below  pertain  only  to  the  cleaning  and
disinfection of environmental surfaces and the surfaces of noncritical equipment. Where
multiple staff are involved, clearly defined and delineated cleaning responsibilities must
be  in  place  for  cleaning  of  all  environmental  surfaces  and  noncritical  patient  care
equipment  (stationary  and  portable).  The  use  of  checklists  and  SOPs  is  highly
recommended. Wipe all horizontal surfaces in the room (e.g., furniture, surgical lights,
operating  bed,  stationary  equipment)  with  a  disinfectant  to  remove  any  dust
accumulated overnight. If there was no written confirmation or terminal cleaning on the
previous  day,  do  a  full  terminal  clean  (see  Terminal  Clean  on  this  table).  Thoroughly
clean  and  disinfect  portable  patient-care  equipment  that  is  not  stored  within  the
operating room, such as suction regulators, anesthesia trolley, compressed gas tanks,
x-ray  machines,  and  lead  gowns,  before  introduction  into  the  operating  room.  Clean
and  disinfect:  Thoroughly  clean  and  disinfect  portable  patient-care  equipment  that  is
not  stored  within  the  operating  room  before  removal  from  the  operating  room.
Examples  include:  Have  dedicated  supplies  and  equipment  for  the  OR  (e.g.,  mops,
buckets). Use fresh mops/floor cloths and mopping solutions for every cleaning session,
including  between  procedures.  Use  fresh  cleaning  cloths  for  every  cleaning  session,
regularly replacing them during cleaning and never double-dipping them into cleaning
and  disinfectant  solutions.  Departments  or  areas  where  medication  is  prepared  (e.g.,
pharmacy or in clinical areas) often service vulnerable patients in high-risk and critical
care  areas,  in  addition  to  other  patient  populations.  The  staff  who  work  in  the
medication  preparation  area  might  be  responsible  for  cleaning  and  disinfecting  it,
instead  of  the  environmental  cleaning  staff.  Develop  detailed  SOPs  and  checklists  for
each  facility  to  identify  roles  and  responsibilities  for  environmental  cleaning  in  these
areas. Departments or areas where semi-critical and critical equipment is sterilized and
stored  (i.e.,  sterile  services)  often  service  vulnerable  patients  in  high-risk  and  critical
care areas, in addition to other patient populations. Staff who work in the SSD might be
responsible  for  cleaning  and  disinfecting  it  instead  of  environmental  cleaning  staff.
Alternatively, it is possible to train and assign a dedicated cleaning staff member to this
area.  Develop  detailed  SOPs  and  checklists  for  each  facility  to  identify  roles  and
responsibilities for environmental cleaning in these areas. SSDs have two distinct areas,
the soiled area (also called dirty area or decontamination area) and the clean area. Find
further  guidance  on  environmental  cleaning  in  SSDs  here:  Decontamination  and
Reprocessing  of  Medical  Devices  for  Health-care  Facilities.  Intensive  care  units  (ICUs)
are  high-risk  areas  due  to  the  severity  of  disease  and  vulnerability  of  the  patients  to
develop infections. Frequency and process is the same for adult, pediatric, and neonatal
units, but there are specific considerations for neonatal areas. See Process / Additional
guidance  in  Table  16  below.    Clean  floors  with  neutral  detergent  and  water  If  a
neonatal incubator is occupied, clean and disinfect only the outside; only clean (neutral
detergent)  on  inside  Ensure  that  cleaning  schedules  details  responsible  staff  (e.g.,
nursing or cleaning staff) for environmental cleaning of surfaces of noncritical patient
care  equipment  Last  clean  of  the  day:  also  clean  low-touch  surfaces;  see  4.2.4
Scheduled  cleaning    Change  filters  in  incubators  according  to  manufacturer’s
instructions, when wet or if neonate was on contact precautions (during terminal clean)
  Pay special attention to terminal cleaning of incubators Pay special attention to ensure
reprocessing  of  noncritical  patient  care  equipment  Provide  dedicated  supplies  and
equipment for the ICU (e.g., mops, buckets) that are not used anywhere else. Use fresh
mops/floor cloths and mopping solutions for every cleaning session. Use fresh cleaning
cloths for surfaces for every cleaning session (at least two per day), regularly replacing
them during cleaning and never double-dipping into cleaning and disinfectant solutions.
Emergency departments are moderate to high-risk areas because of the wide variability
in  the  condition  of  patients  and  admissions,  which  can:  Because  emergency
departments  are  specialized  and  high-throughput  areas,  clinical  staff  (e.g.,  nurses)
might  play  an  active  role  in  performing  environmental  cleaning,  particularly  in
examination and procedural areas. Develop detailed SOPs, including checklists for each
facility to identify roles and responsibilities for environmental cleaning in these areas.
End of the day: entire floor and low-touch surfaces *If there is prolonged time between
procedures  or  local  conditions  that  create  risk  for  dust  generation/dispersal,  re-wipe
surfaces  with  disinfectant  solution  immediately  before  the  subsequent  procedure.
Handwashing sinks (thoroughly clean (scrub) and disinfect) Sluice areas/sinks or scrub
areas Labor and delivery wards are routinely contaminated and patients are vulnerable
to infection. Because labor and delivery wards are often high-throughput areas, clinical
staff  (e.g.,  nurses)  might  play  an  active  role  in  performing  environmental  cleaning,
particularly between procedures. Develop detailed SOPs, including checklists, for each
facility to identify roles and responsibilities for environmental cleaning in these areas.
Clean and disinfect: Clean and disinfect other high-touch surfaces (e.g., light switches,
door handles) outside of the patient zone Clean (scrub) and disinfect handwashing sinks
Clean and disinfect entire floor (move patient bed and other portable equipment) The
areas  in  this  section  are  higher  risk  because  of:  Nursing  and  cleaning  staff  might  be
responsible  for  cleaning  certain  areas/items  in  these  areas,  so  there  must  be  clearly
defined  cleaning  responsibilities  for  all  surfaces  and  equipment  (stationary  and
portable). Develop detailed SOPs, including checklists, for each facility to identify roles
and  responsibilities  for  environmental  cleaning  in  these  areas.  Clean  and  disinfect:
Clean and disinfect: Last clean of the day: clean and disinfect entire floor and low-touch
surfaces Clean floors with neutral detergent and water Clean and disinfect: Clean and
disinfect:  Isolation  or  cohorted  areas  with  suspected  or  confirmed  cases  of  infections
requiring  transmission-based  precautions  are  considered  high-risk  areas,  particularly
for: The three types of transmission-based precautions are: Transmission-specific PPE is
required  for  all  cleaning  sessions  in  areas  under  transmission-based  precautions,
according  to  facility  policy  or  Table  5  in  3.4  Cleaning  Supplies  and  Equipment.  PPE
should always be put on and removed following the indications posted/recommended
by  IPC.  A  full  list  of  pathogens/infections  requiring  these  precautions  are  included  in
CDC's  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions.  Unit  manager  or  shift  leader  should
coordinate  schedule  Take  care  to  keep  the  door  closed  during  the  cleaning  process
(ventilation requirement) Unit manager or shift leader should coordinate schedule Take
care to keep the door closed during the cleaning process (ventilation requirement) Any
surface  (e.g.,  walls)  that  is  visibly  soiled  with  blood  or  body  fluids  See  Cleaning  for
C. difficile (spore forming) Last clean of the day: clean and disinfect low-touch surfaces
These organisms belong to a group of carbapenem-resistant, gram-negative bacteria of
national and international concern because of their implication as an emerging cause of
severe  healthcare-associated  infections.  In  2017,  the  World  Health  Organization
published the first global guidelines for the prevention and control of CRE-CRAB-CRPsA
in healthcare facilities, which include environmental cleaning and disinfection as a key
recommendation.
 This
 implementation
 guide
 discusses
 the
 key
 elements
 of
environmental  cleaning  needed  for  prevention  and  control  of  these  organisms:  WHO
2019:
 Implementation
 manual
 to
 prevent
 and
 control
 the
 spread
 of
carbapenem-resistant organisms at the national and health care facility level [PDF – 98
pages].  There  might  be  specific  cleaning  procedures  for  isolation  areas  of  highly
infectious  pathogens.  Standalone  training  programs  and  strict  adherence  to  required
PPE  is  essential  for  conducting  effective  environmental  cleaning  in  these  situations.
Find more information on developing context-specific protocols: Portable or stationary
noncritical  patient  care  equipment  incudes  IV  poles,  commode  chairs,  blood  pressure
cuffs,  and  stethoscopes.  These  high-touch  items  are:  The  responsibility  for  cleaning
noncritical patient care equipment might be divided between cleaning and clinical staff,
so  it  is  best  practice  to  clearly  define  and  delineate  cleaning  responsibilities  for  all
equipment (stationary and portable). Develop a cleaning chart or schedule outlining the
method,  frequency,  and  staff  responsible  for  cleaning  every  piece  of  equipment  in
patient care areas and take care to ensure that both cleaning and clinical staff (e.g.,
nursing) are informed of these procedures so that items are not missed.   Clean and
disinfect  heavily  soiled  items  (e.g.,  bedpans)  outside  of  the  patient  care  area  in
dedicated  4.7.2  Sluice  rooms  Disinfect  bedpans  with  a  washer-disinfector  or  boiling
water  instead  of  a  chemical  disinfection  process.    Clean  and  disinfect  heavily  soiled
items (e.g., bedpans) outside of the patient care area in dedicated 4.7.2 Sluice rooms
Disinfect  bedpans  with  a  washer-disinfector  or  boiling  water  instead  of  a  chemical
disinfection process A list of compatible cleaning and disinfectant products should be
included in manufacturer's instructions or provided by the manufacturer upon request.
If  manufacturer  instructions  are  not  available,  here  are  the  applicable  material
compatibility  considerations  and  best  practices  for  use  of  common  healthcare
disinfectants: Each major patient care area should be equipped with a designated sluice
room  to  reprocess  soiled  noncritical  patient  care  equipment  (e.g.,  commode  chairs,
bedpans).  Alternatively,  there  may  be  central  depots  where  these  procedures  are
performed. Sluice rooms should be as close as possible to the patient care areas that
they serve and should have an organized workflow from soiled (dirty) to clean. Clean
equipment should be covered or removed during cleaning process It is best practice to
perform  routine,  standardized  assessments  of  environmental  cleaning  (i.e.,  practices,
level  of  cleanliness)  in  order  to:  This  section  includes  an  overview  of  the  available
methods,  as  well  as  their  advantages  and  disadvantages.  The  best  practices  for
developing a system of routine monitoring, audit, and feedback within environmental
cleaning  program  implementation  are  covered  in  2.5  Monitoring,  feedback,  and  audit
elements. Easy to implement Benchmarking is possible Simple and inexpensive Allows
immediate  and  direct  feedback  to  individual  staff  Encourages  cleaning  staff
engagement  and  input  Identifies  gaps  for  staff  training/job  aid  improvements
Labor-intensive  Results  affected  by  Hawthorne  bias  (i.e.,  more  of  an  assessment  of
knowledge  than  actual  practice)  Does  not  assess  or  correlate  to  bioburden  Easy  to
implement Benchmarking is possible Inexpensive Allows immediate and direct feedback
to individual staff Subjective—based on individual determinations of dust/debris levels
Does  not  assess  or  correlate  to  bioburden  Provides  immediate  feedback  on
performance Minimal training required to perform Objective Benchmarking is possible
Relatively  inexpensive  Labor-intensive  as  surfaces  should  be  marked  before  cleaning
and checked after cleaning has been completed Some difficulties documented in terms
of  removal  of  markers  from  porous  or  rough  surfaces  (e.g.,  canvas  straps)
Time-intensive Need to vary frequency and objects to prevent monitoring system from
becoming  known  Provides  immediate  feedback  Minimal  training  required  to  perform
Objective Low sensitivity and specificity Lacks a standardized threshold or benchmark
for determining the level or status of cleanliness (i.e., “safe” post-cleaning ATL levels)
for specific surfaces or patient care areas Variable benchmarks Technology constantly
changing Interference of cleaning products, supplies and in some cases surfaces, which
can  both  reduce  or  enhanced  ATP  levels  (e.g.,  bleach,  microfiber,  stainless  steel)
Provides direct indication of presence of specific pathogens (direct swab cultures) May
be useful for identifying source of outbreaks and/or environmental reservoirs Objective
Expensive Prolonged time for results (>48hrs) Requires access to laboratory resources
and trained personnel for interpreting results Lack of defined threshold or benchmark
for determining the level or status of cleanliness (e.g., colony-forming units per surface
area)  HAIs  are  associated  with  medical  devices,  complications  following  surgery,
transmission  between  patients  and  healthcare  workers,  antibiotic  overuse,  and  more.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/hcp/cleaning-global/procedures.html
