Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Advisory  Council  for  the
Elimination of Tuberculosis  January 1995  CHAIRMAN
Charles M. Nolan, M.D.
Director, Tuberculosis Control
Seattle-King County Department of Public Health
Seattle, WA  ACTING EXECUTIVE SECRETARY
Samuel W. Dooley, Jr., M.D.
Acting Associate Director for Science
National Center for Prevention Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA  MEMBERS  Paul T. Davidson, M.D.
Los Angeles County Department of Health Services
Los Angeles, CA  Miguel A. Escobedo, M.D.
El Paso City/County Health District
El Paso, TX  Sue C. Etkind, R.N., M.S. *
Massachusetts Department of Public Health
Jamaica Plain, MA  Charles P. Felton, M.D.
Harlem Hospital Center
New York, NY  Kathleen F. Gensheimer, M.D.
Maine Department of Human Services
Augusta, ME  Jeffrey Glassroth, M.D.
Northwestern University Medical School
Chicago, IL  Kathleen S. Moser, M.D.
San Diego County Department of Health Services
San Diego, CA  Gisela F. Schecter, M.D., M.P.H. *
San Francisco Tuberculosis Control Program
San Francisco, CA  Jeffrey R. Starke, M.D.
Baylor College of Medicine
Houston, TX  Lillian J. Tom-Orme, Ph.D.
Utah Department of Health
Salt Lake City, UT  Betti Jo Warren, M.D.
King-Drew Medical Center
Los Angeles, CA  EX OFFICIO MEMBERS  G. Stephen Bowen, M.D.
Health Resources and Services Administration
Rockville, MD  Michael J. Brennan, Ph.D.
Food and Drug Administration
Bethesda, MD  Georgia S. Buggs
Office of Minority Health
Public Health Service
Rockville, MD  Warren Hewitt, Jr.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Rockville, MD  J. Terrell Hoffeld, D.D.S.
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research
Rockville, MD  Gary A. Roselle, M.D.
Department of Veterans Affairs
Cincinnati, OH  Zeda Rosenberg, Sc.D.
National Institutes of Health
Bethesda, MD  Bruce Tempest, M.D.
Indian Health Service
Gallup, NM  Basil P. Vareldzis, M.D.
Agency for International Development
Washington, DC  LIAISON REPRESENTATIVES  John B. Bass, Jr., M.D.
American Thoracic Society
University of South Alabama
Mobile, AL  Nancy Dunlap, M.D.
American College of Chest Physicians
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL  Wafaa El-Sadr, M.D., M.P.H.
Infectious Disease Society of America
Harlem Hospital Center
New York, NY  Alice McIntosh
American Lung Association
New York, NY  Norbert P. Rapoza, Ph.D.
American Medical Association
Chicago, IL  Michael L. Tapper, M.D.
Society for Hospital Epidemiology of America
Lenox Hill Hospital
New York, NY  COMMITTEE REPRESENTATIVES  Advisory Committee on the Prevention
of HIV Infection
Walter F. Schlech, M.D.
Victoria General Hospital
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada  Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
Susan Forlenza, M.D.
Nassau County Medical Center
East Meadows, NY  
    These members who made substantive contributions to this report
 rotated
    off  the  Council  in  1994.   The  following  CDC  staff  member  prepared  this  report:  
Patricia M. Simone, M.D.
Division of Tuberculosis Elimination
National Center for Prevention Services  in collaboration with the  Advisory Council for
the Elimination of Tuberculosis  Summary  Tuberculosis (TB) rates declined steadily for
decades in the
 United
States, but several complex social and medical factors caused TB
 morbidity
to increase 14% from 1985 through 1993. The recent increases in TB
morbidity have placed additional demands on state and local TB
 control
programs, which already had been substantially weakened by
 inadequate
staffing and funding support. TB programs throughout the nation
 must be
revitalized if they are to provide core TB control activities that
 enable
effective responses to this public health challenge. This report
 describes
a model for TB control programs and the essential components of a
successful TB control program, including three priority strategies
 for TB
prevention and control: a) identifying and treating persons who
 have active
TB, b) finding and screening persons who have had contact with TB
 patients
to determine whether they are infected with Mycobacterium
 tuberculosis or
have active TB and providing appropriate treatment, and c)
 screening
populations at high risk for TB infection and the development of TB
 disease
to detect infected persons and providing therapy to prevent
 progression to
active TB.  State and local health departments have primary responsibility
 for
preventing and controlling TB. To meet this challenge successfully,
 TB
control programs should be able to administer activities that
 include the
following core components:  
    conducting overall planning and development of policy,  
    identifying persons who have clinically active TB,  
    managing persons who have or who are suspected of having
 disease,  
    identifying and managing persons infected with M.
 tuberculosis,  
    providing laboratory and diagnostic services,  
    collecting and analyzing data, and  
    providing  training  and  education.   The  Advisory  Council  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis has
 prepared  this report to provide a national standard by which policymakers,
 TB
control program managers, and others evaluating TB programs can
 assess
individual TB control programs. The report may also help local
 programs to
obtain and maintain adequate resources for TB control activities.  In addition to defining
the essential components of a TB
 control
program, this report emphasizes the importance of a) prioritizing
 TB
control activities; b) coordinating care with other health-care
 providers,
facilities, and community organizations; c) using alternative
 approaches to
TB control (e.g., the expanded use of directly observed therapy);
 d)
targeting screening and prevention programs to high-risk
 populations; and
e) following current recommendations for the treatment of TB. TB
 control
program managers should make every effort to incorporate each of
 these
components into their program activities. TB programs may perform
 these
activities directly, or programs may coordinate with other
 providers to
ensure the implementation of these activities. Failure to meet
 these core
standards can decrease a TB program's effectiveness in controlling
 this
reemergent public health risk.  INTRODUCTION  The incidence of tuberculosis (TB) was
declining in the United
 States
until recently, and in 1989, goals were set to eliminate the
 disease by the
year 2010 (1). However, instead of continuing to decline, TB
 morbidity
increased 14% from 1985 through 1993 (2). This recent trend has
 been
attributed to several factors, including the human immunodeficiency
 virus
(HIV) epidemic, the occurrence of TB in foreign-born persons from
 countries
that have a high prevalence of TB, and the transmission of
 Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in congregate settings (e.g., health-care facilities,
correctional facilities, drug-treatment centers, and homeless
 shelters).
The increase in TB and the complexity of factors associated with
 this
increase have placed additional demands on public health TB control
programs, yet many of these programs lack adequate support for
 services
necessary for TB control. In particular, funding for TB control
 programs
has been reduced markedly because of the increased competition for
 public
health funds; the decrease in government services at federal,
 state, and
local levels; and the decline in TB cases reported before 1985 (3).
 The
public health-care infrastructure must be rebuilt to meet the
 challenge of
the  recent  resurgence  of  TB  cases  (4).   In  the  United  States,  state  and  local  health
departments have
 legal
responsibility for the prevention and control of TB in communities.
 Three
strategies are fundamental to the prevention and control of TB. The
 first
priority is identifying and treating persons who have active TB;
 this
priority entails identifying persons who have TB, ensuring that
 they
complete appropriate therapy, and, in exceptional circumstances,
 using
confinement measures. The second priority is finding and screening
 persons
who have been in contact with TB patients to determine whether they
 have TB
infection or disease and providing them with appropriate treatment.
 The
third priority is screening high-risk populations to detect persons
 who are
infected with M. tuberculosis and who could benefit from therapy to
 prevent
the  infection  from  progressing  to  TB  disease.   To  implement  these  three  strategies,
public health TB control
 programs
should coordinate with health-care providers from several community
organizations to ensure the provision of direct services for TB
 patients.
Health departments are responsible for providing centralized,
 coordinated
systems for many activities extending beyond individual patient
 care (e.g.,
identifying TB cases; ensuring that patients complete therapy;
 performing
contact investigations; screening high-risk groups; and collecting,
analyzing, and publishing epidemiologic and surveillance data).  PURPOSE  The Advisory
Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis
 (ACET) has
prepared this report to provide a national standard ** for the
 assessment
of individual TB control programs by TB control program managers,
policymakers, and other persons evaluating TB programs. This report
 also
may be used to assist local programs in obtaining and maintaining
 adequate
resources for TB control activities. In addition to defining the
 essential
components of a TB control program, these recommendations emphasize
 the
importance of prioritizing TB control activities; coordinating care
 with
other health-care providers, facilities, and community
 organizations; and
using alternative approaches to TB control (e.g., the expanded use
 of
directly observed therapy, targeted screening and prevention
 programs to
high-risk populations, and adoption of current recommendations for
 the
treatment of TB) (5-7). Although the size and structure of TB
 control
programs vary according to each community's specific needs, TB
 control
program managers should attempt to incorporate each of these core
components  into  program  activities.   OVERALL  PLANNING  AND  POLICY   To  achieve
effective TB control and progress toward TB
 elimination, TB
control programs should develop an overall TB control strategy,
 including
written policies and procedures, and should be able to provide
 guidance and
oversight to local facilities and practitioners involved in TB
 control
activities. TB control programs should ensure that appropriate laws
 and
adequate staff and funding are available to support TB control
 activities.
These programs also should form networks and coalitions with
 community
groups to assist with implementing TB control activities.  An Overall TB Control Strategy
and Written Policies and Procedures  TB control programs should develop an overall TB
control
 strategy in
collaboration with local health-care providers, professional
 societies, and
voluntary organizations. To determine specific needs, the program
 should
use local TB morbidity data and standard indicators of program
 performance
(e.g., the rate of completion of therapy). The plan should be
 developed by
the state or local ACET in conjunction with community TB coalition
representatives. The TB control strategy should outline program
 priorities
and objectives reflecting the specific needs of the community and
 the roles
of the various agencies, organizations, and providers. TB control
 programs
should also have written policies and procedures that clearly
 define the
standard of practice for TB treatment and prevention in the
 community (1,5-18).
periodically  and  revised  as  needed.   Advising  Local  Institutions  and  Practitioners   TB
control programs should provide consultation and oversight
 for the
TB control activities of local facilities and practitioners (and
 local
health departments where appropriate) to ensure that these efforts
 reflect
current standards of care and public health practice. The
 consultation may
be provided by either health department staff or local or regional
 medical
experts who have agreed to act as consultants for the health
 department.
Consultants should be available to advise local practitioners about
 patient
management problems (e.g., monitoring treatment adherence); at
 least one
consultant should be experienced in treating patients having
 drug-resistant
TB. Information on the latest laboratory techniques and technology,
guidance about appropriate laboratory methods for local facilities
 and
laboratories, and assistance in conducting contact or outbreak
investigations should be available from TB control programs or
 their
consultants. TB programs should seek opportunities to inform
 persons or
facilities about activities and technologies that can improve TB
 services.  Appropriate Laws and Regulations to Support TB Control Activities  TB control
programs periodically should review applicable
 laws,
regulations, and policies to ensure their consistency with
 currently
recommended medical and public health practices (8). States and
municipalities should create laws, regulations, and policies that
 provide
support and a legal basis for the following TB control activities:  
    ensuring the prompt, mandatory reporting of each confirmed and
    suspected case of TB;  
    observing state and local laws and regulations protecting
 patient
    confidentiality;  
    examining persons at high risk for TB infection and disease
 and
    prescribing and monitoring appropriate treatment for these
 persons;  
    ensuring that a treatment plan is devised for all hospitalized
    patients before their discharge;  
    ensuring rapid laboratory examination of specimens and
 reporting of
    results (including susceptibility-test results) to the
 appropriate
    health department and the requesting clinician;  
    ensuring that patients who have TB receive appropriate
 treatment
    until they are cured;  
    protecting the health of the public by isolating and treating
    persons who have infectious TB;  
    detaining persons who, though not infectious, are unwilling or
    unable to complete treatment and who are at risk for becoming
    infectious again and acquiring drug-resistant TB; and  
    treating patients without consideration of their ability to
 pay.  States also should require health-care facilities and
 congregate-living  settings (e.g., correctional facilities) to apply recommended
 measures for
infection control.  Adequate and Appropriate Staff to Conduct TB Control Activities  TB
control programs should have adequate and appropriate staff
 to
ensure the fulfillment of TB control activities outlined in this
 report.
The number and type of staff for these programs may vary, depending
 on the
local TB morbidity and the specific needs of the community. Staff
 are
necessary for program planning, program funding, record-keeping,
 education,
and coordination of health department activities with other TB
 control
activities in the community. All TB control programs should have a
designated program manager. These programs should have access to,
 or have
on staff, epidemiologists qualified to conduct data-based
 evaluation and
surveillance activities.  Community outreach workers are needed to deliver directly
 observed TB
therapy, thereby ensuring continuity and completion of treatment.
 Outreach
workers may also be involved in other activities (e.g., educating
 patients,
observing preventive therapy, conducting contact investigations,
 arranging
or providing transportation, assisting patients with social
 services,
serving as interpreters, and assisting clinicians with clinical
 services).
These outreach workers may be nurses or lay persons specifically
 trained
for these activities. The TB program should ensure that outreach
 workers
have  adequate  clinical  and  administrative  supervision.   Depending  on  clinic  needs,
clinic staff may be composed of
 various
combinations of nurses, physicians, physician assistants, and other
workers. In many areas, clinics have nurse managers responsible for
providing most of the education, treatment, clinical monitoring,
 prevention
services, and supervisory needs of the clinic. A physician who is
 qualified
and trained in the diagnosis, management, and clinical monitoring
 of TB
should be available on staff or employed on a contract basis.
 Clinic staff
should have characteristics appropriate to the community's cultural
 and
language  needs.   Adequate  Funding  to  Conduct  TB  Control  Activities   TB  control
programs should seek funding for TB control
 activities from
federal, state, local, and private sources. They should work with
 local
organizations (e.g., state and local medical societies, lung
 associations,
and TB coalition members) to educate policymakers about the local
 TB
problem and local program priorities, needs, and objectives.  Networks with Community
Groups  Optimal TB prevention and control activities require a
multidisciplinary approach. Thus, TB control programs in
 communities having
a high prevalence of TB should form networks and coalitions with
 local
groups (e.g., cultural and ethnic organizations, community clinics,
 places
of worship, professional societies, lung associations, and medical
 and
nursing schools). In collaborating with these community groups, the
 TB
control program should a) ensure that community leaders,
 health-care
providers, and policymakers are knowledgeable about TB; b) help
 educate the
public about TB; and c) provide guidance and assistance for local
 screening
and prevention services. Coalitions with community groups help TB
 control
programs reach high-risk groups more effectively and provide
 culturally
appropriate services. TB control programs should educate and advise
community groups to ensure the quality and appropriateness of TB
 control
activities in accordance with the community's needs. The National
 Coalition
to Eliminate Tuberculosis exemplifies a national coalition involved
 in
educating health-care providers and the public about TB.  MANAGING PERSONS WHO
HAVE DISEASE OR WHO ARE SUSPECTED OF HAVING
 DISEASE  TB control programs should ensure that the services needed to
 evaluate,
treat, and monitor TB patients are readily available in each
 community. In
many areas, these services may be provided directly by the state TB
 control
program. In other areas, local TB control programs or health-care
professionals, with supervision and consultation from the state TB
 control
program, provide treatment services to patients. Although some
 patients may
undergo most of their evaluation and treatment in settings other
 than the
health department, the major responsibility for monitoring and
 ensuring the
quality of all TB-related activities in the community should be
 undertaken
by the health department as part of its duties to protect the
 public
health.  The public health goals of TB patient management are to
 initiate
treatment promptly and ensure the completion of effective therapy
 to cure
illness, reduce transmission, and prevent the development of
 drug-resistant
TB.   Clinical  Services   Developing  a  Treatment  Plan   A  specific  health  department
employee (case manager) should be
 assigned
primary responsibility and held accountable for ensuring that each
 patient
is educated about TB and its treatment, that therapy is continuous,
 and
that contacts are examined. Some specific responsibilities also may
 be
assigned to other persons (e.g., clinical supervisors {nurses,
 physicians,
or physician assistants}, outreach workers, health educators, and
 social
workers).  As soon as TB is diagnosed or suspected, treatment should be
 started,
and the TB case should be reported to the health department. Within
 3
working days after the case is reported, a health department worker
 should
visit the patient in the hospital or home to initiate patient
 education,
identify contacts, make appropriate referrals for medical
 evaluation, and
detect possible problems related to adherence to therapy. In
 cooperation
with the other medical, nursing, and outreach staff providing care
 to the
patient, the case manager should develop an initial treatment and
monitoring plan based on the initial visit, the medical and nursing
assessment, and other available information (Table_1). The
 initial
treatment plan should be developed within 1 week of diagnosis
 (i.e., within
1 week of initiation of therapy for a person suspected to have TB
 or within
1 week of identification of a person having a positive culture).
 This
treatment plan should be reviewed regularly and modified as needed
 when
additional relevant information becomes available (e.g.,
susceptibility-test results) or when the care of the patient is
 transferred
from one provider to another.  The treatment plan should include the specifics of the
medical
 regimen,
a monitoring plan for toxicity and for clinical and bacteriologic
 response,
and an assessment of the patient's social, behavioral, and
 additional
medical needs that may affect continuity or completion of therapy
 (19). The
health department employee responsible for monitoring treatment
 adherence
should identify and implement methods that promote adherence and
 that are
appropriate to the patient's needs and desires. A treatment plan
 should be
designed for efficiency and economy of services and convenience to
 the
patient.  When developing and implementing a treatment plan, TB control
 programs
should work closely with health-care providers from local
 hospitals,
drug-treatment centers, HIV clinics, correctional facilities,
 health
maintenance organizations, private physicians' offices, and other
facilities where TB patients receive medical care. TB control
 programs
should fulfill their mandated responsibilities and also respect the
relationship between patient and primary health-care provider.  Clinic Services  Clinic
services provided by TB control programs should be
 accessible
and acceptable to the members of the community served by the
 clinic. Clinic
hours should be convenient and preferably should include some
 evening hours
for persons who work or attend school during the day. The clinic
 should be
easily accessible by public transportation, or transportation
 should be
provided. Intervals between the time of referral and the time of
appointment and waiting times in the clinic should be kept to a
 minimum. In
busy TB clinics or multipurpose clinics, priority should be given
 to
persons having TB or suspected of having TB and to persons
 receiving TB
medications. Clinic services, including diagnostic evaluation,
 medications,
and transportation, should be provided without consideration of the
patient's ability to pay. The clinic should have staff members who
 speak
the same language and have similar cultural and socioeconomic
 backgrounds
as the community served by the clinic, or the clinic should employ
 persons
trained to work in cross-cultural settings.  Promoting Adherence  Methods for promoting
adherence to therapy should be tailored
 to the
patient's needs, life-style, social support system, and beliefs
 about
health. An assessment of these factors should be included in the
development of a treatment plan (19,20). Patients should be
 educated about
the causes and effects of TB, the dosing and possible adverse
 reactions of
their medication, and the importance of taking their medication
 according
to the treatment plan. To facilitate adherence, the plan should use
short-course treatment regimens and, for patients whose therapy is
 not
directly observed, fixed-dose combination tablets. Providing
 transportation
to the clinic also is important for promoting adherence. A
 welcoming and
respectful atmosphere within the clinic setting is fundamental to
maintaining adherence.  Consideration should be given to treating all patients with
 directly
observed therapy (DOT) (6,7). With DOT, a health-care provider or
 other
responsible person observes the patient swallowing each dose of
 anti-TB
medication. DOT may be administered with daily or intermittent
 regimens and
may be given to patients in an office or clinic setting or by an
 outreach
worker in the patient's home, place of employment, school, or other
mutually agreed-upon place. In some instances, DOT may be
 administered by
the staff of correctional facilities or drug-treatment programs,
 home
health-care workers, staff of maternal and child health facilities,
 or a
responsible community or family member.  Incentives and enablers should be available
to enhance
 adherence to
therapy. These incentives range from simple approaches (e.g.,
 offering a
cup of coffee or food discount coupons and talking with a patient
 while he
or she is waiting in the clinic) to complex approaches (e.g.,
 obtaining
food and housing for a homeless patient).  Health-care professionals, including private
practitioners,
 who become
aware of a TB patient who has demonstrated an inability or
 unwillingness to
adhere to a prescribed treatment regimen should consult the health
department. The TB control program should assist in evaluating the
 patient
for the causes of nonadherence to therapy and provide assistance
 (e.g.,
outreach-worker services) to enable the patient to complete the
 recommended
therapy. If the patient still fails to adhere to treatment, the
 health
department should take appropriate action based on local laws and
regulations. This action could entail seeking court-ordered DOT or
detention for those patients who are unwilling or unable to
 complete their
treatment and who are infectious or who are at risk for becoming
 infectious
or  developing  drug-resistant  TB.   Additional  services  may  be  necessary  to  facilitate
continuity
 and
completion of therapy. Social workers, translators, and referral
 sources
for drug-treatment services should be available in the clinic or
 easily
accessible  to  the  patients.   Referral  System  for  Other  Medical  Problems   A  system
should be in place to facilitate referral of TB
 patients for
evaluation and treatment of other medical problems, including those
conditions (e.g., HIV infection, underlying malignancy, diabetes
 mellitus,
and substance abuse) that may affect the course or outcome of TB
 treatment.
Consultants should see referred patients in a timely fashion, and
 the
assessment and recommendations of the consultant should be made
 available
promptly to the referring health-care provider. If patients receive
 care in
more than one setting, treatment should be coordinated with the
 other
health-care providers to ensure continuity and completion of
 therapy,
minimize drug interactions, and avoid duplication of efforts. The
 TB
program should take primary responsibility for ensuring TB
 treatment and
monitoring for adherence.  Clinical Consultative Services  Expert medical consultation
should be available for management
 of all
TB patients, including those who have drug-resistant TB. These
 consultative
services should be available to the TB control program and
 health-care
providers in the community. The consultation may be provided by a
 staff
member of the TB control program or by a local or regional
 consultant
collaborating with the health department.  Inpatient Care  Regardless of the patient's
ability to pay, appropriate
 accommodations
should be available for any TB patient requiring inpatient hospital
 care
for TB or other conditions. The facility should have effective
 infection
control measures in place to prevent transmission of TB infection
 in the
hospital (12). Medical staff knowledgeable about the management of
 TB
patients should be available to assist in the care of the patient
 while
hospitalized. In addition, appropriate medications should be
 available in
the facility so that the patient can continue therapy in the
 hospital.
Appropriate diagnostic services (e.g., radiology and
 mycobacteriology)
should be available to monitor the patient for adverse reactions,
 the
progress of treatment, and other medical conditions. The local TB
 program
and the facility should develop and implement protocols to ensure
 rapid
reporting of known or suspected TB cases to the local health
 department.  Confinement Capability  To ensure that patients receive treatment until
they are
 cured, TB
control programs should have adequate legal authority and
 appropriate
facilities available to isolate and treat patients who have
 infectious TB.
When all less restrictive measures have failed, TB control programs
 also
should have the authority to detain patients unwilling or unable to
complete their treatment. This authority also should apply to
 nonadherent
patients who are no longer infectious, but who are at risk for
 again
becoming infectious or for the development of drug-resistant TB.  Infection Control  TB
control programs should serve the medical community as
 sources of
information and consultation regarding appropriate infection
 control
practices (12). During interactions with the medical community, TB
 control
programs should emphasize the need to maintain a high level of
 suspicion
for TB in evaluating patients who have TB symptoms and also the
 importance
of early diagnosis and isolation and prompt initiation of therapy.
 The
programs should give expert advice or provide referrals to experts
 for
information about appropriate infection control measures for
 different
settings (e.g., hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, correctional
 facilities,
homeless shelters, and drug-treatment centers).  TB control programs should provide
guidance to local
 facilities and the
community to ensure the availability of an appropriate number of TB
isolation rooms to meet community needs. Because local needs may
 change,
the adequacy of the number of isolation rooms should be reassessed
 each
year as part of the evaluation of the TB control program.  TB control programs should
educate the staff of facilities
 providing
care for TB patients about the need for routine periodic evaluation
 of
infection control practices and may also assist in the evaluation
 process.
Assistance may include providing current recommendations and
 regulations to
the facility, providing names of experts in infection control, or
 providing
access  to  personnel  involved  in  programmatic  evaluations.   Coordinating  Care  with
Other  Health-Care  Providers  and  Facilities   TB  patients  often  receive  care  in  multiple
settings, including
 HIV
clinics, drug-treatment centers, correctional facilities,
 hospitals,
nursing homes, or primary care clinics. When patients move among
 these
various settings, continuity and completion of therapy may be
 compromised
unless a system for the coordination of care exists. Discharge
 planning for
hospitalized patients should begin as soon as TB is diagnosed
 (i.e., at the
time of initiation of therapy in a suspected case or identification
 of a
positive culture in a confirmed case). A representative from the TB
 control
program should visit the patient in the hospital to identify
 contacts,
collect information for the initial treatment plan, and ensure that
 no
obstacles to the patient's follow-up care exist (see Managing
 Persons Who
Have Disease or Who Are Suspected of Having Disease). To provide
 and
coordinate continuous TB treatment and to facilitate transfers of
 care, TB
control programs should communicate regularly with providers and
 facilities
involved in TB patient care, including hospitals, infection-control
practitioners, private practitioners, community clinics,
 correctional
facilities, homeless shelters, and drug-treatment centers. TB
 control
programs should consider using a computerized system for
 coordinating the
care  of  TB  patients.   IDENTIFYING  PERSONS  WHO  HAVE  CLINICALLY  ACTIVE  TB  
Diagnostic Methods  Clinics providing services for TB patients should have access
 to the
basic methods necessary for the diagnosis of TB, including
 tuberculin skin
testing, chest radiography, sputum induction, and mycobacteriology
 services
for smears, cultures, and drug-susceptibility testing (see
 Laboratory and
Diagnostic Services). TB control programs should provide guidance
 to
facilities about appropriate diagnostic methods for different
circumstances. Sputum smear examinations and cultures for
 mycobacteria
should be performed on persons suspected of having active pulmonary
 or
laryngeal TB. Tuberculin testing is the standard method for
 screening
asymptomatic populations for infection with M. tuberculosis.
 However,
screening initially for disease rather than infection may be more
appropriate in some circumstances (e.g., when tuberculin skin-test
 results
may be unreliable, when application and reading of the test may be
impractical, or when the consequences of an undiagnosed case may be
severe). For example, because elderly persons living in long-term
 care
facilities are at high risk for the development of TB and may be
 anergic,
all patients admitted to these facilities should have an initial
 screening
chest radiograph. Chest radiography also may be the preferable
 screening
method for persons incarcerated in jails or residing in other
 settings
where TB is common and where diagnostic delays may result in large
 numbers
of  persons  being  exposed  to  TB.   Case  Finding   Most  persons  who  have  TB  are
diagnosed when they seek medical
 care for
symptoms caused by TB or other medical conditions. Therefore, for
 early
identification of TB cases, health-care providers in the community
 must
have an awareness of TB. Conducting contact investigations is
 another
important way to find TB cases and may yield approximately 700
 cases per
100,000 persons evaluated (CDC Program Management Reports
 1990-1992,
unpublished data). Health departments should seek cases of TB
 through
active  surveillance  of  mycobacteriology  laboratories.   Routine  screening  with  chest
radiographs to identify persons
 who have
disease is justifiable in certain situations, particularly when the
prevalence of TB is extremely high (e.g., among homeless
 populations or
certain immigrant or refugee populations from areas that have a
 high
prevalence of TB) or when the consequences of an undiagnosed case
 of TB are
severe (e.g., in residential facilities for HIV-infected persons,
correctional facilities, homeless shelters {21,22}, or nursing
 homes).
Using local epidemiologic data, TB programs should identify these
 high-risk
groups  and  settings  and  determine  whether  screening  is  indicated.   Contact
Investigation  Staff of TB control programs should begin a contact
 investigation as
soon as they are notified of a suspected or confirmed case of TB.
 TB
control programs should educate health-care providers in the
 community
about the need for prompt reporting of suspected cases. Contact
investigations are important for identifying persons who have TB
 infection
and who are at high risk for the development of active disease.
 Contact
investigations are also important for detecting cases of active TB
 (5).  The priority, speed, and extent of a contact investigation
 should be
influenced by the likelihood of transmission (based on the
 characteristics
of the source patient, environment, and contacts) and the possible
consequences of infection (especially for HIV-infected contacts or
 contacts
who  are  young  children).   IDENTIFYING  AND  MANAGING  PERSONS  INFECTED  WITH  M.
TUBERCULOSIS   TB  Skin  Testing  of  High-Risk  Groups   TB  control  programs  should
assess the prevalence and incidence
 of TB
and the sociodemographic characteristics of TB patients and
 infected
persons in each community. On the basis of these data, TB control
 programs
should design tuberculin screening programs to reach the
 community's
high-risk groups (13,16). Regular evaluation of the usefulness of
 these
screening programs is extremely important because, in general,
 screening
should not be given preference over higher priority activities
 (e.g.,
treatment of TB patients and contact investigation). The practice
 of
screening low-risk groups should be discontinued.  TB control programs should identify
and establish working
 relationships
with persons, facilities, and agencies providing health-care
 services to
high-risk populations and should assist them in developing and
 implementing
screening programs appropriate for various situations. Decisions to
initiate programs to skin test high-risk groups should be based on
 the
ability of the TB control program and these community groups to
 provide
adequate preventive therapy services. For appropriate
 implementation of
screening programs, the TB control program and local facilities
 should be
able to perform tuberculin skin tests, read and interpret the
 tests,
evaluate those persons who have positive results, initiate
 preventive
therapy when appropriate, monitor patients for adverse reactions,
 and
ensure that patients complete preventive therapy. The plan for
 evaluation
and treatment of patients should be developed before testing
 begins.  Health-care providers serving high-risk groups should receive
assistance from TB control programs in planning and providing these
services, including training staff and evaluating screening
 programs to
determine their effectiveness. Members of high-risk groups should
 be
educated about the problem of TB in their community and should be
 involved
in  the  implementation  of  screening  and  prevention  programs.   LABORATORY  AND
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES  Chest Radiograph and Interpretation  Outpatient and inpatient
facilities offering TB treatment
 should have
ready access to a sufficient quantity of radiology equipment and
 enough
trained radiology technicians so that chest radiographs can be
 obtained
each day during clinic hours for all patients needing them.
 Furthermore,
the chest radiograph should be interpreted by a qualified person,
 and the
report of the chest radiograph findings should be available within
 24
hours.  Mycobacteriology Laboratory  To ensure that results of acid-fast examinations of
specimens
 are
available promptly (ideally, within 24 hours of specimen
 collection), TB
control programs should have access to adequate mycobacteriology
 laboratory
services. Reports of isolation and identification of M.
 tuberculosis should
be available within 10-14 days, and reports of drug-susceptibility
 tests
should be available within 15-30 days of specimen collection. The
 TB
control program should work closely with the laboratory to ensure
 rapid
delivery of specimens to the laboratory and prompt laboratory
 reporting of
acid-fast bacilli smears, culture results, and results of
drug-susceptibility tests to the clinician and health department.
 The
laboratory should use rapid laboratory methods, including
 fluorescent
acid-fast staining procedures, inoculation of a liquid medium as
 primary
culture, nucleic acid probes to identify M. tuberculosis, and,
 using
radiometric (e.g., BACTEC (R)) or similar systems, testing of M.
tuberculosis isolates for susceptibility to the first-line drugs
 (23).
These mycobacteriology laboratory services also should be available
 to TB
control programs for monitoring bacteriologic response to therapy.  Diagnostic Services
to Assess Drug Toxicity  The outpatient and inpatient facilities where TB treatment is
 offered
should provide, or have access to, diagnostic services for
 monitoring
patients for potential adverse reactions to anti-TB medications. At
 least
monthly during therapy, patients receiving anti-TB medications
 should be
evaluated by a health-care professional (e.g., nurse, physician, or
physician assistant) and questioned about possible adverse
 reactions. The
facilities offering TB treatment should be able to perform visual
 acuity
and color vision evaluations on site. Blood tests for liver
 enzymes, blood
urea nitrogen, creatinine, uric acid, complete blood count, and
 platelets
may be performed at an outside laboratory; however, phlebotomy
 services
should be available on site. Audiometry should be available on site
 or at
another accessible location. In geographic areas that have a high
prevalence of drug-resistant TB, testing of serum levels for
 anti-TB
medications, especially cycloserine, should be available through a
reference laboratory.  HIV Testing and Counseling  All persons who have confirmed or
suspected TB should be
 offered HIV
counseling and antibody testing. If TB clinics are unable to
 perform
on-site counseling and testing, they should coordinate with
 HIV-testing
programs to make these services available. In geographic areas that
 have a
high prevalence of HIV-infected persons, TB prevention and control
 staff
should be trained and qualified to provide routine HIV counseling
 and
antibody  testing.   DATA  COLLECTION  AND  ANALYSIS   Case  Reporting   TB  control
programs should ensure and facilitate TB case
 reporting from
various community sources (e.g., physicians, laboratories,
 hospitals, and
pharmacies) and routinely monitor the completeness of reporting and
 the
duration of time between diagnosis and reporting. TB control
 programs also
should communicate regularly with infection-control practitioners
 in
hospitals and other facilities that frequently diagnose TB. Case
 reporting
is essential to the compilation of national, state, and local
 morbidity
reports and to program planning and evaluation, and prompt
 reporting is
necessary  for  effective  contact  tracing.   TB  Registry   To  carry  out  mandatory
community public health
 responsibilities, health
department TB control programs should maintain a computerized
 record system
(case registry) with up-to-date information on all current
 clinically
active and suspected TB cases in the community. To ensure follow-up
 of all
TB patients and those persons suspected of having TB, registry
 information
(e.g., smear, culture, and susceptibility results; clinical status;
 chest
radiograph results; and doses of medications being administered)
 should be
obtained and updated on a continuing basis. A specific health
 department
staff member should review detailed registry information for TB
 cases at
least monthly to identify patients who have potential problems with
adherence or response to therapy (e.g., patients who have
 persistently
positive sputum or who are taking medications to which their TB
 organisms
are resistant) and to ensure follow-up (e.g., initiating field
 follow-up
visits or arranging medical consultation with providers). TB
 control
programs also should maintain records on the examination and
 treatment
status of the contacts of infectious TB patients and other groups
 of
high-risk infected persons (e.g., persons coinfected with M.
 tuberculosis
and HIV).  Protection of Confidentiality  TB control programs should devise policies to
ensure the data
 security
and confidentiality of TB records. Strategies should be in place to
 protect
all TB reports, records, and files containing patient names or
 other
identifying information. Local policies regarding the security and
confidentiality of such information, including HIV test results,
 must
adhere to all laws applicable in state and local jurisdictions
 (8,24). TB
control programs should collaborate with HIV programs to develop
 and
implement  such  policies.   Drug  Resistance  Surveillance   TB  control  programs  should
ensure that drug-susceptibility
 tests are
performed on all initial isolates of M. tuberculosis and that the
 results
are reported promptly to the primary care provider and the local
 health
department. TB control programs should monitor local drug
 resistance rates
to assess the effectiveness of local TB control efforts and to
 determine
the appropriateness of the currently recommended initial TB
 treatment
regimen for the area.  Data Analysis and Program Evaluation  To determine morbidity
rates, trends, and demographic
 characteristics
of the TB patient population in the area, TB control programs
 should
analyze the data collected each year. Local health departments
 should
rapidly report cases, including the necessary demographic
 information, to
state health departments, and states should regularly forward the
 reports
to CDC. Timely and complete reporting is essential for local,
 state, and
national  public  health  planning  and  assessment.   TB  control  programs  should  assess
program performance by
 determining
the rates for completion of therapy, contact identification, and
 initiation
and completion of preventive therapy. At least annually, TB control
 program
staff should assess progress toward achievement of program
 objectives. To
facilitate the monitoring of TB morbidity and program performance,
 programs
should implement computerized systems for data collection and
 analysis.
Program evaluation reports should be shared with the appropriate
 public,
private,  and  community  groups.   TB  control  programs  should  periodically  review
screening
 activities to
assess their effectiveness in identifying infected persons and in
 ensuring
that these persons are completing courses of preventive therapy
 when
appropriate. If reviews demonstrate that few or no new cases are
 being
identified by particular screening activities, these activities
 should be
discontinued.  Programs also should conduct periodic reviews of selected
 records
systems (e.g., laboratory reports, pharmacy reports, AIDS
 registries, and
death certificates) to validate the surveillance system and to
 detect any
failure to report cases.  TB control programs should analyze each new TB case and each
 death
caused by TB to determine whether the case or death could have been
prevented. Based on such a review, new policies should be developed
 and
implemented to reduce the number of preventable cases and deaths.  In collaboration
with community-based organizations and
 professional
societies, health departments should prepare annual reports based
 on these
assessments. These reports should document the extent and nature of
 the TB
problem in the area, assess the adequacy of prevention and control
measures, and provide recommendations for program improvements.
 Some TB
programs may determine that an outside review by experts from the
 state
health department, CDC, local lung associations, or other TB
 experts may be
helpful to determine methods for improving program performance and
community TB control and for providing support for major changes
 (e.g.,
significant restructuring or acquisition of new resources).  TRAINING AND EDUCATION 
Staff Training  TB control programs should provide appropriate training and
 evaluation
for all program staff at time of employment and at regular
 intervals so
that staff can maintain an accurate, up-to-date level of knowledge
 about
TB, public health practice, management and evaluation skills, and
 other
related topics.  Education for Health-Care Providers and Members of the Community  TB
control programs should provide leadership in TB education
 in the
community. To determine needs for training and education, TB
 control
programs should monitor the level of knowledge about TB among
 health-care
providers, policymakers, and other community members who provide
 services
to TB patients (e.g., the staff of social services departments,
correctional services departments, mental health offices, and legal
 service
offices). TB control programs should work closely with medical and
 nursing
schools, schools of public health, community-based organizations,
professional societies, minority advocacy groups, and others to
 meet the
training and education needs of the community.  References  
    CDC. A strategic plan for the elimination of tuberculosis in
 the United
    States. MMWR 1989; 38(No. S-3).  
    CDC. Expanded tuberculosis surveillance and tuberculosis
 morbidity --
    United States, 1993. MMWR 1994;43:361-6.  
    Brudney K, Dobkin J. Resurgent tuberculosis in New York City:
 human
    immunodeficiency virus, homelessness, and the decline of the
    tuberculosis control programs. Am Rev Respir Dis
 1991;144:745-9.  
    Snider DE Jr, Roper WL. The new tuberculosis. N Engl J Med
    1992;326:703-5.  
    American Thoracic Society/CDC. Control of tuberculosis in the
 United
    States. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:1623-33.  
    CDC. Initial therapy for tuberculosis in the era of multidrug
    resistance: recommendations of the Advisory Council for the
 Elimination
    of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-7).  
    American Thoracic Society/CDC. Treatment of tuberculosis and
    tuberculosis infection in adults and children. Am J Respir
 Crit Care
    Med 1994;149:1359-74.  
    CDC. Tuberculosis control laws -- United States, 1993:
 recommendations
    of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis
 (ACET).
    MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-15).  
    American Thoracic Society/CDC. Diagnostic standards and
 classification
    of tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:725-35.  
    CDC. Tuberculosis and human immunodeficiency virus infection:
    recommendations of the Advisory Committee for the Elimination
 of
    Tuberculosis (ACET). MMWR 1989;38:236-8,243-50.  
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in correctional
    institutions: recommendations of the Advisory Committee for
 the
    Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1989;38:313-20,325.  
    CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of
 Mycobacterium
    tuberculosis in health-care facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No.
 RR-13).  
    CDC. Screening for tuberculosis and tuberculous infection in
 high-risk
    populations: recommendations of the Advisory Committee for
 Elimination
    of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-11):19-34.  
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in facilities
 providing
    long-term care to the elderly: recommendations of the Advisory
    Committee for Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1990; 39(No.
 RR-10):
    7-20.  
    CDC. Tuberculosis among foreign-born persons entering the
 United
    States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee for
 Elimination of
    Tuberculosis. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-18):1-21.  
    CDC. The use of preventive therapy for tuberculous infection
 in the
    United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee for
    Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1990;39 (No. RR-8):8-12.  
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in migrant farm
 workers:
    recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of
    Tuberculosis. MMWR 1992;41(No. RR-10):1-15.  
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis among homeless
 persons:
    recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of
    Tuberculosis. MMWR 1992;41(No. RR-5):13-23.  
    CDC. Improving patient adherence to tuberculosis treatment.
 Atlanta: US
    Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
 Service, CDC,
    1994.  
    Sumartojo E. When tuberculosis treatment fails: a social
 behavioral
    account of patient adherence. Am Rev Respir Dis
 1993;147:1311-20.  
    McAdam J, Brickner PW, Glicksman R, Edwards D, Fallon B,
 Yanowitch P.
    Tuberculosis in the SRO/homeless population. In: Brickner PW,
 Scharer
    LK, Conanan B, Elvy A, Savarese M, eds. Health care of
 homeless people.
    New York: Springer, 1985:155-75.  
    Barry MA, Wall C, Shirley L, et al. Tuberculosis screening in
 Boston's
    homeless shelters. Public Health Rep 1986;101:487-98.  
    Tenover FC, Crawford JT, Huebner RE, Geiter LJ, Horsburgh CR,
 Good RC.
    The resurgence of tuberculosis: is your laboratory ready? J
 Clin
    Microbiol 1993;31:767-70.  
    Gostin LO. Controlling the resurgent tuberculosis epidemic: a
 50-state
    survey of TB statutes and proposals for reform. JAMA
 1993;269:255-61.  ** The word "standard" is being used to indicate a prototype
 established by
authority, custom, or general consent. Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Elements of a treatment plan for TB patients
====================================================
======================================
   I. Assignment of responsibility
      A. Case manager (i.e., person assigned primary responsibility)
      B. Clinical supervisor (e.g., nurse, physician, physician assistant)
      C. Other caregivers (e.g., outreach worker, nurse, physician, physician assis-
         tant)
      D. Person responsible for completing the contact investigation
  II. Medical evaluation
      A. Tests for initial evaluation (e.g., tuberculin skin test, chest radiograph,
         smear, culture, susceptibility tests, HIV test), including results of each test
         and date completed
      B. Important medical history (e.g., previous treatment, other risk factors for
         drug resistance, known drug intolerances, and other medical problems)
      C. Potential adverse reactions
         1. Appropriate baseline laboratory tests to monitor toxicity (e.g., liver en-
            zymes, visual acuity, color vision, complete blood count, audiogram,
            BUN, and creatinine), including results of each test and date com-
            pleted
         2. Potential drug interactions
      D. Obstacles to adherence
 III. TB treatment
      A. Medications, including dosage, frequency, route, date started, and date
         to be completed for each medication
      B. Administration
         1. Method (directly observed or self-administered)
         2. Site(s) for directly observed therapy
  IV. Monitoring
      A. Tests for response to therapy (e.g., chest radiograph, smear, and culture),
         including planned frequency of tests and results
      B. Tests for toxicity, including planned frequency of tests and results
   V. Adherence plan
      A. Proposed interventions for obstacles to adherence
      B. Plan for monitoring adherence
      C. Incentives and enablers
 VII. TB education
      A. Person assigned for culturally appropriate education
      B. Steps of education process and date to be completed
VIII. Social services
      A. Needs identified
      B. Referrals, including date initiated and results
  IX. Follow-up plan
      A. Parts of treatment plan to be carried out at TB clinic
      B. Parts of treatment plan to be carried out at other sites and person(s) con-
         ducting activities
====================================================
======================================
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00038823.htm
