Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / July 6, 2018 / 67(26);733–737 Aaron W. Tustin, MD1;
Glenn E. Lamson, MS1; Brenda L. Jacklitsch, PhD2; Richard J. Thomas, MD1; Sheila B.
Arbury, MPH1; Dawn L. Cannon, MD1; Richard G. Gonzales3; Michael J. Hodgson, MD1
(View author affiliations) What is already known about this topic? Recommended heat
stress occupational exposure limits are based primarily on wet bulb globe temperature
(WBGT), workload, and acclimatization status. These limits have not been validated at
outdoor  worksites.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Among  25  outdoor  occupational
heat-related illnesses, WBGT-based occupational exposure limits were exceeded for all
14 fatalities and for eight of 11 nonfatal illnesses. Six fatalities occurred when the Heat
Index  was  ˂91°F  (32.8°C).  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?
Whenever  heat  stress  exceeds  occupational  exposure  limits,  workers  should  be
protected  by  acclimatization  programs,  training  about  symptom  recognition  and  first
aid, and provision of rest breaks, shade, and water. A Heat Index of 85°F (29.4°C) could
be  used  as  a  screening  threshold  to  prevent  heat-related  illness.  Views  equals  page
views  plus  PDF  downloads  Table  1  Table  2  Heat  stress,  an  environmental  and
occupational hazard, is associated with a spectrum of heat-related illnesses, including
heat stroke, which can lead to death. CDC’s National Institute for Occupational Safety
and  Health  (NIOSH)  publishes  recommended  occupational  exposure  limits  for  heat
stress (1). These limits, which are consistent with those of the American Conference of
Governmental  Industrial  Hygienists  (ACGIH)  (2),  specify  the  maximum  combination  of
environmental heat (measured as wet bulb globe temperature [WBGT]) and metabolic
heat (i.e., workload) to which workers should be exposed. Exposure limits are lower for
workers  who  are  unacclimatized  to  heat,  who  wear  work  clothing  that  inhibits  heat
dissipation,  and  who  have  predisposing  personal  risk  factors  (1,2).  These  limits  have
been  validated  in  experimental  settings  but  not  at  outdoor  worksites.  To  determine
whether  the  NIOSH  and  ACGIH  exposure  limits  are  protective  of  workers,  CDC
retrospectively reviewed 25 outdoor occupational heat-related illnesses (14 fatal and 11
nonfatal)  investigated  by  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)
from  2011  to  2016.  For  each  incident,  OSHA  assessed  personal  risk  factors  and
estimated WBGT, workload, and acclimatization status. Heat stress exceeded exposure
limits in all 14 fatalities and in eight of 11 nonfatal illnesses. An analysis of Heat Index
data  for  the  same  25  cases  suggests  that  when  WBGT  is  unavailable,  a  Heat  Index
screening  threshold  of  85°F  (29.4°C)  could  identify  potentially  hazardous  levels  of
workplace environmental heat. Protective measures should be implemented whenever
the  exposure  limits  are  exceeded.  The  comprehensive  heat-related  illness  prevention
program  should  include  an  acclimatization  schedule  for  newly  hired  workers  and
unacclimatized  long-term  workers  (e.g.,  during  early-season  heat  waves),  training  for
workers  and  supervisors  about  symptom  recognition  and  first  aid  (e.g.,  aggressive
cooling  of  presumed  heat  stroke  victims  before  medical  professionals  arrive),
engineering  and  administrative  controls  to  reduce  heat  stress,  medical  surveillance,
and provision of fluids and shady areas for rest breaks. OSHA’s Office of Occupational
Medicine and Nursing receives consultation requests from OSHA area offices to address
medical questions that arise during OSHA worksite inspections. A master list of these
consultations  was  used  to  identify  66  heat-related  illness  consultations  during
2011–2016. Three consultations with missing information, 32 indoor incidents, and six
that occurred near a heat source were excluded because accurate retrospective heat
exposure assessments were not possible. The remaining 25 records were reviewed to
assess  workers’  personal  risk  factors,  heat  acclimatization  status,  workload,  and
clothing. Personal risk factors considered in this report were obesity (body mass index
≥30 kg/m2), diabetes, hypertension, cardiac disease, and use of certain medications (1)
and illicit drugs. Workers were considered unacclimatized if they had started a new job
within the preceding 2 weeks or if they had recently returned from an absence of >1
week. Workload was classified as light, moderate, heavy, or very heavy, according to
ACGIH  guidelines  (2).  Archived  climatologic  data  (i.e.,  temperature,  humidity,  wind
speed,  and  sky  conditions)  were  obtained  from  the  nearest  National  Oceanic  and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) weather station. WBGT at the time of each incident
was estimated using a validated heat and mass transfer model (3), and Heat Index was
computed  via  a  standard  NOAA  algorithm.*  In  cases  in  which  the  worker’s  clothing
likely  impaired  heat  dissipation  (four),  clothing  adjustment  factors  (2)  were  added  to
the estimated WBGT to determine the effective WBGT (WBGTeff). Total heat stress was
compared with the applicable NIOSH exposure limit (i.e., the Recommended Exposure
Limit for acclimatized healthy workers or the Recommended Alert Limit for workers who
were unacclimatized or had personal risk factors). The sensitivity of the exposure limits
was  defined  as  the  percentage  of  cases  where  heat  stress  met  or  exceeded  the
applicable limit. The sample consisted of 25 heat-related illnesses that occurred during
outdoor work, 14 (56.0%) of which were fatal (Table 1). Approximately half (12 of 25) of
workers  had  at  least  one  predisposing  personal  risk  factor.  Workload  was  moderate,
heavy,  or  very  heavy  in  13  of  14  fatalities;  the  remaining  fatality  involved  light
workload in an unacclimatized worker. Estimated WBGTeff and Heat Index did not differ
significantly  across  categories  of  workload  or  acclimatization  status  (Table  2).  The
range  of  WBGTeff  was  79°F–94°F  (26.1°C–34.4°C).  The  sensitivity  of  the  NIOSH
exposure limits was 100% (14 of 14) for detection of fatal heat stress and 72.7% (eight
of 11) for detection of conditions that caused nonfatal illness. The median Heat Index
was 91°F (33.3°C) and ranged from 83°F to 110°F (28.3°C to 43.3°C). The Heat Index
was  <91°F  (32.8°C)  in  12  of  25  cases,  including  six  of  14  fatalities.  Among  workers
wearing  a  single  layer  of  normal  clothing  (21),  the  minimum  Heat  Index  was  85°F
(29.4°C), and four of nine nonfatal illnesses and four of 12 fatalities occurred when the
Heat  Index  was  between  85°F  (29.4°C)  and  90°F  (32.2°C).  Top  Because  WBGT
incorporates  four  environmental  factors  (air  temperature,  relative  humidity,  wind
speed,  and  radiation  [often  sunlight])  that  contribute  to  heat  stress,  it  is  the
recommended  workplace  environmental  heat  metric.  In  2016,  NIOSH  reiterated  this
recommendation  in  an  updated  publication  that  defines  WBGT-based  occupational
exposure  limits  (1).  The  limits  were  derived  from  human  experiments  and  have  high
sensitivity for detecting unsustainable heat stress in laboratory settings (4). However,
few  data  have  documented  the  effectiveness  of  the  exposure  limits  in  real-life
situations  (1).  The  current  report  partially  fills  this  data  gap.  In  this  analysis,  the
exposure limits had 100% sensitivity for identifying fatal levels of heat stress in outdoor
industries. This result suggests that the recommended limits are sufficiently protective
of most workers. Heat Index is an “apparent” temperature that combines humidity and
air  temperature  to  quantify  what  the  conditions  “feel  like”  to  the  human  body.  Heat
Index was designed for the general public, based on algorithms that assume a person is
wearing light clothing and walking in a shaded area with a light breeze (5). Heat Index
does  not  account  for  the  effects  of  direct  sunlight,  stagnant  air,  work  clothing,  and
strenuous  activities.  Employers  often  obtain  Heat  Index  information  from  publicly
broadcasted weather reports or forecasts that do not necessarily reflect conditions at
their  worksites.  These  limitations  preclude  Heat  Index  from  supplanting  WBGT  as  the
occupational  gold  standard.  Nonetheless,  at  outdoor  worksites  where  WBGT  is
unavailable, Heat Index is sometimes used to estimate environmental heat. This study
demonstrates that workers wearing normal clothing are at risk for heat-related illness
when  Heat  Index  is  ≥85°F  (29.4°C).  Whenever  the  Heat  Index  is  ≥85°F,  employers
should  exercise  extra  vigilance  and  implement  additional  precautions  (Box),  which
could  include  a  more  accurate  WBGT-based  environmental  heat  assessment.  Current
occupational  Heat  Index  guidance  might  not  be  sufficiently  protective.  For  example,
although OSHA does not have an enforceable permissible exposure limit for heat stress,
OSHA guidance states that a Heat Index of <91°F (32.8°C) is associated with “lower”
risk  of  heat-related  illness  unless  other  factors  (e.g.,  direct  sun,  little  air  movement,
strenuous  workload,  or  nonbreathable  clothing)  are  present  (6).  However,  six  of  14
deaths  in  this  report  occurred  when  the  Heat  Index  was  <91°F.  Additional  evidence
supports  the  possibility  of  serious  illness  when  the  Heat  Index  is  <91°F.  Fourteen
percent  of  moderate  to  severe  heat-related  illnesses  at  a  U.S.  military  training
installation (7) and at least 25% of heat-related illnesses in Washington agriculture and
forestry workers (8) occurred when the Heat Index was <90°F (32.2°C). Some employer
reports  of  heat-related  hospitalizations  to  OSHA’s  Severe  Injury  Reports  database  (9)
have  been  associated  with  a  Heat  Index  of  <80°F  (26.7°C).  A  recent  mathematical
analysis demonstrated that the NIOSH exposure limits can be exceeded when the Heat
Index exceeds 85°F (29.4°C) (10). The findings in this report are subject to at least four
limitations.  First,  some  workers’  acclimatization  status,  workload,  or  clothing  might
have  been  misclassified.  For  example,  all  workers  with  >2  weeks  of  job  tenure  were
considered acclimatized, but during early-season heat waves, some long-term workers
might have been unacclimatized to heat. Second, local environmental heat at worksites
might have differed from meteorologic data obtained from the nearest NOAA weather
station.  Third,  the  WBGT  estimation  algorithm  was  subject  to  small  (<1°C)  random
errors (3) and, in some cases, to uncertainties because of reliance on cloud cover as a
surrogate  for  solar  radiation  measurements.  Finally,  there  was  an  inability,  possibly
attributable  to  the  study’s  sample  size,  to  detect  differences  in  environmental  heat
between groups stratified by workload or acclimatization status. Future research could
expand  upon  the  findings  in  this  report  to  define  Heat  Index-based  occupational
exposure  limits  that  account  for  physical  activity  and  acclimatization.  As  part  of  a
comprehensive  program  to  prevent  heat-related  illnesses,  employers  should  measure
heat  stress  throughout  the  workday,  preferably  by  using  WBGT,  and  take  actions  to
prevent exposure limits from being exceeded. When WBGT is unavailable, a Heat Index
threshold  of  85°F  (29.4°C)  could  be  used  to  screen  for  hazardous  workplace
environmental heat. The comprehensive heat-related illness prevention program should
also  include  an  acclimatization  schedule  for  newly  hired  workers  and  unacclimatized
long-term  workers  (e.g.,  during  early-season  heat  waves),  training  for  workers  and
supervisors  about  symptom  recognition  and  first  aid  (e.g.,  aggressive  cooling  of
presumed  heat  stroke  victims  before  medical  professionals  arrive),  engineering  and
administrative  controls  to  reduce  heat  stress,  medical  surveillance,  and  provision  of
fluids  and  shady  areas  for  rest  breaks  (1).  Top  Thomas  Bernard,  College  of  Public
Health, University of South Florida. Top 
 No  conflicts  of  interest  were  reported.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Aaron  W.  Tustin,
tustin.aaron.w@dol.gov,  202-693-2018.  Top  1Directorate  of  Technical  Support  and
Emergency Management, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Washington,
D.C.;  2Education  and  Information  Division,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety
and  Health,  CDC;  3Directorate  of  Enforcement  Programs,  Occupational  Safety  and
Health
 Administration,
 Washington,
 D.C.
 Top
 *
http://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/html/heatindex_equation.shtml.  Top  Top  *  Obesity,
diabetes, hypertension, cardiac disease, and use of certain medications or illicit drugs.
Top  Abbreviation:  WBGT  =  wet  bulb  globe  temperature.*  Obesity,  diabetes,
hypertension, cardiac disease, and use of certain medications or illicit drugs.† Effective
WBGT equals measured WBGT plus any applicable clothing adjustment factor. Top Top
Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Tustin  AW,  Lamson  GE,  Jacklitsch  BL,  et  al.  
Evaluation  of  Occupational  Exposure  Limits  for  Heat  Stress  in  Outdoor  Workers  —
United  States,  2011–2016.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2018;67:733–737.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6726a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6726a1.htm
