A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Evidence  Summaries  from  the
Recommendations for Prevention and Control of Infections in NICU Patients: S. aureus
(2020) guideline. Key Question 1. What are effective strategies for preventing S. aureus
transmission from colonized or infected NICU patients to other patients, and do these
strategies  differ  between  MRSA  and  MSSA  or  in  the  setting  of  an  outbreak?  Key
Question  2.  If  active  surveillance  is  conducted,  which  anatomic  sampling  sites  and
laboratory assays most effectively identify S. aureus colonization in NICU patients? To
address these questions, studies were considered that examined interventions for the
prevention of transmission of S. aureus, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
or  methicillin-sensitive  S.  aureus  (MSSA),  from  colonized  or  infected  NICU  patients  to
other patients. The search strategy predominantly identified studies describing multiple
infection prevention and control strategies implemented simultaneously or sequentially.
In  multi-intervention  studies,  it  is  not  possible  to  distinguish  the  effectiveness  of
individual interventions, and it is likely that a combination of interventions led to any
reported  reductions  in  healthcare-associated  transmission  of  S.  aureus.  The
interventions described in these studies include core infection prevention and control
strategies,  institution  of  preemptive  Contact  Precautions,  changes  in  hand  hygiene
protocols, use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) compared to conventional culture for
testing,  active  surveillance  testing,  and  decolonization  of  NICU  patients.  The  benefits
weighed  in  evaluating  the  evidence  included  the  outcomes  of  reduction  in  S.  aureus
infection, colonization, and transmission (a composite measure including both infection
and  colonization),  attributable  mortality,  and  length  of  stay.  Harms  included  the
outcomes of antimicrobial resistance and product-related adverse events. The outcome
deemed  critical  to  decision-making  was  reduction  in  S.  aureus  infections.  For  the
purposes  of  this  analysis,  healthcare-associated  transmission  within  the  NICU  is
suggested by an increase in cases of S. aureus colonization or infection as determined
by cultures obtained for clinical indications or surveillance purposes. The evidence for
these  questions  consisted  of  20  observational  studies.[2–9,11,17,23,32,38,52–58]  The
findings of the evidence review and the grades for all critical and important outcomes
are  provided  in  the  Appendix.  (Appendix  Section  3.)  The  search  identified  12
observational  studies  [2–5,7,8,11,32,54–56,58]  that  implemented  multiple  infection
prevention  and  control  strategies  simultaneously  to  prevent  and  control  S.  aureus
transmission.  Nine  studies[3–8,32,55,56]  implemented  multi-intervention  strategies  to
prevent  MRSA:  2  in  the  outbreak  setting,[3,6]  and  7  in  the  non-outbreak
setting.[4,5,7,8,32,55,56]  One  study[54]  implemented  multi-intervention  strategies  to
prevent  MSSA  in  the  non-outbreak  setting,  and  2  non-outbreak  studies[2,58]
implemented these strategies to reduce S. aureus transmission. For the purposes of this
analysis,  multi-intervention  infection  prevention  and  control  strategies  included  a
combination  of  the  following  interventions:  All  studies  retrieved  in  this  analysis
implemented  a  combination  of  some  or  all  of  these  interventions.  The  independent
effect  of  each  of  these  interventions  cannot  be  determined  due  to  the  concurrent
implementation of the measures. The optimal combination of infection prevention and
control strategies could not be determined because all studies implemented different
combinations  of  infection  prevention  and  control  strategies  in  both  the  endemic  and
outbreak settings and reported heterogeneous outcome measures. It is notable that all
7  studies[2,8,10,32,54–56]  that  reported  a  reduction  in  S.  aureus,  MRSA,  or  MSSA
infections  included  the  intervention  of  infant  decolonization.  In  these  studies,  infant
decolonization was frequently implemented after other infection prevention and control
strategies were not successful in controlling transmission. The added implementation of
Contact  Precautions  for  MRSA,  versus  Standard  Precautions  alone  for  MSSA,  is  the
primary  difference  in  the  infection  prevention  and  control  strategies  implemented
between  studies.  The  evidence  suggests  a  benefit  to  implementing  multiple  infection
prevention and control strategies to reduce S. aureus transmission. This conclusion is
based on overall reductions in S. aureus infections[2,8,10,32,54,56] and the composite
outcome  of  transmission,  which  included  both  infected  and  colonized  infants.[6]  The
benefit of implementing multi-intervention strategies to reduce S. aureus colonization
as  a  sole  outcome  measure  could  not  be  determined  due  to  inconsistency  in  results
across studies[4,5,32,55]; however, the results of one study[4] suggesting no benefit in
the endemic setting were likely confounded by the emergence of an outbreak strain.
The overall quality of this evidence was rated as low. The harms data reported in these
studies was limited. One study[7] reported no difference in unadjusted length of stay
and  attributable  mortality.  (Appendix  Section  3.A.1.a.,  Table  11)  Three  studies[3,6,8]
suggest  a  benefit  to  implementing  multi-intervention  strategies  to  reduce  MRSA
transmission.  However,  the  evidence  suggests  mixed  results  regarding  the  benefit  of
implementing
 multi-intervention
 strategies
 to
 reduce
 MRSA
 infections
 and
colonization.[4,5,7,8,32,56,58]  It  is  notable  that  2  of  the  3  studies  reporting  the
outcome  of  MRSA  transmission  were  conducted  in  the  outbreak  setting,  and  both  of
these  studies[3,6]  reported  a  reduction  of  transmission.  Again,  data  were  limited  on
harms,  and  only  one  study[7]  reported  no  change  in  unadjusted  length  of  stay  and
attributable  mortality.  A  reduction  in  MRSA  transmission  was  seen  in  2  studies[3,6]
conducted  in  the  outbreak  setting.  The  combination  of  interventions  implemented  in
the outbreak and non-outbreak setting were similar. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.a., Table
12)  Multi-intervention  strategy  data  are  limited  for  MSSA,  with  only  one  study[54]
suggesting  a  reduction  in  MSSA  bacteremia  following  the  implementation  of  multiple
infection prevention and control strategies. No harm outcomes were reported for this
comparison.  (Appendix  Section  3.A.1.a.,  Table  13)  Recommendations  on  strategies
considered foundational to infection prevention and control across healthcare settings
can be found in the Core Infection Prevention and Control Practices for Safe Healthcare
Delivery in All Settings – Recommendations of the HICPAC (2017) document.[1] In the
setting  of  endemic  MRSA,  there  is  limited  evidence  of  benefit  to  implementing
preemptive  Contact  Precautions  for  outborn  infants  until  their  colonization  status  is
confirmed  as  negative.  A  decrease  in  MRSA  transmission  rate  was  observed  after
implementation of preemptive Contact Precautions; however, this evidence consisted of
one study[52] which also reported a 25% increase in hand hygiene compliance during
the  intervention  period,  likely  confounding  the  results.  This  study  did  not  report
adjusted  morbidity  or  attributable  mortality.  (Appendix  Section  3.A.1.b.,  Table  14)
Evidence  from  one  study[53]  suggests  benefit  to  implementing  a  new  hand  hygiene
protocol which incorporated multiple policy changes, including implementing universal
glove  use  and  changing  the  cleansing  agent  from  a  chlorhexidine  hand  wash  to  a
chlorhexidine-alcohol  hand  rub.  This  study[53]  found  a  decrease  in  the  incidence  of
MRSA septicemia with the institution of this new hand hygiene protocol. No changes in
either  mean  length  of  stay  or  infection-related  mortality  were  associated  with  the
implementation  of  the  interventions  associated  with  this  policy.  (Appendix  Section
3.A.1.c.,  Table  15)  Active  surveillance  testing  of  NICU  patients  to  identify
newly-colonized  infants  to  guide  implementation  of  infection  prevention  and  control
measures,  such  as  Contact  Precautions  or  decolonization,  has  been  shown  to  be  of
benefit  in  the  context  of  an  outbreak,  increased  incidence  of  infection,  or  ongoing
healthcare-associated
 transmission.[2,4,5,8–11,58]
 Observational
 studies
 report
decreased incidence of infection and colonization. In most studies, the anterior nares
were sampled; the umbilicus, rectum, axilla, and groin were also sampled. (Appendix
Section  3.A.1.d.)  The  evidence  retrieved  suggests  that  implementation  of  active
surveillance testing to guide implementation of infection control strategies results in a
reduction  in  S.  aureus  infection[2,4,7–11]  and  transmission.[3,6]  The  evidence  of
benefit was inconsistent for the outcome of S. aureus colonization.[2,4,5,58] The quality
of evidence for these outcomes was rated as low. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.d., Table 16)
There was evidence of reduction in MRSA transmission after using active surveillance
testing to guide implementation of multiple infection prevention and control strategies.
Two  of  the  3  studies[3,6]  reporting  this  outcome  were  conducted  in  the  outbreak
setting.
 The
 evidence
 suggests
 no
 reduction
 in
 MRSA
 infections
 with
 the
implementation  of  active  surveillance  testing.  Two  studies  reported  the  outcome  of
MRSA colonization, and the results were inconsistent.[4,58] (Appendix Section 3.A.1.d.,
Table  17)  Two  non-outbreak  studies[9,11]  employed  active  surveillance  to  guide  the
implementation  of  infection  prevention  and  control  measures  to  prevent  MSSA.  One
study[9]  implemented  decolonization  of  MSSA-colonized  infants,  and  the  other
study[11] provided decolonization to very low birthweight infants with central venous or
peripheral catheters. Both reported reductions in composite MSSA infections[9] or MSSA
bloodstream infection (BSI) and pneumonia.[11] (Appendix Section 3.A.1.d., Table 18)
Thirteen studies reported varying frequencies of active surveillance testing to detect S.
aureus  colonization  in  NICU  infants.  In  these  studies,  active  surveillance  testing  was
performed:  One  study[32]  implemented  routine  surveillance  on  a  monthly  basis,  and
one tested all intubated patients weekly and added admission screening for "increased
burden."[58]  The  interventions  implemented  for  patients  following  results  of
surveillance cultures also varied among the studies, which affects the interpretability of
the  results.  (Appendix  Section  3.A.1.e.)  Five  studies  found  a  reduction  in  S.  aureus
infection  from  implementing  active  surveillance  testing  on  admission  and  weekly
thereafter.  Two  of  these  studies[2,17]  conducted  admission  screening  for  all  infants,
and 3 conducted admission screening for outborn infants only.[8–10] One non-outbreak
study[7]  implementing  active  surveillance  testing  on  admission  and  weekly  for  all
infants  found  no  reduction  in  MRSA  infections.  The  choice  of  the  optimal  target
population for conducting active surveillance testing can be guided by epidemiology in
the facility and unit. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.e., Tables 19 – 22) The interpretability of
the  impact  of  conducting  weekly  surveillance  testing  is  limited  due  to  inconsistent
results  in  the  outcomes  of  infection  and  colonization  across  studies.[4,11,58]  These
studies  were  conducted  in  the  non-outbreak  setting;  however,  one  study4  saw
reductions  in  MRSA  colonization  that  were  not  sustained  during  a  period  of
overcrowding  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  MRSA  strain.  One  outbreak  study3
suggested a benefit to implementing admission screening for all infants in the outbreak
setting.  (Appendix  Section  3.A.1.e.,  Tables  21  –  25)  To  address  this  question,  studies
providing test characteristics for the detection of S. aureus were critically reviewed. The
available data on detection of S. aureus examined the characteristics of tests and the
choice  of  anatomical  sites  for  sampling  for  active  surveillance  testing  for  S.  aureus.
Laboratory  methods  available  to  detect  S.  aureus  colonization  included  culture-based
methods and molecular testing methods. The evidence consists of one diagnostic study
examining  S.  aureus  colonization[19]  and  5  diagnostic  studies  examining  MRSA
colonization.[18,20–22,57] (Appendix Section 3.A.1.f. – 3.A.1.g.) One diagnostic study19
compared  assays  to  detect  S.  aureus  and  reported  higher  sensitivity  and  negative
predictive  value  for  real-time  PCR  than  for  culture-based  methods  using  broth
enrichment techniques. Results for specificity and positive predictive value to detect S.
aureus were the same for PCR and culture. In this study, culture-based methods were
used as the reference standard upon which the results were calculated. While this study
conducted susceptibility testing, results were reported in aggregate for S. aureus, and
not for MRSA or MSSA. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.f., Table 26) Evidence from 2 diagnostic
studies[18,20]  suggests  high  sensitivity,  specificity,  and  negative  predictive  value  of
PCR  for  detecting  MRSA.  However,  evidence  from  both  studies  suggested  that  the
positive predictive value of PCR was low. In the study finding a positive predictive value
of 41%,[18] 7 PCR-positive results were negative on culture: 5 of the 7 cultured positive
for  MSSA  via  nasal  swabs.  In  these  studies,  culture-based  methods  were  used  as  the
reference standard upon which the results were calculated. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.f.,
Table  27)  One  observational  outbreak  study[38]  found  a  benefit  to  changing  from
culture-based  testing  methods  to  real-time  PCR  testing  to  analyze  active  surveillance
samples during an MRSA outbreak. This study reported a decrease in both the MRSA
infection  rate  and  the  MRSA  transmission  rate.  This  study  also  reported  moderate
compliance  with  hand  hygiene  protocols  and  Contact  Precautions  and  did  not  assess
any  adverse  events.  (Appendix  Section  3.A.1.f.,  Table  28)  IMPLEMENTATION
CONSIDERATIONS  Although  PCR  may  have  higher  sensitivity,  multiple  considerations
influence  which  test  a  facility  may  use  to  screen  for  S.  aureus  colonization.  These
include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  outbreak  identification;  turnaround  time;  performance
characteristics  of  the  test;  use  in  clinical  management;  the  number  of  specimens
combined  with  the  capabilities  of  the  laboratory  providing  the  service;  and  resource
utilization.  Depending  on  laboratory  capacity,  molecular  diagnostic  testing  methods
such as PCR may be more useful in circumstances such as identifying an outbreak when
there may be an increased volume of cultures to process and a faster turnaround time
is needed. However, culture-based methods provide the benefit of lower cost and the
ability  to  assess  pathogen  susceptibility  patterns  to  guide  patient  treatment,  and  to
assess  genetic  relatedness  of  other  strains  for  outbreak  detection.  Either  PCR  or
culture-based methods are acceptable, and facilities and providers can balance these
situation-specific  needs  to  select  the  assay  that  best  benefits  their  NICU  patients.
Evidence from 3 diagnostic studies[21,22,57] demonstrated that swabs taken from the
nares had higher sensitivity and negative predictive value for MRSA than swabs taken
from the umbilical and rectal areas. While one study[22] concluded that nasal cultures
are sufficient to detect MRSA in the majority of colonized neonates, another study[21]
suggested  that  sampling  from  2  sites  would  increase  sensitivity.  (Appendix  Section
3.A.1.g.,  Table  29)  The  literature  search  did  not  reveal  studies  that  provided  test
characteristics for the detection of MSSA; data on the appropriate target populations; or
the ideal timing or frequency for active surveillance testing for S. aureus. The literature
search did not reveal studies examining the optimal anatomical site for detection of S.
aureus or MSSA. IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS The available evidence suggests
that  the  nares  samples  will  yield  high  sensitivity  when  screening  NICU  patients  for
MRSA and that other sites can be sampled to optimize sensitivity of screening strategy.
Although evidence on performance of various biologic samples for detecting MSSA and
S.  aureus  is  not  available,  it  is  likely  that  evidence  for  MRSA  applies  due  to  biologic
similarities. In general, testing and sampling strategies that apply to MRSA also apply to
MSSA; however, future research may provide greater insight into this issue. Eliminating
the  carrier  state  was  associated  with  decreases  in  infections  and  colonization  in  the
NICU  when  there  was  evidence  of  ongoing  healthcare-associated  transmission  and
when there was increased incidence of infection.[9–11,18] No studies retrieved by this
literature  search  examined  these  interventions  as  a  stand-alone  strategy  in  outbreak
settings. In 5 studies,[9–11,17,23] all colonized infants received decolonization. Two of
these studies[9,10] were conducted in the same facility at different time periods and
found  this  strategy  was  associated  with  reductions  in  S.  aureus  infections.  One
study[10] observed reductions in infections, but not reductions in colonization of other
NICU  patients.  One  study[11]  that  provided  prophylactic  decolonization  and
chlorhexidine bathing only to very low birthweight (VLBW) infants with central venous
and peripheral venous catheters found reductions in S. aureus infections in all infants in
the NICU. Two studies[9,10] that provided all NICU patients mupirocin decolonization,
regardless  of  colonization  status,  found  reductions  in  S.  aureus  infections  in  all  NICU
patients. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.h.) The literature search did not retrieve studies that
compared  different  decolonization  strategies  or  regimens  in  NICU  patients.  Four
studies[9–11,23]  examined  the  implementation  of  decolonization  of  colonized  infants,
and  all  found  reductions  in  S.  aureus  infections.  Two  of  these  studies[9,10]  were
performed  in  a  single  center  NICU  population  and  examined  the  impact  of  infant
decolonization  on  MSSA[9]  and  on  S.  aureus  as  a  whole.[10]  One  study[23]  found  no
difference in MRSA colonization between the group that was decolonized and the group
that was not decolonized. The fourth study[11] found reductions in MSSA-attributable
infections  after  implementing  surveillance  and  decolonization  of  only  MSSA-colonized
infants  with  IVs.  All  of  these  studies  were  conducted  in  non-outbreak  settings.
(Appendix Section 3.A.1.h., Tables 30 – 32) Two studies[11,17] examined prophylactic
use  of  decolonization  agents.  One[11]  targeted  VLBW  infants  with  central  and
peripheral lines with intranasal decolonization and chlorhexidine bathing, and one[17]
decolonized all infants in the NICU every 5 weeks with intranasal mupirocin. Both found
a reduction in S. aureus infections; however, the prophylactic decolonization regimens
and  choice  of  agents  were  too  dissimilar  to  determine  the  optimal  prophylactic
strategy. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.h., Table 33) Decolonization regimens varied across
the  studies  and  included  intranasal  mupirocin[17];  mupirocin  ointment  applied  to  the
nares  and  umbilicus[23]  or  to  the  nares,  umbilicus,  eroded  skin,  and  wounds[2];
intranasal mupirocin with chlorhexidine bathing for select patients[9,10]; and intranasal
mupirocin and octenidin washes.[11] Octenidin is not approved by the US Food & Drug
Administration (FDA) for use in US healthcare settings. All studies suggested reductions
in S. aureus infection and transmission. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.h., Tables 30 – 33) Two
studies[11,23] examined adverse events associated with the decolonization protocols,
and  found  none.  Safety  concerns  exist,  however,  for  the  2  most  commonly  utilized
decolonizing  agents.  The  FDA  has  not  determined  the  safety  and  effectiveness  for
intranasal  mupirocin  in  children  younger  than  12  years  of  age.  Specifically,  the
FDA-approved drug label states that pharmacokinetic data in neonates and premature
infants  suggests  that  significant  systemic  absorption  can  occur  following  intranasal
administration of mupirocin. Additionally, chlorhexidine bathing products may be used
"with care" in premature infants or infants under 2 months of age. These products may
cause irritation or chemical burns in these patients. (Appendix Section 3.A.1.h., Tables
30 – 33) Four studies[2,9,17,23] examined S. aureus isolates for increased antimicrobial
resistance  to  the  decolonizing  agent  during  the  study  period.  Two  studies[9,23]
examined resistance after the implementation of targeted decolonization of colonized
infants  and  found  no  increase  in  resistance  associated  with  targeted  decolonization.
Two  studies[2,17]  examined  resistance  after  the  implementation  of  a  universal
decolonization strategy that prophylactically decolonized all NICU infants. One study[2]
reported  no  resistance,  and  the  other[17]  reported  a  small  increase  in  mupirocin
resistance  associated  with  universal  decolonization.  The  studies  that  reported
mupirocin resistance evaluated the development of resistance over shorter periods of
time. There is greater concern regarding the evolution of harms, such as resistance to
the  decolonizing  agent,  if  it  is  applied  broadly  to  an  entire  population  in  a  unit.
(Appendix Section 3.A.1.h., Tables 30 – 33) There are concerns that decolonization can
have  farther-reaching  effects  than  resistance  and  can  alter  the  microbiome  of  NICU
patients. One study reported that while the authors could not exclude the possibility of
pathogen  replacement,  they  found  no  changes  in  either  the  central  line-associated
bloodstream  infection  (CLABSI)  rate  or  the  pathogen  distribution  contributing  to
CLABSIs  among  infants  who  were  decolonized  with  mupirocin.[17]  (Appendix  Section
3.A.1.h., Tables 30 – 33) Key Question 3. What are the risk factors and risk indicators for
S. aureus infection in NICU patients, and do they differ between MRSA and MSSA or in
the setting of an outbreak? Key Question 4. What are the risk factors and risk indicators
for S. aureus colonization in NICU patients, and do they differ between MRSA and MSSA
or  the  setting  of  an  outbreak?  The  evidence  retrieved  for  non-modifiable  risk  factors
and risk indicators consists of 29 observational studies. Many of the studies reported
differences in the presence of these characteristics between S. aureus-positive and S.
aureus-negative  infants;  however,  these  results  were  not  statistically  significant.
Additionally, many possible risk factors and risk indicators were assessed in only one
study,  which  precludes  drawing  conclusions  as  to  their  importance.  Several  studies
reported  composite  outcomes  of  colonization  or  infection  rather  than  reporting
colonization  and  infection  rates  separately,  which  hinders  the  ability  to  assess  the
association of risk factors and risk indicators with each specific outcome. A summary of
the evidence on risk factors and risk indicators analyzed in at least 2 studies follows.
The findings of the evidence review and the summary of potential risk factors and risk
indicators  across  studies  are  provided  in  the  Appendix  (Appendix  Section  3.B.)  Lower
birthweight[2,33,60–62]  and  younger  gestational  age[2,33,60]  were  reported  to  be
significantly  associated  with  S.  aureus  and  MRSA  infection  in  NICU  patients.  An
association was reported between prior colonization and S. aureus infection,[2,23] while
sex[2,61–63]  was  not  associated  with  S.  aureus  infection;  one  of  these  studies[62]
analyzed  a  composite  outcome  that  included  colonization.  Inconsistent  results  across
studies
 suggest
 an
 unclear
 association
 between
 race[60,62]
 and
 multiple
gestation[33,60] for S. aureus and MRSA infection. Data were limited to formulate any
conclusions  regarding  risk  factors  and  risk  indicators  for  MSSA  infection;  however,  3
studies[26,30,64]  compared  risk  factors  and  risk  indicators  for  MRSA  and  MSSA
infection.  These  studies  found  a  significantly  higher  incidence  of  MSSA  infections  in
older  infants;  however,  gestational  age  was  not  different  between  these  infants,
suggesting  that  a  longer  length  of  stay  may  affect  an  infant's  likelihood  of  acquiring
MSSA  infections  when  compared  with  MRSA  infections.  Only  one  study[33]  examined
risk factors and risk indicators for MRSA infections in the outbreak setting, which was
insufficient to formulate conclusions regarding the differences between risk factors and
risk indicators for infection between the endemic and the outbreak settings. (Appendix
Section  3.B.1.,  Tables  42  –  45)  Multiple  gestation[33,60,65]  and  administration  of
antibacterial therapy[65,66] were significantly associated with MRSA colonization. It is
notable  that  administration  of  antibacterial  therapy  is  a  potentially  modifiable  risk
factor to prevent MRSA colonization; however, infants in the NICU are severely ill, and
administration  of  these  antibiotics  is  necessary  and  likely  unavoidable.  The  literature
search  did  not  retrieve  any  studies  demonstrating  the  optimal  duration  of  antibiotic
therapy to prevent MRSA colonization; thus, no recommendation can be formulated to
guide practitioners on the duration of systemic antibacterial therapy that may prevent
MRSA colonization. (Appendix Section 3.B.1.b., Table 46) As with MRSA infection, lower
birthweight  was  associated  with  MRSA  colonization[21,23,33,38,41,60,62,65,67];  it
should be noted that 3 of these studies[38,62,67] analyzed composite outcomes that
included
 infection.
 Age
 at
 NICU
 admission,[21,23,62,65,68]
 delivery
method,[4,45,66,68,69]
 gender,[21,23,41,45,60,62,66–74]
 race,[62,67–69,73,74]
maternal age,[68,69] malformation,[4,65] the presence of a central venous catheter or
endotracheal  intubation,[63,66,68,70]  and  occurrence  of  surgical  procedures[66,68]
were not associated with MRSA colonization. Due to conflicting results across studies,
there  was  unclear  association  between  MRSA  colonization  status  and  gestational
age,[4,21,23,33,41,45,60,65,66,68–71,74] inborn status,[4,21,23,41,45,60,65,66,74,75]
Apgar
 score,[4,65,69,70]
 retinopathy
 of
 prematurity,[68,71]
 length
 of
 NICU
stay,[65,66,73]  and  healthcare  personnel  hand  hygiene[68,76]  compliance.  Lower
birthweight[33,38,67] is the only risk factor found in the literature for MRSA colonization
in  the  outbreak  setting.  This  association  may  be  confounded  because  2  of  these
studies[38,67] analyzed composite outcomes that included infection. (Appendix Section
3.B.1.b., Table 46 – 52) No risk factors or risk indicators for MSSA colonization in NICU
patients
 were
 found
 in
 the
 literature.
 Younger
 gestational
 age,[77,78]
birthweight,[68,78] delivery method,[68,77] gender,[68,78] healthcare personnel hand
hygiene
 compliance,[68,77]
 presence
 of
 central
 venous
 catheter,[20,74]
 and
occurrence of surgical procedure[63,64] were not associated with MSSA colonization in
the available evidence. There was an unclear association between Apgar score[77,78]
and  MSSA  colonization  due  to  conflicting  results  across  studies.  Data  were  limited  to
confer  any  difference  in  risk  factors  and  risk  indicators  for  MSSA  colonization  status
between the endemic and outbreak settings. (Appendix Section 3.B.1.c., Table 53 – 58).
Additional  studies  would  elucidate  modifiable  risk  factors  and  risk  indicators  for  S.
aureus  transmission  and  infection  to  test  novel  interventions  to  prevent  S.  aureus
disease. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce
the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/nicu-saureus/evidence-summaries.html
