A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Executive summary from the Guideline for
Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities  (2008).  The  Guideline  for
Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities,  2008,  presents  evidence-based
recommendations on the preferred methods for cleaning, disinfection and sterilization
of  patient-care  medical  devices  and  for  cleaning  and  disinfecting  the  healthcare
environment.  This  document  supercedes  the  relevant  sections  contained  in  the  1985
Centers  for  Disease  Control  (CDC)  Guideline  for  Handwashing  and  Environmental
Control.  1Because  maximum  effectiveness  from  disinfection  and  sterilization  results
from first cleaning and removing organic and inorganic materials, this document also
reviews  cleaning  methods.  The  chemical  disinfectants  discussed  for  patient-care
equipment  include  alcohols,  glutaraldehyde,  formaldehyde,  hydrogen  peroxide,
iodophors,  ortho-phthalaldehyde,  peracetic  acid,  phenolics,  quaternary  ammonium
compounds, and chlorine. The choice of disinfectant, concentration, and exposure time
is based on the risk for infection associated with use of the equipment and other factors
discussed  in  this  guideline.  The  sterilization  methods  discussed  include  steam
sterilization, ethylene oxide (ETO), hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, and liquid peracetic
acid. When properly used, these cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization processes can
reduce  the  risk  for  infection  associated  with  use  of  invasive  and  noninvasive  medical
and surgical devices. However, for these processes to be effective, health-care workers
should adhere strictly to the cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization recommendations
in  this  document  and  to  instructions  on  product  labels.  In  addition  to  updated
recommendations,  new  topics  addressed  in  this  guideline  include  CDC  provides
information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections
among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/executive-summary.html
