A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Executive  summary  of  the  Guideline  for
Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare
Settings  (2007).  The  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of
Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings 2007 updates and expands the 1996 Guideline
for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals. The following developments led to revision of the
1996 guideline: This document is intended for use by infection control staff, healthcare
epidemiologists,  healthcare  administrators,  nurses,  other  healthcare  providers,  and
persons  responsible  for  developing,  implementing,  and  evaluating  infection  control
programs for healthcare settings across the continuum of care. The reader is referred to
other guidelines and websites for more detailed information and for recommendations
concerning specialized infection control problems. Part I reviews the relevant scientific
literature that supports the recommended prevention and control practices. As with the
1996 guideline, the modes and factors that influence transmission risks are described in
detail.  New  to  the  section  on  transmission  are  discussions  of  bioaerosols  and  of  how
droplet  and  airborne  transmission  may  contribute  to  infection  transmission.  This
became a concern during the SARS outbreaks of 2003, when transmission associated
with  aerosol-generating  procedures  was  observed.  Also  new  is  a  definition  of
"epidemiologically  important  organisms"  that  was  developed  to  assist  in  the
identification of clusters of infections that require investigation (i.e. multidrug-resistant
organisms,  C.  difficile).  Several  other  pathogens  that  hold  special  infection  control
interest (i.e., norovirus, SARS, Category A bioterrorist agents, prions, monkeypox, and
the  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses)  also  are  discussed  to  present  new  information  and
infection control lessons learned from experience with these agents. This section of the
guideline  also  presents  information  on  infection  risks  associated  with  specific
healthcare  settings  and  patient  populations.  Part  II  updates  information  on  the  basic
principles  of  hand  hygiene,  barrier  precautions,  safe  work  practices  and  isolation
practices that were included in previous guidelines. However, new to this guideline, is
important  information  on  healthcare  system  components  that  influence  transmission
risks,  including  those  under  the  influence  of  healthcare  administrators.  An  important
administrative  priority  that  is  described  is  the  need  for  appropriate  infection  control
staffing  to  meet  the  ever-expanding  role  of  infection  control  professionals  in  the
modern,  complex  healthcare  system.  Evidence  presented  also  demonstrates  another
administrative  concern,  the  importance  of  nurse  staffing  levels,  including  numbers  of
appropriately  trained  nurses  in  ICUs  for  preventing  HAIs.  The  role  of  the  clinical
microbiology  laboratory  in  supporting  infection  control  is  described  to  emphasize  the
need  for  this  service  in  healthcare  facilites.  Other  factors  that  influence  transmission
risks are discussed i.e., healthcare worker adherence to recommended infection control
practices, organizational safety culture or climate, education and training. Discussed for
the first time in an isolation guideline is surveillance of healthcare-associated infections.
The information presented will be useful to new infection control professionals as well
as persons involved in designing or responding to state programs for public reporting of
HAI  rates.  Part  III  describes  each  of  the  categories  of  precautions  developed  by  the
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the Centers for
Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  and  provides  guidance  for  their  application  in
various  healthcare  settings.  The  categories  of  Transmission-Based  Precautions  are
unchanged  from  those  in  the  1996  guideline:  Contact,  Droplet,  and  Airborne.  One
important  change  is  the  recommendation  to  don  the  indicated  personal  protective
equipment (gowns, gloves, mask) upon entry into the patient's room for patients who
are on Contact and/or Droplet Precautions since the nature of the interaction with the
patient  cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty  and  contaminated  environmental  surfaces
are  important  sources  for  transmission  of  pathogens.  In  addition,  the  Protective
Environment (PE) for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients, described
in  previous  guidelines,  has  been  updated.  There  are  several  tables  that  summarize
important  information:  New  in  this  guideline  is  a  figure  that  shows  a  recommended
sequence  for  donning  and  removing  personal  protective  equipment  used  for  isolation
precautions  to  optimize  safety  and  prevent  self-contamination  during  removal.
Appendix  A  consists  of  an  updated  alphabetical  list  of  most  infectious  agents  and
clinical conditions for which isolation precautions are recommended. A preamble to the
Appendix  provides  a  rationale  for  recommending  the  use  of  one  or  more
Transmission-Based Precautions, in addition to Standard Precautions, based on a review
of  the  literature  and  evidence  demonstrating  a  real  or  potential  risk  for
person-to-person  transmission  in  healthcare  settings.  The  type  and  duration  of
recommended precautions are presented with additional comments concerning the use
of adjunctive measures or other relevant considerations to prevent transmission of the
specific  agent.  Relevant  citations  are  included.  New  to  this  guideline  is  a
comprehensive review and detailed recommendations for prevention of transmission of
MDROs. This portion of the guideline was published electronically in October 2006 and
updated in November, 2006 (Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L and HICPAC.
Management  of  Multidrug-Resistant  Organisms  in  Healthcare  Settings  2006),  and  is
considered  a  part  of  the  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions.  This  section  provides  a
detailed  review  of  the  complex  topic  of  MDRO  control  in  healthcare  settings  and  is
intended to provide a context for evaluation of MDRO at individual healthcare settings.
A  rationale  and  institutional  requirements  for  developing  an  effective  MDRO  control
program  are  summarized.  Although  the  focus  of  this  guideline  is  on  measures  to
prevent  transmission  of  MDROs  in  healthcare  settings,  information  concerning  the
judicious  use  of  antimicrobial  agents  is  presented  since  such  practices  are  intricately
related to the size of the reservoir of MDROs which in turn influences transmission (e.g.,
colonization pressure). There are two tables that summarize recommended prevention
and  control  practices  using  the  following  seven  categories  of  interventions  to  control
MDROs:  administrative  measures,  education  of  healthcare  personnel,  judicious
antimicrobial use, surveillance, infection control precautions, environmental measures,
and decolonization. Recommendations for each category apply to and are adapted for
the  various  healthcare  settings.  With  the  increasing  incidence  and  prevalence  of
MDROs, all healthcare facilities must prioritize effective control of MDRO transmission.
Facilities should identify prevalent MDROs at the facility, implement control measures,
assess the effectiveness of control programs, and demonstrate decreasing MDRO rates.
A  set  of  intensified  MDRO  prevention  interventions  is  presented  to  be  added  This
updated  guideline  responds  to  changes  in  healthcare  delivery  and  addresses  new
concerns about transmission of infectious agents to patients and healthcare workers in
the  United  States  and  infection  control.  The  primary  objective  of  the  guideline  is  to
improve the safety of the nation’s healthcare delivery system by reducing the rates of
HAIs. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce
the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/executive-summary.html
