A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.   Factors  Affecting  the  Efficacy  of
Disinfection  and  Sterilization  from  the  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in
Healthcare Facilities (2008). The activity of germicides against microorganisms depends
on a number of factors, some of which are intrinsic qualities of the organism, others of
which are the chemical and external physical environment. Awareness of these factors
should lead to better use of disinfection and sterilization processes and will be briefly
reviewed.  More  extensive  consideration  of  these  and  other  factors  is  available
elsewhere 13, 14, 16, 411-413. All other conditions remaining constant, the larger the
number of microbes, the more time a germicide needs to destroy all of them. Spaulding
illustrated this relation when he employed identical test conditions and demonstrated
that it took 30 minutes to kill 10 B. atrophaeus (formerly Bacillus subtilis) spores but 3
hours to kill 100,000 Bacillus atrophaeus spores. This reinforces the need for scrupulous
cleaning  of  medical  instruments  before  disinfection  and  sterilization.  Reducing  the
number  of  microorganisms  that  must  be  inactivated  through  meticulous  cleaning,
increases the margin of safety when the germicide is used according to the labeling and
shortens the exposure time required to kill the entire microbial load. Researchers also
have  shown  that  aggregated  or  clumped  cells  are  more  difficult  to  inactivate  than
monodispersed  cells  414.  The  location  of  microorganisms  also  must  be  considered
when  factors  affecting  the  efficacy  of  germicides  are  assessed.  Medical  instruments
with  multiple  pieces  must  be  disassembled  and  equipment  such  as  endoscopes  that
have crevices, joints, and channels are more difficult to disinfect than are flat- surface
equipment because penetration of the disinfectant of all parts of the equipment is more
difficult. Only surfaces that directly contact the germicide will be disinfected, so there
must be no air pockets and the equipment must be completely immersed for the entire
exposure  period.  Manufacturers  should  be  encouraged  to  produce  equipment
engineered for ease of cleaning and disinfection. Microorganisms vary greatly in their
resistance  to  chemical  germicides  and  sterilization  processes  (Figure  1)  342  Intrinsic
resistance  mechanisms  in  microorganisms  to  disinfectants  vary.  For  example,  spores
are  resistant  to  disinfectants  because  the  spore  coat  and  cortex  act  as  a  barrier,
mycobacteria have a waxy cell wall that prevents disinfectant entry, and gram-negative
bacteria  possess  an  outer  membrane  that  acts  as  a  barrier  to  the  uptake  of
disinfectants  341,  343-345.  Implicit  in  all  disinfection  strategies  is  the  consideration
that the most resistant microbial subpopulation controls the sterilization or disinfection
time.  That  is,  to  destroy  the  most  resistant  types  of  microorganisms  (i.e.,  bacterial
spores),  the  user  needs  to  employ  exposure  times  and  a  concentration  of  germicide
needed to achieve complete destruction. Except for prions, bacterial spores possess the
highest  innate  resistance  to  chemical  germicides,  followed  by  coccidia  (e.g.,
Cryptosporidium), mycobacteria (e.g., M. tuberculosis), nonlipid or small viruses (e.g.,
poliovirus,  and  coxsackievirus),  fungi  (e.g.,  Aspergillus,  and  Candida),  vegetative
bacteria  (e.g.,  Staphylococcus,  and  Pseudomonas)  and  lipid  or  medium-size  viruses
(e.g., herpes, and HIV). The germicidal resistance exhibited by the gram-positive and
gram-negative  bacteria  is  similar  with  some  exceptions  (e.g.,  P.  aeruginosa  which
shows  greater  resistance  to  some  disinfectants)  369,  415,  416.  P.  aeruginosa  also  is
significantly more resistant to a variety of disinfectants in its "naturally occurring" state
than are cells subcultured on laboratory media 415, 417. Rickettsiae, Chlamydiae, and
mycoplasma cannot be placed in this scale of relative resistance because information
about  the  efficacy  of  germicides  against  these  agents  is  limited  418.  Because  these
microorganisms  contain  lipid  and  are  similar  in  structure  and  composition  to  other
bacteria, they can be predicted to be inactivated by the same germicides that destroy
lipid viruses and vegetative bacteria. A known exception to this supposition is Coxiella
burnetti, which has demonstrated resistance to disinfectants 419. With other variables
constant, and with one exception (iodophors), the more concentrated the disinfectant,
the  greater  its  efficacy  and  the  shorter  the  time  necessary  to  achieve  microbial  kill.
Generally not recognized, however, is that all disinfectants are not similarly affected by
concentration  adjustments.  For  example,  quaternary  ammonium  compounds  and
phenol  have  a  concentration  exponent  of  1  and  6,  respectively;  thus,  halving  the
concentration of a quaternary ammonium compound requires doubling its disinfecting
time,  but  halving  the  concentration  of  a  phenol  solution  requires  a  64-fold  (i.e.,  26)
increase in its disinfecting time 365, 413, 420. Considering the length of the disinfection
time,  which  depends  on  the  potency  of  the  germicide,  also  is  important.  This  was
illustrated  by  Spaulding  who  demonstrated  using  the  mucin-loop  test  that  70%
isopropyl alcohol destroyed 104 M. tuberculosis in 5 minutes, whereas a simultaneous
test with 3% phenolic required 2–3 hours to achieve the same level of microbial kill 14.
Several  physical  and  chemical  factors  also  influence  disinfectant  procedures:
temperature,  pH,  relative  humidity,  and  water  hardness.  For  example,  the  activity  of
most disinfectants increases as the temperature increases, but some exceptions exist.
Furthermore, too great an increase in temperature causes the disinfectant to degrade
and weakens its germicidal activity and thus might produce a potential health hazard.
An  increase  in  pH  improves  the  antimicrobial  activity  of  some  disinfectants  (e.g.,
glutaraldehyde,  quaternary  ammonium  compounds)  but  decreases  the  antimicrobial
activity  of  others  (e.g.,  phenols,  hypochlorites,  and  iodine).  The  pH  influences  the
antimicrobial  activity  by  altering  the  disinfectant  molecule  or  the  cell  surface  413.
Relative humidity is the single most important factor influencing the activity of gaseous
disinfectants/sterilants,  such  as  EtO,  chlorine  dioxide,  and  formaldehyde.  Water
hardness (i.e., high concentration of divalent cations) reduces the rate of kill of certain
disinfectants  because  divalent  cations  (e.g.,  magnesium,  calcium)  in  the  hard  water
interact with the disinfectant to form insoluble precipitates 13, 421. Organic matter in
the  form  of  serum,  blood,  pus,  or  fecal  or  lubricant  material  can  interfere  with  the
antimicrobial activity of disinfectants in at least two ways. Most commonly, interference
occurs by a chemical reaction between the germicide and the organic matter resulting
in  a  complex  that  is  less  germicidal  or  nongermicidal,  leaving  less  of  the  active
germicide available for attacking microorganisms. Chlorine and iodine disinfectants, in
particular,  are  prone  to  such  interaction.  Alternatively,  organic  material  can  protect
microorganisms  from  attack  by  acting  as  a  physical  barrier  422,  423.  The  effects  of
inorganic contaminants on the sterilization process were studied during the 1950s and
1960s  424,  425.  These  and  other  studies  show  the  protection  by  inorganic
contaminants of microorganisms to all sterilization processes results from occlusion in
salt crystals 426, 427. This further emphasizes the importance of meticulous cleaning of
medical devices before any sterilization or disinfection procedure because both organic
and inorganic soils are easily removed by washing 426. Items must be exposed to the
germicide  for  the  appropriate  minimum  contact  time.  Multiple  investigators  have
demonstrated  the  effectiveness  of  low-level  disinfectants  against  vegetative  bacteria
(e.g.,  Listeria,  E.  coli,  Salmonella,  VRE,  MRSA),  yeasts  (e.g.,  Candida),  mycobacteria
(e.g., M. tuberculosis), and viruses (e.g., poliovirus) at exposure times of 30–60 seconds
46-64.  By  law,  all  applicable  label  instructions  on  EPA-registered  products  must  be
followed.  If  the  user  selects  exposure  conditions  that  differ  from  those  on  the
EPA-registered product label, the user assumes liability for any injuries resulting from
off-label  use  and  is  potentially  subject  to  enforcement  action  under  the  Federal
Insecticide,  Fungicide,  and  Rodenticide  Act  (FIFRA).  All  lumens  and  channels  of
endoscopic  instruments  must  contact  the  disinfectant.  Air  pockets  interfere  with  the
disinfection process, and items that float on the disinfectant will not be disinfected. The
disinfectant  must  be  introduced  reliably  into  the  internal  channels  of  the  device.  The
exact times for disinfecting medical items are somewhat elusive because of the effect
of  the  aforementioned  factors  on  disinfection  efficacy.  Certain  contact  times  have
proved reliable (Table 1), but, in general, longer contact times are more effective than
shorter  contact  times.  Microorganisms  may  be  protected  from  disinfectants  by
production of thick masses of cells 428 and extracellular materials, or biofilms 429-435.
Biofilms are microbial communities that are tightly attached to surfaces and cannot be
easily  removed.  Once  these  masses  form,  microbes  within  them  can  be  resistant  to
disinfectants  by  multiple  mechanisms,  including  physical  characteristics  of  older
biofilms,  genotypic  variation  of  the  bacteria,  microbial  production  of  neutralizing
enzymes,  and  physiologic  gradients  within  the  biofilm  (e.g.,  pH).  Bacteria  within
biofilms  are  up  to  1,000  times  more  resistant  to  antimicrobials  than  are  the  same
bacteria  in  suspension  436.  Although  new  decontamination  methods  437  are  being
investigated  for  removing  biofilms,  chlorine  and  monochloramines  can  effectively
inactivate  biofilm  bacteria  431  438.  Investigators  have  hypothesized  that  the
glycocalyx-like  cellular  masses  on  the  interior  walls  of  polyvinyl  chloride  pipe  would
protect embedded organisms from some disinfectants and be a reservoir for continuous
contamination 429, 430, 439. Biofilms have been found in whirlpools 440, dental unit
waterlines441,  and  numerous  medical  devices  (e.g.,  contact  lenses,  pacemakers,
hemodialysis  systems,  urinary  catheters,  central  venous  catheters,  endoscopes)  434,
436, 438, 442. Their presence can have serious implications for immunocompromised
patients and patients who have indwelling medical devices. Some enzymes 436, 443,
444  and  detergents  436  can  degrade  biofilms  or  reduce  numbers  of  viable  bacteria
within  a  biofilm,  but  no  products  are  EPA-registered  or  FDA-cleared  for  this  purpose.
CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk
of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/efficacy-factors.html
