Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  To  receive  email  updates  about  this  page,  enter  your  email
address: The following downloadable file provides a preview of the trivalent influenza
vaccines codes for the 2024/2025 season, anticipated vaccines have been added. The
NDC codes are not yet available. Download the Influenza Vaccine Trivalent Codes for
the  2024/2025  Season  Table  The  current  Fall  vaccine  code  and  crosswalk  tables  for
COVID-19,  RSV,  and  Influenza  are  provided  in  the  following  summary  tables.  The
following table provides a preview and summary of the vaccine codes and crosswalks
that  will  be  activated  if  the  FDA  authorizes  use  and  ACIP  votes  to  recommend  the
candidate  vaccines.  Note:  Codes  in  the  following  table  are  effective  and  published  in
the  full  vaccine  code  sets  only  upon  EUA  issuance  or  BLA  licensure  of  COVID-19
vaccine(s) by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Additional code details and fields
values are included in the vaccine code sets once published. Download the Fall 2023
COVID-19  Vaccine  Code  Crosswalk  table  (*)  Product  Label  Tradename:  If  the
manufacturer name is included in the tradename, the vaccine product is to be provided
under Emergency Use Authorization (EUA), once FDA EUA issuance is received. Other
tradenames  are  for  vaccine  products  to  be  provided  under  BLA  licensure,  once
approved.  Information  regarding  currently  active  EUA  Recipient  and  Caregiver  Fact
Sheet  URLs  and  Codes  can  be  found  here.  Registered  users  can  access  COVID-19
vaccine  lot  numbers  and  expiration  dates  provided  to  CDC  by  the  vaccine
manufacturer.  Information  regarding  Previous  COVID-19  pandemic  Emergency  Use
Authorization  (EUA)  and  BLA  codes  and  crosswalks  can  be  found  here.  The  following
table includes the RSV codes and crosswalks included in the CDC IIS Vaccine Code Sets.
Note that the CPT codes shown are not mapped to the NDC codes, but are mapped to
the CVX codes shown. CPT codes provided in the vaccine code sets are to assist with
code  categorizations  and  are  not  intended  to  represent  billable  codes.  Download  the
RSV  Crosswalk  table  (*)  The  BEYFORTUS  nirsevimab  monoclonal  antibody  codes  are
included  in  the  vaccine  code  set  in  a  manner  similar  to  regular  vaccines  to  enable
reporting or other program data exchange in accordance with ACIP and CDC guidelines.
Guidance  relating  to  RSV  vaccines  can  be  found  at  Home  page  for  MMWR  |  MMWR
(cdc.gov)  On  July  17,  2023,  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  licensed  Nirsevimab
(Beyfortus),  a  long-acting  monoclonal  antibody  for  the  prevention  of  respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) in infants and young children. It is anticipated that the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  will  vote  on  potential  recommendations
for use of this product and its inclusion in the Vaccines for Children (VFC) program at
the August 3rd ACIP meeting. New codes listed above have been added in anticipation
of  potential  recommendations.   More  information  to  support  integration  into  VFC,  as
well as details around vaccine codes, Clinical Decision Support for Immunization (CDSi),
and any data collection requirements will be published as they become available. This
new  format  includes  all  seasonal  influenza  vaccines  for  the  2023/2024  season  in  a
single Excel crosswalk table that provides the CVX, MVX, NDC Unit of Sale, NDC Unit of
Use, and CPT (*) codes for each vaccine. (*) Please note that the CPT codes shown for
each vaccine crosswalk are not mapped to the NDC codes, but are mapped to the CVX
codes  shown.   These  are  reference  CPT  codes  for  vaccine  categorization  and  are  not
intended to represent billable codes. Download the Seasonal Influenza Crosswalk table
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/iis/fall-season-respiratory-codes.html
