A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 The False-Positive Investigation Toolkit provides mycobacteriology staff with resources
to  recognize  potential  false-positive  results  and  to  assist  staff  in  false-positive
investigations.  False-positive  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  complex  (MTBC)  results  can
be difficult to identify, investigate, and resolve. False-positive results often have serious
implications  for  patient  isolation,  patient  therapy,  contact  investigations,  and
unnecessary laboratory testing. Errors leading to false- positive results can be classified
as  pre-analytic,  analytic,  or  post-analytic.  In  any  mycobacteriology  laboratory,
cross-contamination,  mislabeling  errors,  specimen  mix-ups,  and  use  of  nonsterile
reagents can cause the inadvertent transfer of bacilli from one specimen or culture to
another  specimen  or  culture.  The  False-Positive  Investigation  Toolkit  provides
mycobacteriology  staff  with  updated  resources  to  recognize  potential  false-positive
results  and  to  assist  staff  in  false-positive  investigations.   False-Positive  Investigation
Toolkit  The  toolkit's  primary  audience  is  mycobacteriology  laboratory  supervisors,
technologists, and quality- assurance staff members. In addition, TB Control programs
and  healthcare  providers  may  also  find  this  information  beneficial  when  investigating
potential false-positive laboratory results. The toolkit includes a document that can be
reviewed  and  referred  to  and  job  aids,  posters,  and  templates.  The  job  aids  and
templates  can  be  modified  for  local  use  and  should  not  be  sent  to  CDC  for  data
collection.   An  accompanying  online  interactive  case  study  training  module,
Mycobacteriology  False-Positive  Case  Studies,  is  available  through  the  Association  of
Public Health Laboratories. The training module walks through different scenarios of a
potential  false-positive  investigation.  False-Positive  Investigation  Toolkit:  Pre-Analytic,
Analytic,  and  Post  Analytic  Prevention  Practices  False  Positive  Investigation  Toolkit:
Laboratory Monitoring False-Positive Investigation Toolkit: Monitoring for False-Positive
Results
 Outside
 the
 Laboratory
 False-Positive
 Investigation
 Toolkit:
 Initial
Communication  of  a  Potential  False-Positive  False-Positive  Investigation  Toolkit:
Laboratory  Areas  for  Investigations  False-Positive  Investigation  Toolkit:  Actions  Taken
as a Result of an Investigation AFB: Acid-fast bacilli AFB culture: Acid-fast bacilli culture.
The  inoculation  of  a  clinical  specimen  into  culture  media  such  as  Becton  Dickinson
Mycobacteria  Growth  Indicator  Tube  (BD  MGIT  broth)  or  onto  Middlebrook  7H11  or
Lowenstein-Jensen (LJ) media slant with incubation at 36±1°C for up to six (6) to eight
(8) weeks and detection or observation of growth or no growth during this incubation
period. AFB smear: Acid-fast bacilli smear. The microscopic examination of a Kinyoun,
Ziehl-Neelsen,  or  fluorochrome  stain  of  a  clinical  specimen.  BacTec  MGIT™:
Mycobacteria  Growth  Indicator  Tube,  Becton  Dickinson  and  Co.  A  commercial,
nonradiometric,  broth-based  mycobacterial  culture  system.  BSC:  Biological  safety
cabinet  CAP:  College  of  American  Pathologists  Contamination:  Inadvertent  addition  of
target  analytes  to  samples  during  sample  collection,  transportation,  and  analysis
process Cross-contamination: Act of spreading foreign or undesired material from one
surface to another. Epidemiologic links: Term used to identify whether individuals have
a  known  connection  through  case  interviews  or  contact  investigations.  False-Positive:
Error  in  which  a  test  result  improperly  indicates  presence  of  a  condition,  such  as  a
disease.  Genotype:  Genetic  constitution  of  an  individual  organism  used  to  distinguish
different  strains  of  bacteria.  Isolate:  Culture  growth  of  microorganisms  isolated  for
testing.  LIMS:  Laboratory  Information  Management  System  MTBC:  Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
 complex
 Nonconforming
 event
 (NCE):
 an
 unapproved
 departure
(nonconformance)  from  a  documented  requirement  or  procedure  (e.g.,  regulation,
statute, policy, procedure, customer requirement) NTM: Nontuberculous mycobacteria
PHL: Public health laboratory PPE: Personal Protective Equipment. Equipment worn to
minimize  exposure  to  hazards  that  cause  serious  workplace  injuries  and  illnesses.
Quality control (QC): Processes and products used to ensure that testing procedures are
performed accurately by achieving expected results. Specimen processing log: Log that
is used in the laboratory to record when and how a specimen was processed, tested,
and  resulted.  Sputum:  Mucous  secretion  from  the  lungs,  bronchi,  and  trachea  that  is
expectorated  through  the  mouth.  TAT:  Turnaround  time  TB:  Tuberculosis  The  Clinical
and  Laboratory  Standards  Institute  (CLSI)  Laboratory  Detection  and  Identification  of
Mycobacteria,  2nd  ed.  M48  Mycobacteriology  Laboratory  Guidance  (2018)  has  been
referenced throughout this toolkit1. Because of its broad use, this document should be
consulted  when  further  guidance  is  warranted.  Additional  references  are  cited  as
applicable. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily represent the views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Special thanks to
U.S. state and local public health laboratories and TB Programs and the Association of
Public  Health  Laboratories  for  content  and  critical  review.  Tuberculosis  is  caused  by
bacteria called Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The bacteria usually attack the lungs but
can attack any part of the body. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/tb/php/false-positive-investigation-toolkit/index.html
