Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.   Please  note  it  is  very  important  to  provide  NHSN  your
thoughts regarding the case you are requesting for review.  Please provide specifics as
to  the  criteria  you  have  considered  and  which  elements  of  the  criteria  you  have
determined  the  patient  does  or  does  not  meet.   If  you  are  unable  to  make  a
determination, please let us know specifically why you are unable to decide and clearly
outline your question(s). Our hope is that the case review process will be educational
for  you  for  making  future  determinations.    Please  provide  the  following  information
when sending NHSN a question for SSI case review:  NHSN does not mandate reporting.
 A  facility  selects  reporting  and  indicates  this  via  the  NHSN  Monthly  Reporting  Plan
(MRP). A facility is required to report data (procedure and SSI event) that represents the
selections  on  the  MRP.   Selections  for  reporting  included  in  the  MRP  may  depend  on
their own internal facility risk assessment, any state required reporting, and/or any CMS
required reporting. Appendix B in the SSI protocol [PDF – 586 KB] provides clarity and
support  for  Denominator  Reporting  Instruction  #6  (which  addresses  the  same  NHSN
operative  procedure  category  performed  via  separate  incisions).  Appendix  B  provides
guidance  on  correct  procedure  reporting  when  multiple  procedures  of  the  same
category  are  performed  per  patient  per  calendar  day  via  separate  incisions  (with  an
explanation  for  each  of  the  12  procedure  categories  found  within  this  instruction).
Denominator Reporting Instruction #6 is found on page 9-25 of the SSI protocol [PDF –
586  KB]  and  Appendix  B  begins  on  page  9-40  of  the  SSI  protocol  [PDF  –  586  KB].
‘Detected’ should be answered as “RF”. Per the Instructions for Completion of Surgical
Site Infection (SSI) Form (CDC 57.120) definition for ‘Event Details: Detected’: Check RF
if SSI was identified due to patient readmission to the facility where the procedure was
originally performed. Check “RF” regardless of readmission to a prior facility. See the
SSI event Table of Instructions [PDF – 500 KB] ‘Event Details: Detected’ for complete
guidance.  The  ICD-10-PCS  or  CPT  operative  procedure  codes  are  required  to  identify
NHSN operative procedures. Only NHSN operative procedures begin an SSI surveillance
period and only NHSN operative procedures are eligible for SSI attribution.  Non-NHSN
operative  procedures  do  not  set  a  surveillance  period  nor  are  they  eligible  for  SSI
attribution.   Following  a  non-NHSN  operative  procedure,  site-specific  infection  criteria
(found in Chapter 17 [PDF – 621 KB] – CDC/NHSN Surveillance Definitions for Specific
Types  of  Infections)  may  be  reviewed  to  determine  if  HAI  criteria  can  be  applied.   A
return trip to the OR via the same surgical site ends the surveillance period for the prior
NHSN  operative  procedure  and  begins  a  new  SSI  surveillance  period  if  an  NHSN
operative  procedure  is  performed.  The  surveillance  period  for  an  NHSN  operative
procedure  is  not  determined  by  the  presence  or  absence  of  an  implant.   The  SSI
surveillance period is determined by the NHSN operative procedure category.  Table 2
found on page 9-16 within the SSI protocol [PDF – 586 KB] provides guidance related to
surveillance periods for SSI for each of the NHSN operative procedure categories. No.
The  only  organisms  excluded  from  SSI  event  reporting  are  found  in  the  SSI  protocol
[PDF – 1 MB] on page 9-18 (SSI Event Reporting Instruction #1 Excluded Organisms).
The Infection Window Period (IWP), Present on Admission (POA), Healthcare-associated
Infection  (HAI),  and  Repeat  Infection  Timeframe  (RIT)  definitions  do  not  apply  to  SSI
surveillance.  SSI surveillance is based on a 30- or 90-day SSI surveillance period, which
is  determined  by  the  NHSN  operative  procedure  category  and  the  tissue  level  of  SSI
event.  SSI guidelines do not offer a strict timeframe for elements of criteria to occur
but in NHSN’s experience, all elements required to meet an SSI criterion usually occur
within a 7-10 day timeframe with typically no more than 2-3 days between elements. To
ensure that all elements associate to the SSI, the elements must occur in a relatively
tight  timeframe.  For  example,  an  element  that  occurs  on  day  2  of  the  surveillance
period with another element that occurs three weeks later should not be used to cite an
SSI. Each case differs based on the individual elements occurring and the type of SSI
but the DOE for an SSI must occur within the appropriate 30- or 90-day SSI surveillance
period. There is no standard, clinically agreed upon definition for purulence.  For NHSN
surveillance  purposes,  the  descriptors  “pus”  or  “purulence”  are  sufficient  gross
anatomic evidence of infection.  When the terms ‘pus’ or ‘purulence’ are not written in
the  medical  record,  NHSN  has  allowed  determinations  for  purulence  based  off
descriptors.  Documentation  that  uses  a  color  descriptor  and  a  consistency  descriptor
(from the list below) in combination is acceptable to indicate ‘purulence’.  For example,
fluid only described as yellow, or only described as thick, is not sufficient. However, if
the  terms  are  combined,  then  they  may  be  more  representative  of  purulence  (for
example:  fluid  described  as  thick  and  yellow).  Color  Green  Yellow  Consistency  Milky
Thick  Creamy  Opaque  Viscous    NOTE:  The  following  descriptors  cannot  be  used  to
define  purulence/infection:  ‘Cloudy’,  ‘turbid’,  ‘murky’  or  the  odor  of  a  wound.  Gram
stain results such as WBCs or PMNs cannot be used to define purulence within the SSI
protocol  [PDF  –  1  MB].  Yes.   Patient-reported  signs  and  symptoms  are  an  important
aspect  of  SSI  surveillance  and  are  useable  within  the  SSI  definitions  if  documented
within  the  patient  medical  record.   Patient  reported  purulence  documented  in  the
medical  record  by  a  healthcare  professional  is  acceptable  for  use  with  SSI  criterion
(even if the provider doesn’t document purulence).  A specific date/timeframe must be
documented in the patient medical record to indicate the purulence occurred within the
SSI  surveillance  period.  Contamination  does  not  exclude  a  procedure  from  being
reported in your denominator if the procedure is one selected for surveillance in your
MRP nor would it exclude an SSI event from being reported if SSI criteria are met within
the  surveillance  period  following  the  procedure.  PATOS  is  determined  by  evidence  of
infection documented in the narrative portion of the operative note or report of surgery
(the  surgeon’s  description  of  what  is  seen/done  during  the  procedure).   Traditionally,
NHSN  uses  the  part  of  the  operative  note  labeled  ‘description  of  procedure’  or
‘procedure  details’  as  the  surgical  narrative.  The  language/verbiage  in  the  surgical
narrative  must  clearly  reflect  infection  is  ‘seen’  during  the  operative  procedure  and
should  additionally  include  reference  to  the  tissue  level  where  the  infection  is  seen.  
There is not a ‘standard’ format used with operative notes so within SSI Event Reporting
Instruction  #3  NHSN  provides  examples  of  headings  not  considered  eligible  as  the
surgical narrative for use with PATOS: procedure title, indication for surgery, and/or a
pre/post op diagnosis. A ‘Findings’ section within the operative report, if a reflection of
what the surgeon ‘sees’ present at time of surgery, can be used as a surgical narrative
with  a  PATOS  determination.   SSI  Event  Reporting  Instruction  #3  addresses  PATOS.  
See SSI Protocol [PDF – 1 MB] for complete details. Additionally, a Quick Learn “Surgical
Site Infection (SSI) Event PATOS – Infection Present at Time of Surgery” can be found
here: PATOS – Quick Learn [Video – 6 min]. Yes. PATOS SSI events and the procedures
to which they are linked are reported to NHSN. SSI events that are PATOS = YES are not
excluded from SSI event reporting and must be entered into NHSN if you are following
the procedure category in your monthly reporting plan. NOTE: An SSI event must first
be identified within the surveillance period following an NHSN operative procedure to
answer the PATOS question that is found on the SSI event form. NHSN does not make
recommendations  about  wound  class.  The  wound  class  is  assigned  by  someone
participating in the surgical case. The IP should not modify the wound class based on
their interpretation of the operative note. If it is determined that an error was made in
wound class assignment, the IP should work with the OR to validate this error with the
OR  making  any  such  change  in  the  medical  record.  The  application  does  not  offer
Wound  Class  Clean  (C)  a  choice  for  the  following  procedure  categories:  APPY,  BILI,
CHOL,  COLO,  REC,  SB  and  VHYS.  Procedures  in  these  categories  that  are  assigned  a
Clean (C) wound class do not meet the definition of an NHSN operative procedure and
should not be included in denominator reporting for NHSN SSI surveillance. Excluding
a  procedure  from  the  denominator  for  procedure  data  should  be  made  on  a
case-by-case basis with knowledge of the procedure and after review of the operative
report. We recommend that you document the rationale for excluding a procedure in
your facility’s surveillance records in the event an explanation is needed in the future.
Gross anatomic evidence of infection is evidence of infection elicited or visualized on
physical examination or observed during an invasive procedure.  This includes findings
elicited  on  physical  examination  of  a  patient  during  admission  or  subsequent
assessments of the patient and may include findings noted during a medical/invasive
procedure, dependent upon the location of the infection as well as the NHSN infection
criterion.  Examples:  NOTE:  Imaging  test  evidence  of  infection  cannot  be  applied  to
meet gross anatomic evidence of infection.  Imaging test evidence has distinct findings
in the NHSN definitions (for example, IAB ‘3b’). No. The presence of stool/feces and/or
blood  in  the  intraabdominal  space  without  purulence  or  abscess  is  considered
contamination but not infection, therefore cannot be used as gross anatomic evidence
of  infection.  NHSN  defines  aseptically  obtained  as  “obtained  in  a  manner  to  prevent
introduction  of  organisms  from  the  surrounding  tissues  into  the  specimen  being
collected”.  Swabs collected at the bedside or in the OR can be aseptically obtained. 
There is a misconception by some that only cultures obtained in the OR are aseptic. 
While  there  are  general  guidelines  for  the  collection  of  optimum  wound  specimens,
specific  procedures  for  specimen  collection  and  transport  is  institution  dependent.  
Infection prevention professionals should review these practices with their clinical staff
and  laboratory  colleagues  to  ensure  that  aseptic  technique  is  being  used  to  obtain
wound specimens. For purposes of NHSN surveillance, it is the expectation that proper
technique  for  specimen  collection  is  being  performed.   If  a  wound  specimen  was
collected and sent to the lab for culture, the findings are eligible for use in SSI criteria
(no exclusions).  Culture results such as “Mixed flora” or “Mixed cutaneous flora” alone
cannot  be  reported  to  NHSN  as  there  is  no  such  pathogen  option  in  this  list  of
pathogens.   Wound  culture  results  with  this  finding  may  require  review  for  proper
technique based on the facility/lab protocol for proper wound specimen collection. Yes. 
An SSI can only be a primary infection and must be reported if criteria are met.  There
may  be  additional  primary  infections  present  which  may  also  be  reportable.  This  will
depend  on  the  individual  details  of  the  case.  SSI  Event  Reporting  Instruction  #10
identifies three bullet points that must be met in entirety before the exclusion can be
considered.   Note  that  tissue  levels  that  are  not  entered  are  still  eligible  for  SSI.  For
example, if within an SSI surveillance period a superficial debridement of the surgical
site is performed, and the deep incisional level and organ/space level are not entered, a
subsequent  deep  incisional  or  organ/space  SSI  following  the  superficial  debridement
may  be  an  SSI  attributable  to  the  index  COLO  procedure.   First,  confirm  that  all
available data sources have been reviewed, including the surgical records, to locate a
height  and  weight.   Within  the  application,  the  height  and  weight  field  must  have  a
value > 0. If a height and/or weight is not available, NHSN recommends a height of 1ft,
0  in  and  weight  of  1  lb.  This  will  signal  to  NHSN  that  these  data  are  outliers  due  to
unavailable data and will not be used in risk adjustment. It is very important to have a
system or process in place for collecting this information, so that the data used in risk
adjustment  and  factored  into  the  SIR  analysis  is  accurate.  For  information  on  how  to
report  height  and  weight  in  NHSN,  including  its  uses  in  SSI  analysis,  please  see:
Reporting  Height  and  Weight  for  Procedures  in  NHSN  [PDF  –  500  KB]  No.   Post-op
occurrences  and  complications  are  not  an  exclusion  for  monitoring  for  an  SSI  and
reporting an SSI if SSI criteria are met.  If SSI criteria are met within the appropriate SSI
surveillance  period,  an  SSI  is  reported.  This  is  addressed  on  page  9-22  of  the  SSI
protocol  [PDF  –  1  MB]  under  SSI  Event  Reporting  Instruction  #11.    Yes.   Trauma  is
defined  in  NHSN  as  “blunt  or  penetrating  traumatic  injury.”  Therefore,  if  the  surgery
was performed because of a recent fall, for example, a hip prosthesis (HPRO) following
a fall, then indicate Trauma = Yes on the SSI event form. No.  The trauma field is to be
used to document trauma that occurred before the surgery and resulted in the need for
the surgery.  For example, inadvertent organ injuries (such as an organ nick) that occur
during  a  procedure  are  not  considered  a  trauma  case.  Clinical  correlation  refers  to
physician documentation of antimicrobial treatment for site-specific infection related to
equivocal  (not  clearly  identified  )  findings  of  infection  on  imaging  test.  For  example,
when applying intraabdominal infection (IAB) criterion 3b, the finding of ‘fluid collection
seen in the lower abdominal cavity’ on an imaging test may or may not represent an
infection.  This finding is not clearly identified as an infection and should be confirmed
with clinical evidence that an infection is present.  In the case of IAB criterion 3b, the
clinical  evidence  required  is  physician  documentation  of  antimicrobial  therapy  for
treating  the  intraabdominal  infection.  “With  no  other  recognized  cause”  means  the
sign/symptom  is  eligible  for  use  in  meeting  the  SSI  criteria  unless  there  is  physician
documentation  within  the  medical  record  that  specifically  states  the  sign/symptom  is
due to a condition other than an SSI. The determination to exclude a sign/symptom with
no  other  recognized  cause  must  be  made  by  the  local  facility  based  on  the
documentation available in the medical record. Clinical judgment determination needs
to be defended and backed up by physician documentation and there should be clear
rationale  in  the  event  the  case  is  validated.  When  monitoring  an  NHSN  operative
procedure  category  in  your  MRP,  the  entire  SSI  protocol  [PDF  –  586  KB]  must  be
followed  and  you  must  report  all  SSIs  for  that  procedure  category.  This  includes
superficial  incisional,  deep  incisional  and  organ/space  SSI  events.  If  a  superficial
incisional  SSI  progresses  to  meet  SSI  criteria  at  a  deeper  tissue  level  within  the
designated surveillance period following an NHSN operative procedure, the event type
and date of event must be edited to reflect the deepest tissue level where SSI criteria
are met during the surveillance period.  See SSI Event Reporting Instruction #4 on page
9-20 in the SSI protocol [PDF – 586 KB] for full details.    NOTE:  If a patient meets both
organ/space BONE and MED criteria report the SSI event as organ/space MED. No. An
‘antimicrobial indication’ is not the same as a diagnosis and cannot be used to meet
Superficial  Incisional  SSI  criterion  ‘d’  (diagnosis  of  a  superficial  incisional  SSI  by  a
physician* or physician designee).      
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-ssi.html
