Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.   We  know  this  can  be  an  area  of  confusion.  We  need  to
consider events occurring in patients on mechanical ventilation and events occurring in
patients NOT on mechanical ventilation, and we have to consider events that occur in
adults and events that occur in neonates and in children. Let’s review what is available
for  in-plan  or  off-plan  surveillance  of  lower  respiratory  tract  events  in  NHSN.  Keep  in
mind  that  “in-plan”  surveillance  means  that  you/your  facility  have  committed  to
following the NHSN surveillance protocol for that particular event in your NHSN monthly
reporting  plan.  “Off-plan”  surveillance  is  surveillance  that  is  done  because  you/your
facility have decided to track a particular event for internal use. Data that are entered
into NHSN “off-plan” are not used or reported in NSHN annual reports or other NHSN
publications.  A  facility  makes  no  commitment  to  follow  the  protocol  for  “off-plan”
events. What lower respiratory tract event surveillance can be done “in-plan”?     NOTE:
When  conducting  CLABSI  surveillance,  the  PNEU  definition  is  available  for  use  as  a
site-specific infection to which a bloodstream infection can be attributed as a secondary
BSI  for  all  patients,  all  locations,  regardless  of  use  of  mechanical  ventilation.  This
includes  ventilated  or  non-ventilated  adults,  children,  or  neonates  in  any  patient
location.   What lower respiratory tract event surveillance can be done “off-plan”?   Yes.
VAE  and  PNEU/VAP  are  two  separate  protocols  and  detect  different  types  of  events
within NHSN. An adult location can conduct simultaneous in-plan VAE surveillance and
off-plan  PNEU/VAP  surveillance,  and  a  patient  can  meet  one  and  not  the  other,  meet
both, or meet neither. In other words, detection of one type of event (such as a VAE) in
a particular patient would have no bearing on the conduct of surveillance for the other
event type (PNEU/VAP) in the same patient. Patients who meet a VAE definition and a
PNEU/VAP  definition  would  have  two  events  identified  in  units  where  surveillance  for
multiple respiratory events is occurring. No. Tracking of daily minimum PEEP and FiO2
should be done for all patients who are eligible for VAE surveillance in units in which
in-plan  VAE  surveillance  is  being  conducted,  regardless  of  the  reason  for  which  the
patient was admitted or the reason for initiation of mechanical ventilation. Additionally,
VAE and PNEU detect two separate events. If a patient meets a PNEU definition, while
this establishes a 14-day RIT for subsequent PNEU events, the PNEU RIT does not apply
to or account for the identification of VAEs. In some cases, patients may be on HFV or
ECLS or paracorporeal membrane oxygenation for a portion of a calendar day, but not
for  the  entire  calendar  day,  for  example  when  the  support  is  first  initiated  or  when
discontinued. In these instances, the patient is eligible for inclusion in VAE surveillance
during  the  portion  of  the  calendar  day  when  the  patient  was  being  mechanically
ventilated using a conventional mode of mechanical ventilation (not on HFV or ECLS or
paracorporeal  membrane  oxygenation).  You  should  review  the  FiO2  and  PEEP  data
recorded for the portion of the calendar day when the patient was NOT on HFV or ECLS
or paracorporeal membrane oxygenation to select the daily minimum FiO2 and PEEP.
Once  the  patient  has  been  switched  to  HFV  or  ECLS  or  paracorporeal  membrane
oxygenation they are no longer included in VAE surveillance. On calendar days when
the patient was on HFV or ECLS or paracorporeal membrane oxygenation for the entire
day (specifically, midnight to 11:59 pm), you will not record a daily minimum FiO2 or
PEEP  –  you  will  enter  “Not  applicable”  or  “Not  eligible  for  surveillance”  in  your
worksheet column and you will not enter values in the VAE calculator for daily minimum
FiO2 and PEEP for that particular day. Once the patient has been switched back to a
conventional  mode  of  mechanical  ventilation,  VAE  surveillance  may  resume.  If  the
patient has been on HFV or ECLS or paracorporeal membrane oxygenation for one or
more calendar days (such that there is a gap in recording of the daily minimum FiO2
and PEEP), then upon return to a conventional mode of mechanical ventilation you will
essentially need to start over with VAE surveillance. The patient would need to have at
least 2 days of stability or improvement and at least 2 days of worsening oxygenation
on the ventilator identified before you can detect a VAE. For example, if the patient was
on conventional mechanical ventilation on January 10 until 10:00 am, switched to HFV
at 10:00 am, remained on HFV until 1:00 pm on January 11 and was then placed back
on a conventional mode of mechanical ventilation, you would be able to evaluate the
FiO2 and PEEP values recorded for the patient from midnight to 10:00 am on January 10
(period  on  conventional  mechanical  ventilation)  and  from  1:00  pm  to  11:59  pm  on
January  11  (period  on  conventional  mechanical  ventilation)  when  looking  for  VAEs.  In
contrast, if a patient was on HFV for the entire calendar day on January 10 and January
11, then you would exclude them from VAE surveillance during this period. Once the
patient  returns  to  conventional  mechanical  ventilation  for  some  portion  of  each
calendar  day  you  could  again  include in  VAE  surveillance and  once again  begin  daily
assessment for the daily minimum FiO2 and PEEP values obtained while the patient was
on the conventional mode of ventilation. Yes. As long as the patient is receiving support
from  a  mechanical  ventilator  and  is  eligible  for  VAE  surveillance,  then  you  should
review all FiO2 and PEEP data that are recorded each day to identify the daily minimum
FiO2 and PEEP values – including FiO2 and PEEP values that are recorded during periods
of  time  when  the  patient  is  undergoing  spontaneous  awakening  or  spontaneous
breathing  trials  (or  other  forms  of  weaning  from  mechanical  ventilation).  The  only
periods  of  time  that  are  not  taken  into  consideration  when  identifying  the  daily
minimum  FiO2  and  PEEP  values  are  times  when  the  patient  is  on  HFV,  ECLS,  or
paracorporeal  membrane  oxygenation,  or  times  when  the  patient  is  not  receiving
mechanical ventilation support (for example, a T-piece trial or a trach collar trial where
the  patient  continues  to  receive  supplemental  oxygen  but  is  receiving  no  additional
support from the mechanical ventilator). Keep in mind, too, that during periods of time
when the patient is being mechanically ventilated using APRV or a related strategy (see
the APRV FAQ), you will only review FiO2 data (not PEEP). Definitions of “daily minimum
PEEP” and “daily minimum FiO2” can be found in the VAE protocol. Please refer to the
VAE  protocol  for  details.  There  will  be  multiple  PEEP  and  FiO2  settings  documented
each calendar day on mechanically ventilated patients. These PEEP and FiO2 values are
typically  recorded  in  the  paper  or  electronic  medical  record,  on  respiratory  therapy
and/or nursing flow sheets, in the section of the flow sheet that pertains to respiratory
status/mechanical ventilation. You will make daily minimum value determinations using
documented  settings  specific  to  the  calendar  day  and  independently  of  the  settings
recorded on the previous calendar day or the next calendar day. Please note that the
VAE  surveillance  protocol  specifies  to  use  the  daily  minimum  PEEP  and  FiO2  values
when  assessing  for  both  the  period  of  stability  or  improvement  and  the  period  that
indicates worsening oxygenation. From the multiple PEEP and FiO2 settings that will be
documented each calendar day, you will identify the minimum (lowest) value for that
calendar day that is maintained for > 1 hour. You are not comparing values that occur
within a calendar day to determine stability, improvement, or worsening. Operationally
you will always be collecting/recording/evaluating those values, at the earliest, one day
in arrears so that you can allow for the values obtained for the full 24-hour calendar day
to be assessed. You will compare the daily minimum value from day to day within the
individual  parameters  (PEEP  and  FiO2),  looking  for  a  period  of  stabilization  or
improvement  in  PEEP  followed  by  a  period  of  worsening  oxygenation  in  PEEP,  or  a
period  of  stabilization  or  improvement  in  FiO2  followed  by  a  period  of  worsening
oxygenation  in  FiO2.    Consider  the  following  examples:  Example  #  1  (Mechanical
ventilator data from a single day, May 10):  In this example, the daily minimum FiO2 for
May  10  would  be  recorded  as  0.70  (70%),  and  the  daily  minimum  PEEP  would  be
recorded as 5 cmH2O. Note that the daily minimum FiO2 may have been documented
at a different time than the daily minimum PEEP (as in the example above). Example #
2  (Mechanical  ventilator  data  from  a  single  day,  May  11):   n  this  example,  the  daily
minimum  FiO2  for  May  11  would  be  recorded  as  0.70  (70%),  and  the  daily  minimum
PEEP would be recorded as 5 cmH2O. Note that even though the lowest recorded FiO2
value for the day was 0.60 (60%), it was only recorded at a single time point with an
interval  indicating  that  it  was  not  maintained  for  >  1  hour.  For  the  purposes  of  VAE
surveillance, PEEP values between 0 cmH2O and 5 cmH2O are considered equivalent.
This means that patients with a daily minimum PEEP in the range of 0-5 cmH2O must
have an increase in the daily minimum PEEP to at least 8 cmH2O, sustained at or above
8  cmH2O  for  at  least  2  calendar  days,  in  order  for  the  VAC  definition  to  be  met.  In
essence, think of values between 0-5 as all being equal to 5, and therefore an increase
to 8 cmH2O is necessary to satisfy the required increase in daily minimum PEEP ≥ 3
cmH2O over the daily minimum PEEP in the baseline period.
NOTE: The VAE calculator will automatically make this correction. PEEP values entered
into  the  VAE  calculator  that  are  between  0-5  cmH2O  will  be  interpreted  by  the
calculator as equal to 5. You would only disregard PEEP values on calendar days when
the  patient  was  mechanically  ventilated  using  APRV  or  a  related  type  of  mechanical
ventilation for the entire calendar day (specifically, from midnight through 11:59 pm).
On calendar days when the patient was on APRV for the entire day, you will not record a
daily  minimum  PEEP  –  you  will  enter  “Not  applicable”  in  your  worksheet  column  for
daily  minimum  PEEP  for  that  particular  day.  Likewise,  when  using  the  online  VAE
Calculator, do not enter a daily minimum PEEP value on days when the patient was on
APRV  for  the  entire  calendar  day.  Leave  the  PEEP  field  in  the  VAE  Calculator
empty/blank  for  these  days  (DO  NOT  ENTER  ZERO).  Note  that  while  patients  are
mechanically  ventilated  using  APRV  or  a  related  strategy  (including  modes  such  as
BiLevel,  Bi  Vent,  BiPhasic,  PCV+,  and  DuoPAP),  they  are  not  excluded  from  VAE
surveillance – but when assessing these patients for VAE, you will use only FiO2 data to
identify periods of stabilization or improvement and worsening. In some cases, patients
may  be  mechanically  ventilated  using  APRV  or  a  related  strategy  for  a  portion  of  a
calendar day, but not for the entire calendar day. In these instances, you should look at
all FiO2 data recorded for the entire calendar day when selecting the daily minimum
FiO2, and you should look at the portion of the calendar day when the patient was NOT
on APRV or a related mechanical ventilation strategy to select the daily minimum PEEP.
In other words, when recording the daily minimum PEEP for a patient who spent part of
the day on APRV and part of the day on a conventional mode of mechanical ventilation
(for example, Assist Control Ventilation, Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation, etc.), you
will  review  PEEP  values  just  from  the  portion  of  the  day  when  the  patient  was  on  a
conventional  mode  of  mechanical  ventilation.  For  example,  on  January  1  a  patient  is
switched  from  conventional  mechanical  ventilation  at  11:00  am  to  APRV.  The  patient
stays  on  APRV  until  January  2  at  11:00  pm,  when  the  patient  is  switched  back  to
conventional mechanical ventilation. You will review the FiO2 data from the entire day
on January 1 and January 2, and the PEEP data that were recorded for the period from
midnight to 10:59 am on January 1 (since the patient was on conventional mechanical
ventilation during this time) and from 11:00 pm to 11:59 pm on January 2 (since the
patient was back on conventional mechanical ventilation at this time). You will be able
to  assign  a  daily  minimum  PEEP  for  each  of  these  days  based  on  the  time  spent  on
conventional mechanical ventilation, and a daily minimum FiO2 based on each entire
calendar day, and review both PEEP and FiO2 data to determine whether there is a VAE.
Here  is  another  example:  On  January  1  a  patient  is  switched  from  conventional
mechanical  ventilation  at  11:00  am  to  APRV.  The  patient  stays  on  APRV  all  day  on
January  2,  and  on  January  3  until  11:00  pm,  when  the  patient  is  switched  back  to
conventional  mechanical  ventilation.  In  this  example,  you  will  (as  above)  have  PEEP
data to review for January 1 and for January 3, based on the amount of time the patient
was on conventional mechanical ventilation. But because the patient was on APRV all
day on January 2, you will need to rely on the FiO2 to determine whether there is a VAE
during  that  period  of  days  (because  there  is  a  gap  in  PEEP  data,  you’d  have  to  start
over  looking  for  a  baseline  period  in  PEEP  on  January  3).  Yes.  As  long  as  there  is  an
abnormal  temperature  (>  38°C  or  <  36°C)  or  abnormal  white  blood  cell  count  (≥
12,000 cells/mm3 or ≤ 4,000 cells/mm3) documented during the VAE Window Period, it
should  be  used  in  determining  whether  the  patient  meets  the  IVAC  definition  or  not,
regardless of whether an abnormal temperature or abnormal white blood cell count was
also present on admission or outside the VAE window period. The antimicrobial criterion
is one of the required criteria in the Infection-related Ventilator-Associated Complication
(IVAC) definition. The IVAC definition was not originally developed to identify respiratory
infections alone; therefore, the list of antimicrobial agents eligible for meeting the IVAC
antimicrobial  criterion  was  broad  and  included  drugs  that  are  not  used  to  treat
respiratory  infections.  This  caused  concern  and  confusion  among  some  users  –
particularly in situations where the “new” antimicrobial agent that resulted in an IVAC
determination and then subsequently a PVAP determination was not an agent used to
treat a respiratory infection. To avoid increasing the complexity of this already complex
criterion,  the  list  was  refined  and  selected  antimicrobial  agents  were  removed:  oral
cephalosporins
 and
 penicillins,
 erythromycin
 and
 erythromycin/sulfisoxazole,
amantadine,  rimantadine,  chloramphenicol,  tinidazole,  fidaxomicin,  nitrofurantoin,
enteral  vancomycin,  and  daptomycin.  These  are  agents  that  would  not  be  used,  or
would be unlikely to be used, in treating a lower respiratory infection in a critically ill
patient. No. With the IVAC definition, the intent is not to specifically identify infectious
events  arising  from  the  respiratory  tract  –  it  is  to  identify  an  event  that  may  be
infectious  in  nature  (whether  arising  from  the  lungs  or  elsewhere)  that  is  associated
with a period of respiratory deterioration. Any antimicrobial agent that is found in the
antimicrobial agent appendix and is administered within the correct timeframe and for
the  required  period  of  time  stated  in  the  protocol  will  be  used  to  satisfy  the
antimicrobial  criteria  for  IVAC.  Therefore,  when  determining  if  a  patient  satisfies  the
IVAC  definition,  there  is  no  need  to  discern  the  reason  for  the  administration  of  the
antimicrobial. In a patient who has met the VAC definition and has additionally met the
temperature  and/or  WBC  requirement  for  IVAC  but  dies  prior  to  meeting  the
requirement for ≥ 4 Qualifying Antimicrobial Days, the IVAC criteria are not fulfilled. In
this instance a VAC (not an IVAC) would be reported to NHSN. For purposes of the VAE
surveillance protocol, qualitative refers to identification of an organism or cells without
a  quantity  descriptor:  for  example,  “Staphylococcus  aureus  present”  or  “white  blood
cells seen.” Semi-quantitative refers to a text description of the amount or quantity of
organism or cells present, without a specific numeric value: for example, “occasional,”
“few,”  “moderate,”  “many,”  “heavy”  or  1+,  2+,  3+,  4+.  An  example  of
semi-quantitative  reporting  would  be  a  result  indicating  “many  Pseudomonas
aeruginosa”  or  “1+  epithelial  cells.”  Quantitative  refers  to  a  specific  numeric
description  of  the  amount  of  organism  or  cells  present:  for  example,  105  CFU/ml
Klebsiella  pneumoniae.  Yes,  it  does  not  matter  if  the  patient  had  previous  positive
cultures  for  certain  organisms  –  if  an  eligible  pathogen  is  recovered  from  an  eligible
specimen  with  a  collection  date  during  the  VAE  window  period,  it  should  be  used  in
determining  if  PVAP  is  met.  This  means  the  following  are  excluded:   Yes.  For  the
purposes  of  VAE  surveillance,  a  “bronchial  wash”  is  considered  the  same  type  of
specimen as a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Specimens may frequently be labeled as
“sputum”  when  they  are  really  “endotracheal  aspirates.”  Making  the  automatic
substitution is not advised. If, however, you can verify with the patient’s caregiver that
the  specimen  was  indeed  an  endotracheal  aspirate,  and  also  confirm  that  your
microbiology  laboratory  does  not  process  specimens  labeled  as  “sputum”  differently
than those labeled as “endotracheal aspirate,” the culture result can be used to meet
the requirements for the PVAP definition. Additionally, take the opportunity to address
improving specimen labeling. Yes, lower respiratory tract specimen cytology findings in
support  of  identification  of  infection  can  be  used  to  satisfy  PVAP  Criterion  3.  For
purposes of NHSN, for a bloodstream infection to be determined to be secondary to a
site-specific  infection  (specifically,  related  to  an  infection  at  another  site,  such  that
primary  site  of  infection  may  have  seeded  the  bloodstream  secondarily),  the  patient
must  first  meet  one  of  the  NHSN  site-specific  definitions.  For  example,  for  a
bloodstream infection to be deemed secondary to PNEU, the PNU2 or PNU3 definition
must  be  met  first.  You  cannot  attribute  a  bloodstream  infection  secondary  to  PNEU
based on a clinical diagnosis of pneumonia or solely based on recovery of a matching
pathogen from a lower respiratory tract specimen and blood specimen. To determine if
a positive blood culture can be attributed as a secondary bloodstream infection (BSI)
related to a lower respiratory tract event, consider the following steps:
1) Does the patient meet any of the VAE definitions?
a. If only the VAC or IVAC definition is met, then the positive blood culture CANNOT be
secondary  to  the  VAE  (as  per  the  VAE  surveillance  protocol,  BSIs  cannot  be  deemed
secondary  to  VAC  or  to  IVAC).  b.  If  the  PVAP  definition  is  met,  then  the  bloodstream
infection may be attributed to the VAE (as a secondary BSI) IF the blood culture meets
the VAE secondary BSI requirements as outlined in the VAE surveillance protocol: the
organism  isolated  from  blood  must  match  an  organism  isolated  from  the  respiratory
tract  culture  used  in  meeting  the  PVAP  definition  AND  the  blood  culture  must  be
collected during the 14-day VAE event period.
2)  If the BSI cannot be attributed as a secondary BSI to VAE, then the positive blood
culture can be evaluated to see if it is secondary to any of the infection sites as defined
in Chapter 17 or PNEU, UTI, or SSI event protocols. If another specific site infection to
which the bloodstream infection can be attributed as a secondary BSI is not identified,
the  BSI  may  need  to  be  reported  as  a  primary  BSI/CLABSI.  When  a  bloodstream
infection is deemed secondary to a PVAP (specifically, BSI diagnosed by blood culture
collected during the 14-day VAE event period, with at least one organism from blood
matching  an  organism  isolated  from  an  eligible  respiratory  tract  specimen  obtained
during the VAE window period), organisms isolated from that same blood culture that
do not match an organism in the eligible respiratory tract specimen MAY be reported as
a PVAP pathogen—EXCEPT when they are one of the excluded organisms (specifically
Candida
 species
 or
 yeast
 NOS,
 Enterococcus
 species,
 coagulase-negative
Staphylococcus species). An exception to the excluded organism rule is made when the
eligible  respiratory  tract  specimen  is  pleural  fluid  or  lung  tissue.  Excluded  organisms
isolated  from  positive  blood  cultures  must  be  accounted  for  as  a  secondary
bloodstream infection to an infection present on admission, another hospital acquired
infection (HAI), or a primary bloodstream infection. Please see the examples 1-4 below.
NOTE: When multiple, separate blood cultures are positive during the 14-day VAE event
period, ONLY those blood cultures that are positive for at least one organism matching
an  organism  isolated  from  an  eligible  respiratory  tract  specimen  obtained  during  the
VAE window period may be considered secondary to the PVAP. Example 1
A PVAP was detected in a patient in the MICU, with an event date of August 1. The PVAP
determination was made on the basis of an endotracheal aspirate culture collected on
August  2  (within  the  VAE  window  period)  that  was  positive  for  many  Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (PA). On August 9, within the 14-day event period, the patient has a positive
blood  culture  for  PA  and  Escherichia  coli  (EC).  This  positive  blood  culture  should  be
reported as a secondary BSI for the PVAP event because it occurred within the 14-day
event period, and because at least one of the pathogens isolated from blood matches
an organism isolated from the respiratory tract specimen. Pathogens reported for this
PVAP  should  include  PA  and  EC.  Example  2  A  PVAP  was  detected  in  a  patient  in  the
MICU with an event date of August 1. The PVAP determination was made on the basis of
an endotracheal aspirate culture collected on August 2 (within the VAE window period)
that was positive for ≥ 105 CFU/ml Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) and Candida albicans
(CA).  On  August  9,  within  the  14-day  event  period,  the  patient  has  a  positive  blood
culture for PA and CA. This positive blood culture should be reported as a secondary BSI
for the PVAP event because it occurred within the 14-day event period, and because at
least one of the pathogens isolated from blood matches an organism isolated from the
respiratory tract specimen. Pathogens reported for this PVAP should be limited to PA.
Candida  albicans  CANNOT  be  reported  as  a  pathogen  for  PVAP  because  it  is  an
excluded  pathogen  when  isolated  from  endotracheal  aspirate.  CA  must  be  accounted
for  as  either  a  secondary  bloodstream  infection  to  another  primary  site-specific
infection or as a primary bloodstream infection. Example 3
A PVAP was detected in a patient in the MICU with an event date of August 1. The PVAP
determination was made on the basis of a lung biopsy obtained for culture on August 2
(within the VAE window period) that was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) and
Candida albicans (CA). On August 9, within the 14-day event period, the patient has a
positive blood culture for PA and CA. This positive blood culture should be reported as a
secondary BSI for the PVAP event because it occurred within the 14-day event period,
and because at least one of the pathogens isolated from blood matches an organism
isolated from the respiratory tract specimen. Pathogens reported for this PVAP should
include PA and CA. In this instance the Candida albicans CAN be reported as a pathogen
for this VAE because it is isolated from a culture of lung tissue. Example 4
A PVAP was detected in a patient in the MICU with an event date of August 1. The PVAP
determination was made on the basis of a lung biopsy obtained for culture on August 2
(within the VAE window period) that was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA). On
August 9, within the 14-day event period, the patient has a positive blood culture for PA
and  Candida  albicans  (CA).  This  positive  blood  culture  should  be  reported  as  a
secondary BSI for the PVAP event because it occurred within the 14-day event period,
and because at least one of the pathogens isolated from blood matches an organism
isolated from the respiratory tract specimen. Pathogens reported for this PVAP should
be  limited  to  PA.  Candida  albicans  CANNOT  be  reported  as  a  pathogen  for  this  VAE
because it is an excluded pathogen unless isolated from pleural fluid or lung tissue. The
lung tissue culture in this case did NOT grow CA. As an excluded organism isolated from
positive  blood  culture,  CA  must  be  accounted  for  as  either  a  secondary  bloodstream
infection  to  another  primary  site-specific  infection  or  as  a  primary  bloodstream
infection. Per the VAE surveillance protocol, only one VAE can be reported during each
14-day event period (where day 1 is the onset of worsening oxygenation). A previously
detected VAE cannot be “upgraded” using information obtained outside of the original
VAE window period. Once the VAC definition is met the other criteria needed to satisfy
the  IVAC  and  PVAP  definitions  must  all  be  present  within  the  VAE  window  period
timeframe,  according  to  the  protocol.  The  temperature,  white  blood  cell  count,  and
laboratory  test  collection  dates  must  occur  within  the  VAE  Window  Period,  and  the
antimicrobial agent(s) that help to satisfy the ≥ 4 qualifying antimicrobial days (QADs)
criterion  must  be  “new”  within  the  VAE  window  period.  Keep  in  mind  that  while  the
antimicrobial  agent  must  be  new  within  the  VAE  window  period,  QADs  that  count
toward  satisfying  the  IVAC  antimicrobial  criterion  may  occur  outside  the  VAE  Window
Period. Example: A VAC is detected in a medical ICU patient, with the day of onset of
worsening  oxygenation  occurring  on  mechanical  ventilation  (MV)  day  10.  The  VAE
window period is therefore determined to be from MV day 8 (2 days before the onset of
worsening  oxygenation)  through  MV  day  12  (2  days  after  the  onset  of  worsening
oxygenation). The patient has a temperature of 39°C on MV day 10 and is started on a
new antimicrobial agent on MV day 11 (with that new agent continued for 7 consecutive
days, from MV day 11 through MV days 17). The IVAC definition is therefore met. On MV
day 15, a BAL is performed and it grows 105 CFU/ml Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Because
the BAL specimen was collected OUTSIDE of the VAE window period (even though it was
collected during the 14-day event period), it cannot be used to upgrade the VAE from
an IVAC to a PVAP. Per the VAE surveillance protocol, the 14-day event period is to be
observed  even  if  a  new  episode  of  mechanical  ventilation  (MV)  is  established  during
that event period. The 14-day event period for VAE surveillance is governed by the date
of  event  (date  of  onset  of  worsening  oxygenation),  not  the  date  of  initiation  of
mechanical ventilation. So, if a patient is removed from mechanical ventilator for one
full calendar day or more and then is returned to the ventilator within the 14-day event
period,  a  new  VAE  cannot  be  detected  or  reported  until  the  14  days  have  elapsed.
When the patient is returned to the ventilator, a new episode of MV would begin, and
the  mechanical  ventilation  day  count  would  start  over  again.  The  earliest  a  new  VAE
could be identified would be day 3 of the new MV episode. In the example presented in
the table below, you will see that there is a VAC detected on hospital day 4 during the
first episode of mechanical ventilation. The patient is extubated on hospital day 6 and
remains off MV for one full calendar day (hospital day 7). On hospital day 8, the patient
is  re-intubated,  thereby  starting  a  second  episode  of  MV.  The  patient  is  observed  to
meet VAC criteria, with a baseline period of stability or improvement on hospitals days
8  and  9  and  a  period  of  worsening  on  hospitals  days  10  and  11  –  but  because  the
patient is still within the 14-day event period for the VAE detected on hospital day 4, a
new VAE is not reported.  See Scenarios A through E below. Scenario A:
Patient is intubated by the EMS in the field or is intubated in the ED. FiO2 and PEEP data
are  available  from  the  time  the  patient  spent  in  the  ED,  prior  to  the  patient  being
transferred to the ICU as an inpatient. Should I use the pre-hospital/ED ventilator data
when making VAE determinations for that patient? No. Ventilator data that is obtained
from  patients  in  the  Emergency  Department  or  other  pre-hospital/pre-inpatient
locations should not be included in VAE surveillance. Therefore, VAE surveillance begins
for  patients  who  are  intubated  in  the  pre-hospital  or  ED  setting  upon  transfer  to  an
inpatient  location.  Day  1  of  ventilator  data  consists  of  data  collected  during  the  first
calendar day of inpatient care. Scenario B:
Patient  is  intubated  and  mechanically  ventilated  in  an  inpatient  unit  where  VAE
surveillance is not occurring. The patient is transferred to another inpatient unit in the
same  hospital  where  VAE  surveillance  is  occurring.  Do  I  use  ventilator  data  from  the
transferring unit, even though VAE surveillance was not occurring in that unit? Yes – to
an extent. Since the transferring unit is in the same hospital, and since ventilator data
from that transferring  unit should  be readily  available, we advise that you  go  back 2
calendar days prior to transfer and utilize minimum daily PEEP and FiO2 data from the
transferring unit to determine whether a VAE has occurred during the first 2 days in the
receiving unit. If a VAE is detected with an onset date on calendar day 1 or 2 (day of or
day  after  transfer)  in  the  receiving  unit,  that  VAE  would  be  attributable  to  the
transferring unit and so would not be reported (since the transferring unit was not doing
VAE  surveillance).  Scenario  C:  Patient  is  intubated  and  mechanically  ventilated  in  an
inpatient unit where VAE surveillance is occurring. The patient is transferred to another
inpatient unit in the same hospital where VAE surveillance is also occurring. Do I use
ventilator  data  from  the  transferring  unit?  Yes.  When  transferring  a  patient  between
units that are both participating in VAE surveillance, surveillance should continue in a
continuous, ongoing fashion. For example, if the patient had a VAE in the transferring
unit  on  August  1,  and  was  transferred  to  the  receiving  unit  on  August  4,  a  new  VAE
could not be detected in the receiving unit until the 14-day event period for the August
1 VAE had elapsed (so, August 15 in this case). Scenario D: 
Patient  is  intubated  and  mechanically  ventilated  in  another  hospital  or  healthcare
facility  and  then  transferred  to  my  facility.  It  is  unknown  whether  the  transferring
facility was performing VAE surveillance or not. Should I use ventilator data from the
transferring facility (if available in my facility’s medical record) when making my VAE
determinations?  When  ventilator  data  are  available  from  a  transferring  facility  and
documented in your facility’s medical record, you may use the ventilator data from the
2 calendar days prior to transfer to determine whether a VAE has occurred early in the
course of the inpatient stay in your receiving facility. As in Scenario B, above, if a VAE is
detected with onset date on calendar day 1 or 2 (day of or day after transfer) in your
receiving  facility,  the  VAE  would  be  attributable  to  the  transferring  facility.  If  no
ventilator data are available from the transferring facility, VAE surveillance begins on
admission to your receiving facility/inpatient location where VAE surveillance is taking
place. Scenario E: 
Patient  is  intubated  and  mechanically  ventilated  in  another  hospital  or  healthcare
facility and then transferred to my facility. The transferring facility was performing VAE
surveillance,  and  I  have  been  informed  that  a  VAE  was  detected  in  the  transferring
facility five days prior to transfer. Upon arrival in my receiving facility, does the 14-day
event  period  apply,  or  do  I  need  to  “start  fresh”  with  ventilator  data  available  in  my
facility? You should “start fresh,” although as noted above in Scenario D, you can use
ventilator data from the 2 calendar days prior to transfer to determine whether there is
a  VAE  early  in  the  course  of  hospitalization  in  your  receiving  facility  that  would  be
attributed back to the transferring facility. The first step in determining whether such
patients should be included in VAE surveillance is to decide whether the patient is on
invasive  mechanical  ventilation,  as  defined  by  the  NHSN.  The  NHSN  definition  of  a
ventilator is, “Any device used to support, assist or control respiration (inclusive of the
weaning  period)  through  the  application  of  positive  pressure  to  the  airway  when
delivered  via  an  artificial  airway,  specifically  an  oral/nasal  endotracheal  or
tracheostomy tube.” Note: Ventilation and lung expansion devices that deliver positive
pressure  to  the  airway  (for  example,  CPAP,  BiPAP,  Bi-level,  IPPB,  and  PEEP)  via
non-invasive means (for example, nasal prongs, nasal mask, full face mask, total mask,
etc.) are not considered ventilators unless positive pressure is delivered via an artificial
airway  (oral/nasal  endotracheal  or  tracheostomy  tube).  Based  on  this  definition,
patients  on  home  mechanical  ventilators  or  patients  supported  by  devices  typically
considered non-invasive ventilator devices should be included in VAE surveillance if the
ventilator  support  is  administered  via  an  endotracheal  or  tracheostomy  tube,  even  if
the  support  is  administered  only  for  portions  of  each  day  (for  example,  overnight).
Patients  receiving  non-invasive  ventilation  (such  as  BiPAP  via  a  face  mask  or  nasal
mask)  should  not  be  included  in  VAE  surveillance.  The  second  step  in  determining
whether such patients can be included in VAE surveillance is to determine whether the
FiO2 or PEEP can be set at a specific level on the home mechanical ventilator or other
ventilator device. Our current understanding is that some brands of home mechanical
ventilators  and  devices  typically  used  for  non-invasive  ventilation  do  not  have  the
capability  of  setting  a  specific  FiO2  or  PEEP  level.  In  these  circumstances,  a  patient
could  not  be  included  in  VAE  surveillance  because  it  would  not  be  feasible  to  assess
changes in the set level of FiO2 or PEEP. If the FiO2 or PEEP can be set at a specific
value and monitored, then these patients should be included in VAE surveillance. If the
patient is switched from a home mechanical ventilator or other device to a critical care
unit mechanical ventilator, then they can be included in VAE surveillance at that time
(taking into account that a baseline period of stability or improvement will need to be
established  on  the  critical  care  mechanical  ventilator).  NOTE:  Patients  on  home
ventilators  in  locations  where  in-plan  VAE  surveillance  is  being  performed  will  be
included in the ventilator day denominator count regardless of their eligibility for VAE
surveillance. This field should reflect the location where the patient was intubated. For
example, if the patient was intubated by first responder personnel in the field prior to
arrival in the facility where mechanical ventilation was eventually initiated, the location
chosen  should  be  Mobile  Emergency  Services/EMS.  If  the  patient  was  intubated  at
another facility, the location chosen should be “Location outside facility.” You will want
to map these locations into your facility’s Locations list as appropriate. When a patient
is admitted to a facility on a mechanical ventilator the date of mechanical ventilation
initiation should reflect the actual date of mechanical ventilation initiation, not the date
of admission to the facility. If necessary, an estimate of the actual date of mechanical
ventilation  initiation  can  be  used.  In  the  situation  where  a  patient’s  mechanical
ventilation  initiation  is  begun  prior  to  admission  to  a  facility,  only  in  circumstances
where the actual date or an estimate of the actual date cannot be determined should
the  date  of  mechanical  ventilation  initiation  default  to  the  date  of  admission  to  the
facility. It is important to note that having an IVAC or PVAP is not necessarily “worse”
than having a VAC – the algorithm is progressive in terms of criteria to be met (from
VAC  to  IVAC  to  PVAP),  but  this  is  not  to  imply  that  each  subsequent  tier  is  more
clinically  significant  than  the  one  before.  The  fundamental  definition  within  the
algorithm  is  the  VAC  definition  (which  is  defined  on  the  basis  of  respiratory
deterioration) – so even in those circumstances where an IVAC or PVAP is detected, the
event still met the VAC definition. It’s just that there is some additional evidence that
the  event  may  be  infectious  in  nature  (IVAC)  as  opposed  to  non-infectious,  and  if
infectious in nature the infection may be related to the lower respiratory tract (PVAP).
The  rates  and  SIRs  that  are  potentially  appropriate  for  these  purposes  include  the
overall VAE rate or Total VAE (where the numerator includes all events meeting at least
the VAC definition – VAC + IVAC + PVAP). You may find rates and SIRs for “IVAC-plus”
(where the numerator includes all events meeting at least the IVAC definition – IVAC +
PVAP)  and  the  rates  of  the  individual  specific  event  types  (VAC  only,  IVAC  only,  and
PVAP  only)  useful  for  internal  quality  improvement  purposes.  More  information
regarding the SIR models and parameter estimates for Total VAE and IVAC-plus can be
found in The NHSN Guide to the SIR. [PDF – 50 Pages] 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-vae.html
