Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Catheter-Associated  Urinary  Tract  Infection  [CAUTI]  and
Non-Catheter-Associated  Urinary  Tract  Infection  [UTI]  and  Other  Urinary  System
Infection  [USI]   Surveillance  criteria  may  not  be  equally  sensitive  for  all  patient
populations.   Patient  populations  in  which  the  UTI  criteria  may  not  be  as  sensitive
include  spinal  cord  injury  patients,  those  with  brain  injuries,  and  heavily  sedated
patients.  NHSN  constructed  its  Surveillance  definitions  to  balance  sensitivity  and
specificity along with feasibility. A set of criteria that covered every subpopulation with
high specificity and sensitivity would be too complicated to employ consistently across
different  facilities.   Simply  follow  the  criteria  as  written  in  locations  in  which  you  are
performing  CAUTI  surveillance.  Mechanical  ventilation  or  sedation  does  not  always
mean that patients will not be able to verbalize pain.  Facilities should always perform
physical  examination  and  assess  patients  for  non-verbal  communication  of  pain  or
tenderness. My lab offers culture counts that are:  You must check with your laboratory
to determine if they can identify whether at least 100,000 CFU/ml are identified in the
urine culture, and if so to report it as ≥ 100,000 CFU/ml.  Some laboratories have been
able to clarify this. If the laboratory cannot clarify the culture count and cannot say for
certain  that  a  culture  has  at  least  100,000  CFU/ml  because  the  lab  reported  it  as
75,000-100,000  CFU/ml,  do  not  use  that  culture  for  NHSN  UTI  surveillance.  No,  this
urine  culture  is  not  eligible  for  use  in  an  NHSN  UTI  determination.   The  medical
definition of flora is a group of organisms.  Any type of mixed flora makes a positive
urine  culture  ineligible  for  use  to  meet  NHSN  UTI  criteria,  because  “mixed  flora”*
implies that at least 2 organisms are present in addition to the identified organism.  The
urine culture does not meet the criteria for a positive urine culture with 2 organisms or
less and cannot be used to meet the NHSN UTI criteria.  * The same is true for perineal
flora,  normal  flora,  and  vaginal  flora.   No.  NHSN  surveillance  identification  of  an
organism to the genus level or the species level, for example Escherichia (genus) coli
(species) or Staphylococcus species is as far as you can get for reporting purposes. The
E. coli #1 and #2 is considered one organism, and then S. aureus would be considered
the  second  organism.  Antimicrobial  susceptibility  results  and  colony  morphology
difference do not equate to a report of separate organisms. This urine culture result is
not > 2 organisms, and therefore, is an eligible specimen. I have a final lab result for a
patient  in  my  possible  CAUTI  report:  Yes.  When  an  organisms  found  in  urine  are
identified  to  the  same  genus  and  species  level  but  there  is  an  indication  of  different
colony morphology or a different antibiogram (indicated by strain 1 or strain 2, colony A
, colony B, for example), for purposes of NHSN UTI surveillance the organisms should be
considered the same and if the sum total of the colony counts is ≥ 100,000 CFU/ml the
culture  result  is  eligible  for  use  in  meeting  a  UTI  definition.   If  antibiograms  are
available  and  the  sensitivities  differ  for  the  same  organisms,  always  report  the  more
resistant panel.  Colony morphology, biotype, and drug sensitivity comparisons should
not  be  used  to  differentiate  organisms  because  laboratory  testing  capabilities  and
protocols vary between facilities. Do not add multiple cultures together.   More than 2
organisms  in  a  single  urine  culture  suggests  the  possibility  of  contamination  of  the
specimen. The same is not true for separate urine cultures with less than 3 organisms
in  each.  In  this  example  the  first  culture  would  be  eligible  for  a  UTI.  If  no  UTI  was
associated with that urine culture, then the second urine culture could be considered
for a UTI, since no previous UTI RIT was set and there were not more than 2 organisms
in  that  urine  culture.  Yes.   This  time  period  is  called  the  Repeat  Infection  Timeframe
(RIT).  Please  see  the  information  on  RIT  found  in  Chapter  2  “Identifying
Healthcare-associated
 Infections”
 in
 the
 NHSN
 manual.
 Identifying
Healthcare-associated Infections [PDF – 1 MB]  No, the urine culture would be ineligible
for use to meet NHSN UTI criteria, because there would be a total of three organisms
present,  including  the  candida  (which  is  an  excluded  UTI  organism).   An  excluded
organism, such as candida, can be in a positive urine culture, however, there can only
be one other organism present that has > 100K CFU/ml to be an eligible urine culture. If
the patient reports a fever > 38.0°C (or over 100.40 F), during the POA timeframe and
within the IWP of a positive urine culture, this can be used to determine if the definition
of  a  POA  infection  is  met.   A  general  report  of  “fever”  by  the  patient,  without  an
accompanying  temperature  measurement,  may  not  be  used.  Urinary  retention  is  not
the same as dysuria and cannot be used to meet the UTI definition.  Dysuria is defined
as painful or uncomfortable urination. No, “with no other recognized cause” does not
apply to these symptoms. In the presence of a positive urine culture which may have
been collected as a differential diagnosis for suspicion of UTI, it would be very rare that
there  is  another  associated  cause  for  urinary  urgency,  urinary  frequency  and  dysuria
which  are  hallmark  UTI  symptoms.  Yes.  If  the  patient’s  urinary  urgency,  urinary
frequency, or dysuria occurred when the indwelling urinary catheter was not in place at
the  time  the  patient  experienced  the  urinary  urgency,  urinary  frequency,  or  dysuria,
then the urinary urgency, urinary frequency, or dysuria can be used as an element even
on  a  day  when  the  indwelling  urinary  catheter  was  in  place  for  part  of  the  day.
Generalized  “low  back  pain”  in  the  medical  record  is  not  interpreted  as  CVA  pain  or
tenderness, as there can be many causes of low back pain. Left, right, or bilateral lower
back or flank pain is acceptable to describe costovertebral pain. There are many causes
of  abdominal  pain  and  abdominal  pain  is  too  generalized  to  meet  the  localized  UTI
symptom  of  suprapubic  tenderness.  Low  abdominal  pain,  (left/right  or  bilateral)  or
bladder or pelvic pain or discomfort are acceptable documentation to meet NHSN’s UTI
symptom of suprapubic tenderness. General guidance: UTI signs/symptoms within the
IWP of a positive urine culture would seem to indicate the symptom is a UTI symptom
related to the positive urine culture, which may have been collected based on suspicion
of  UTI.  To  exclude  using  “with  no  other  recognized  cause,”  it  should  be  clear  the
symptom relates to that cause and is clearly differentiated from a UTI symptom. Ideally,
clinical decisions about “with no other recognized cause” for the UTI signs/symptoms of
suprapubic tenderness or costovertebral angle pain or tenderness should be made by a
physician  and/or  their  designee  in  your  organization  who  has  access  to  the  entire
medical record and clinical picture.  The other recognized cause must occur during the
current admission. Clinical judgment determination needs to be defended and backed
up  by  physician  documentation  and  there  should  be  clear  rationale  in  the  event  the
case is validated. Yes. Both practices may increase the risk of UTI, and these patients
should be included in CAUTI surveillance. Only catheter-associated UTI data (both ABUTI
and SUTI) are shared with CMS. Keep in mind that ABUTI may occur in patients with or
without an indwelling urinary catheter. Therefore, if a patient in one of these locations
has  an  ABUTI  and  an  indwelling  urinary  catheter  within  the  timeframe  to  meet  the
device-associated rule, this is a CAUTI and is reportable to CMS if CAUTI reporting in the
location  is  included  in  your  monthly  reporting  plan.  NHSN  surveillance  is  aimed  at
identifying risk to the patient that is the result of device use in general, not risk from a
specific device. NHSN does not allow for attribution to a specific device when entering a
UTI event. You should attribute the UTI to the inpatient location where the patient was
assigned  on  the  DOE.  No.  Patients  with  colovesical,  enterovesical,  or  rectovesical
fistulae are not excluded from meeting the NHSN UTI definition. NHSN surveillance for
infection  is  aimed  at  identifying  risk  to  the  patient  that  is  the  result  of  device  use  in
general, not aimed at a specific device. An indwelling urinary catheter in place puts the
patient  at  risk  and,  therefore,  is  included  in  CAUTI  surveillance.  The  purpose  of
submitting a urine specimen for culture is to determine infection. The NHSN definitions
currently account for contamination of urine specimens. NSHN excludes specimens with
culture  results  of  more  than  two  organisms  (polymicrobial)  for  use  in  meeting  UTI
definitions.  Yes.   Patients  who  have  neobladders  are  not  excluded  from  CAUTI
surveillance.  NHSN  surveillance  definitions  account  for  contamination.   Urine  cultures
that  result  with  >  2  eligible  organisms,  are  not  eligible  for  use  to  meet  NHSN  UTI
criteria. No. Any urine specimen submitted for culture is eligible for review to see if that
urine specimen meets NHSN UTI criteria. No.  Only the E. coli has a colony count eligible
for use in meeting a UTI criteria.  Scenario 1 of the Secondary BSI guide (Appendix B of
the  BSI  protocol  –   https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/pscmanual/4psc_clabscurrent.pdf
[PDF – 900 KB]) states: At least one organism from the blood specimen must match an
organism identified from the site-specific infection, in this case the urine, that is used as
an element to meet the NHSN site-specific infection criterion.  The 50,000 CFU/ml MRSA
is not used as an element in the UTI definition. In this example the BSI with MRSA only
cannot be attributed as secondary to the UTI event. Additionally, the blood specimen
must  have  a  collection  date  within  the  UTI  secondary  BSI  attribution  period.   NOTE:
Please do not send Personal Identifiable Information through the NHSN email system. 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-uti.html
