Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.  For NHSN reporting purposes, a CDI LabID event is a positive
laboratory  test  result  for  C.  difficile  toxin  A  and/or  toxin  B  OR  any  detection  of
toxin-producing  C.  difficile  organisms  by  culture  or  other  laboratory  means  on  an
unformed stool specimen that conforms to the container. Testing methods include, but
are not limited to, molecular assays such as PCR and/or toxin assays such as EIA.   If a
multi-step testing algorithm is used to test for C. difficile toxins, refer to question #2
below.  The  CDI  lab  result  (Antigen  Positive,  Toxin  Negative)  does  not  meet  NHSN
definition  of  a  CDI-positive  laboratory  assay  since  the  toxin  result  is  negative.
Regardless  of  the  method  or  sequence  of  testing,  when  testing  the  same  unformed
stool  specimen,  the  result  of  the  last  test  performed  is  used  to  determine  if  the  CDI
Laboratory Assay definition is met and a LabID event is submitted to NHSN.   Examples
of different algorithms and interpretations for event reporting are provided in the MDRO
protocol:   MDRO  protocol  [PDF  –  2  MB].  Only  when  the  final  report  has  specific  test
times  attached  to  each  of  the  individual  testing  methods  (for  example,  antigen/toxin
and PCR) can one make a valid determination of which test is performed first and which
is  performed  last.  If  there  are  no  specific  test  times/time  stamps  attached  to  each
individual  testing  method  on  the  final  lab  report,  consider  the  tests  as  performed
simultaneously  and  any  positive  is  eligible  for  use.  NHSN  doesn’t  specify  collection
methods;  Any  unformed  stool  specimen  testing  positive  for  C.  difficile  toxin  A  and/or
toxin B is eligible for use in meeting the definition of CDI laboratory assay. Reporting
should be done irrespective of method of collection (for example, stools collected from
ostomies), and/or there being a change from the normal consistency or amount of the
stool.   These  reporting  instructions  align  with  the  intent  of  LabID  Event  Reporting  to
decrease  the  burden  for  gathering  information  beyond  the  specimen  collection  date
and  admission  date  and  will  remove  subjectivity  and  simplify  interpretation  of  the
GI-CDI  infection  criteria.   Specimens  labeled  something  other  than  ‘stool’  are  not
eligible for use. The response should reflect the testing method used with the majority
of  specimens  tested  (the  test  used  in  more  than  50%  of  all  testing  performed).   For
example,  a  facility  rotates  between  three  testing  methods,  with  the  following
proportions: NAAT only in 15% of specimens tested, GDH/EIA toxin in 45%, and GDH/EIA
reflexed to NAAT for discrepant results in 40%.  The appropriate response is GDH/EIA
given 85% of all testing is by GDH/EIA.  The response to the question is to be completed
in  the  last  month  of  each  calendar-year  quarter  (March,  June,  September,  and
December).   If  you  change  test  method  during  the  quarter,  compare  the  counts  for
different  testing  to  identify  the  appropriate  response  to  the  testing  question.  The
transfer rule does not apply to LabID Event reporting. LabID Events are attributed to the
location of the patient at the time of specimen collection. The location of attribution for
LabID  Events  is  based  on  the  inpatient  location  of  the  patient  at  time  of  specimen
collection regardless of time spent or procedures performed in the location. There is 1
special  case  scenario  available  for  use:   If  a  specimen  collected  in  an  affiliated
outpatient clinic is positive for an MDRO or CDI, and the patient it is collected from is
admitted  to  the  facility  on  the  SAME  calendar  date  into  an  inpatient  location  that  is
monitoring LabID Events for the identified MDRO or CDI, the positive specimen can be
reported as the first specimen for the patient in that admitting inpatient location for the
month. If the facility is also monitoring outpatient LabID Events for the same MDRO or
CDI  in  affiliated  outpatient  clinics  (FacWideOUT),  then  the  same  specimen  for  the
patient would also be reported a second time for that outpatient location. The question
is  used  to  define  a  C.  difficile  LabID  Event  as  community-onset  healthcare
facility-associated (CO-HCFA) (community onset event collected from a patient who was
discharged from the same facility ≤4 weeks prior to the current date of stool specimen
collection).  The  question  refers  to  prior  discharge  from  the  same  facility  after  an
inpatient stay and offers meaningful information for appropriate event categorization.
Discharge from an outpatient location (also known as an encounter) such as emergency
department and 24-hour observation unit are not eligible for use. This is a non-editable
data  field  and  will  auto-fill  by  the  system  based  whether  a  MDRO  LabID  Event  was
submitted  for  the  same  MDRO  and  same  patient  in  a  prior  month  (not  the  current
month) at this reporting facility. If there is a previous LabID event for this organism type
identified by NHSN in a prior month, the system will auto-populate with a “YES.”  Note: 
This data field is NOT used in the calculation of SIRs.  Instructions for completion of the
LabID  Event  form  can  be  found  on  the  following  site  (must  copy  and  paste  the  link):
Instructions for completion of the LabID Event form [PDF – 100 KB]. For NHSN purposes,
if the IRF is located inside of the ACH:  No. If monitoring all MRSA specimens, any MRSA
isolate  from  the  same  patient  and  location  after  an  initial  report  of  MRSA  during  a
calendar  month  is  considered  a  duplicate  MRSA  isolate  and  should  not  be  entered,
except if it is a unique blood source.  If the first MRSA isolate for the month is from a
blood source, no other non-blood MRSA isolates are reported for the calendar month for
that  patient  and  location.   If  there  is  another  positive  MRSA  blood  isolate  from  same
patient and location, there must be a full 14 days with no positive blood MRSA isolates
for  the  patient  and  location  before  another  MRSA  Blood  LabID  Event  is  entered  into
NHSN for the patient. See Figure 1 in MDRO and CDI Module (Chapter 12) [PDF – 3 MB]
for algorithm for ALL SPECIMENS. NHSN doesn’t encourage assumptions; the lab report
must identify the isolate as ‘MRSA’ [or some form of the name] or have a susceptibility
pattern  which  meets  the  definition  to  qualify  for  event  reporting.  MRSA  includes  S.
aureus cultured from any specimen that tests oxacillin-resistant, cefoxitin-resistant, or
methicillin-resistant  by  standard  susceptibility  testing  methods,  or  any  laboratory
finding  of  MRSA  (includes  but  not  limited  to  PCR  or  other  molecular  based  detection
methods).  These  are  two  very  different  CDI  event  reporting  methods  that  are  each
governed by different sets of rules and date timeframes.   CDI LabID Event Reporting is
based strictly on the number of hospital days between the specimen collection date and
the date the patient is admitted to the facility.  Facility admission date is considered
Day 1. There is no consideration for clinical presentation.   Day of admission or the day
after  =  present  on  admission  (POA)  Hospital  day  3  or  greater  =  HAI   Each  method
requires a positive test for toxin-producing C. difficile on an unformed stool specimen.
Note:   Although  diarrhea  is  not  a  specific  element  for  a  GI-CDI  event,  it  must  be
checked when entering the GI-CDI event to validate that testing was performed on the
appropriate  specimen  type.  NHSN  defines  an  encounter  as  a  patient  visit  to  an
outpatient  location  (ED,  24-hour  observation)  and  is  independent  of  admission  to  the
inpatient  facility.   Each  encounter  must  be  included  in  the  total  encounter  count
regardless of admission to the facility. Instructions for completion of denominator data
for  Infection  Surveillance  and/or  LabID  Events  is  found  at  (must  copy  and  paste  the
link):
 http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/forms/instr/57_127.pdf
 Total
 Facility
 Patient
Days/Admissions  include  all  inpatient  locations  in  the  facility  including  units  with
separate  CCNs  such  as  inpatient  rehabilitation  facility  (IRF)  and  inpatient  psychiatric
facility  (IPF)  locations.  Line  2  records  the  total  facility  counts  minus  counts  from
CMS-certified  inpatient  rehabilitation  units  (IRFs)  and  inpatient  psychiatric  units  (IPFs)
with a unique CCN. This is not a count of patients with an MDRO. Line 3 records the
total facility counts minus counts from CMS-certified inpatient rehabilitation units (IRFs)
and inpatient psychiatric units (IPFs) with a unique CCN, and minus counts from all baby
locations.  This is not a count of patients with CDI.   NOTE: Patient Days/Admissions on
Line 2 and Line 3 of the FacWideIN form refer to the total number of patients housed in
eligible  inpatient  locations  (FACWIDEIN)  in  your  facility,  regardless  of  the  patient’s
MDRO  or  C.  difficile  infection  status.  Step-by-step  instructions  for  completing  this
information  can  be  found  in  the  Instructions  for  Completion  of  MDRO  and  CDI
Prevention Process and Outcome Measures Monthly Monitoring form (CDC 57.127) [PDF
–  61  KB].  The  ‘Report  No  Events’  box  on  the  facility-wide  inpatient  (FacWideIN)  form
should be checked if there were no LabID events reported in any inpatient location, not
including units with separate CCNs. If applicable, the ‘Report No Events’ box must be
checked  separately  for  each  individual  location,  that  is  for,  FacWideIN,  emergency
departments, 24-hour observation units, units with separate CCNs (such as an IRF), and
other locations the facility has provided summary data.  For example, all LabID events
for  the  month  occur  in  the  ED;  you  should  check  the  ‘Report  No  Events’  box  on  the
FacWideIN  summary  to  indicate  no  inpatient  events  were  submitted  for  the  month.  
Review events for each reporting month to determine in which location a LabID event
was reported. Check the ‘Report No Events’ box as needed on the appropriate summary
forms to complete reporting requirements. For more information about resolving Alerts,
refer to our Alert Guide: Alert Guide [PDF – 1 MB]. The First positive C. difficile specimen
for the patient and the location is reported as a LabID event.  Once submitted, NHSN
automatically applies a location level assignment of “CO” or “HO” based on the date of
event.  An event occurring on HD 5 is categorized as a healthcare facility-onset (HO)
CDI  for  the  admitting  facility  [HO  =  specimen  collection  date  was  ≥ 4  days  after
inpatient  admission  to  the  facility].  The  categorization  is  irrespective  of  testing
performed prior to admission to a facility or patient history. LabID Event reporting and
categorizations  are  based  on  a  single  reporting  facility  and  for  FacWideIN  include
inpatient,  emergency  department,  and  24-hour  observation  locations  in  the  reporting
facility.  The  challenges  of  decreased  specificity  as  it  relates  to  true  infection  verses
colonization  is  balanced  by  the  intent  of  the  categorizations  used  for  LabID  Events
Reporting, which are:  These categorizations are based on the length of time between
C. Difficile LabID Events for the same patient while in the same facility.  Specifically:  All
patients  cared  for  /  housed  in  an  eligible  inpatient  unit  should  be  included  in  counts
(numerator and denominator) for FacWideIN LabID Event reporting, including patients
designated  as  “swing  bed”  and  “observation”  status.   Data  from  IRFs  and  IPFs  with
separate CCNs are excluded from acute care hospitals’ FacWideIN LabID event SIRs.   
The complete list of algorithms used to determine which events are counted in the SIR
(for all facility types) can be found here: Troubleshooting the MRSA Bacteremia and CDI
LabID Event SIR [PDF – 300 KB]. The MRSA bacteremia and CDI LabID Event Line Lists
contain  indicator  variables  that  identify  which  events  are  counted  in  the  SIR.  The
indicator  variables  for  acute  care  hospitals  are  listed  below  [Facility  wide  incidence
SIR=  Facility  wide  Inpatient  (FacWideIN)  SIR:  Variable  will  display  as  1  or  0  for  each
event:  NOTE:  separate  indicator  variables  are  available  for  CMS-certified  IRF  units.
Refer to the Troubleshooting Guide: Troubleshooting Guide [PDF – 300 KB]. To show risk
at  the  location/unit  level  where  the  patient  has  been  housed,  all  location/unit  level
LabID events reported into the NHSN application will appear on the line list.  However,
the categorizations assigned (HO vs. CO) on the line list are based only on the patient’s
facility admission date and specimen collection date. This means that although the first
reported LabID Event is categorized as CO if the specimen is collected fewer than four
days  after  inpatient  admission,  a  subsequent  LabID  Event  submitted  to  NHSN  for  the
same  patient,  but  a  different  location  will  be  categorized  as  HO  if  the  specimen  is
collected on Day 4 or later after inpatient admission to the facility. Each LabID event is
viewed  independently  of  other  events  at  this  level.  Note:  For  FacWideIN  reporting,
however, duplicate LabID Events will be removed during analysis. Your SIR report will
provide  a  more  accurate  description  of  your  FacWideIN  numbers.  CMS  guidance
documents  and  reporting  requirements  can  be  found  on  the  NHSN  home  page  under
“CMS  Requirements”  (must  copy  and  paste  the  link):   CMS  guidance  documents  and
reporting requirements [PDF – 245 KB]. FacWideIN standardized infection ratios (SIRs)
are  sent  to  CMS  for  those  hospitals  participating  in  the  Hospital  Inpatient  Quality
Reporting  program.   The  numerator  of  the  SIR  is  a  count  of  the  following  events:
Additional  data  such  as  community-onset  events  and  monthly  denominators  are
incorporated into the SIR calculations that are submitted to CMS. To ensure complete
reporting  of  MRSA  and  CDI,  refer  to  this  document:  How  to  Set  Up  Facility-Wide
Inpatient MRSA Bacteremia and C. difficile LabID Event Reporting [PDF – 300 KB]. NOTE:
Duplicate  LabID  Events  reported  at  the  location  level  are  excluded  from  SIR
calculations.  For  more  information  about  the  algorithms  used  to  determine  which
events  are  counted  in  the  SIR,  refer  to  our  LabID  Troubleshooting  Guide:  LabID
Troubleshooting Guide [PDF – 250 KB]. 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-mdro-cdi.html
