Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Q1: What does NHSN require for AR data submission? The first
step is to ensure your facility has an Admission Discharge Transfer (ADT) system and an
electronic Laboratory Information System (LIS) or electronic access to the required data
elements.  Your  facility  also  should  have  the  ability  to  package  the  data  into
standardized Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) format for upload into NHSN. NHSN
does not allow manual entry due to the amount of data submitted each month. As a
result, many facilities use a vendor system to package and submit the AR data via CDA.
As of May 2023, all vendors that submit data to the NHSN AR Option are required to
pass Synthetic Data Set (SDS) validation. The  AR SDS Validation website lists vendors
that have an NHSN-validated AR reporting solution. You may already use one of these
vendors currently to submit other types of data to NHSN so start there to see if 1) your
facility has the capability to submit these data already using your current vendor or 2)
your  current  vendor  offers  this  capability  with  an  “add  on”  feature.  Some  facilities
leverage internal IT/informatics resources to report these data. However, this does take
specialized knowledge of coding and data aggregation. For this reason, NHSN does not
recommend this option for most facilities. Please note facilities that create their AR CDA
files in-house using their own “homegrown” IT or informatics resources must also pass
AR SDS Validation. You can find the details on what data are required to be reported on
our NHSN AUR Module webpage within the AUR Protocol. If your facility would like to
begin submitting Antimicrobial Use (AU) and AR data for the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  Promoting  Interoperability  (PI)  Program,  please  see  the
additional guidance document [PDF – 356 KB]. If your facility is interested/considering
taking up this work internally, you’ll find the AU and AR CDA toolkits, which contain the
sample CDA files, link to the CDA Implementation Guide, helpful hints, etc., on the CDA
Submission Support Portal website.   Q2: Can our facility still submit AR data to NHSN
even  if  we  don’t  perform  our  own  on-site  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing?  It
depends. If the off-site laboratory is sending susceptibility results back to your facility
and  your  facility  has  electronic  access  to  the  required  data  elements,  then  yes,  your
facility may still be able to submit AR data. Please work with your software vendor to
determine  if  your  antimicrobial  susceptibility  data  are  in  a  format  conducive  to
electronic  reporting.  Facilities  should  not  employ  manual  means  of  data  collection  to
report AR Option data to NHSN.   Q3: Do I need Secure Access Management Services
(SAMS)  credentials  to  view  or  submit  AR  data  to  NHSN?  Yes,  you  will  need  SAMS
credentials  to  submit  and/or  view  AR  data.  If  you  are  new  to  NHSN,  a  user  with
administrative rights at your facility, such as the Facility Administrator, must first add
you  to  the  NHSN  AR  Option  following  the  steps  in  Q4  in  the  General  Submission
Requirements section. After being invited to NHSN, review and accept the NHSN Rules
of Behavior and complete the SAMS enrollment process [PDF – 542 KB]. All NHSN users
must  follow  these  steps  before  using  the  application.  While  waiting  for  your  SAMS
credentials, you can complete the trainings in the AUR Educational Roadmap. After you
receive your SAMS credentials, you’ll be able to log into your NHSN facility. You can find
more information about SAMS on the About SAMS webpage.   Q4: How do I add a user
to view/upload data into the AR Option? A user with administrative rights, such as the
Facility Administrator, must follow these steps to add users to the NHSN AR Option: For
complete  details  and  instructions,  please  refer  to  the  NHSN  AUR  User  Rights
document  [PDF  –  350  KB].    Q5:  How  do  I  include  the  AR  Option  in  my  Monthly
Reporting Plan? NHSN requires a Monthly Reporting Plan for every month that you plan
to submit AR data.     NOTE: You do not have to check the AU boxes unless you also
plan  to  submit  AU  Option  data.  Please  note  that  the  AUR  Measure  of  the  CMS  PI
Program is attestation-based so CDC will not share AUR data with CMS, even if included
in  the  Monthly  Reporting  Plan.  View  the  complete  list  of  data  required  for  each  CMS
Quality Reporting Program [PDF – 1 MB].   Q6: Can we submit AR Option data if we’re
not submitting Antimicrobial Use (AU) data? Yes. Facilities can submit AR Option data
separately without submitting AU Option data. However, to get credit for participation
in  the  CMS  PI  Program,  CMS  requires  facilities  to  submit  data  for  both  AR  and  AU
Options.  Refer  to  CDC’s  PI  Program  Guidance  for  NHSN  Facilities  [PDF  –  356  KB]  for
more information.   Q7: What qualifies as an AR Event? An AR Event contains isolate
level antimicrobial susceptibility results for a specific organism. An isolate is defined as
a  population  of  a  single  organism  observed  in  a  culture  obtained  from  a  patient
specimen.  The  isolate  must  meet  the  four  criteria  below:  Please  note,  your  facility
should  report  all  eligible  isolates  that  meet  the  reporting  guidelines  outlined  in  the
NHSN  AUR  Module  Protocol  [PDF  –  1  MB]  to  NHSN  regardless  of  the  antimicrobial
resistance of the isolated organism. This means that even isolates that are susceptible
to all required antimicrobials are eligible to be reported to the AR Option.   Q8: What
locations  are  eligible  for  AR  Option  Event  reporting?  NHSN  strongly  encourages
reporting  specimens  from  all  NHSN  defined  inpatient  locations  (including  inpatient
procedural  areas  like  operating  rooms)  and  three  select  outpatient  locations
(Emergency  Department,  Pediatric  Emergency  Department,  and  24-hour  Observation
Area) at each facility.   Q9: What specimen sources are acceptable for AR reporting?
Your facility can report all specimen sources included in the Specimen Source tab of the
Information
 Data
 Model
 (IDM)
 spreadsheet
 with
 an
 “X”
 in
 the
 “Valueset:
ARSpecimenSource”  column  to  the  AR  Option.  The  Specimen  Source  tab  in  the  IDM
provides  further  breakdown  of  the  specimen  sources  into  the  specific  categories
outlined  in  the  AR  Option  Protocol:  Note:  The  AR  Option  does  not  include  wound
specimens.  The  IDM  is  found  within  the  AR  Toolkit  located  on  the  CDA  Submission
Support  Portal  website.    Q10:  What  organisms  are  eligible  for  AR  Option  reporting?
Facilities and vendors should refer to the AR Option Pathogen Roll-up Workbook found
in  the  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Toolkit  for  organisms  eligible  for  AR  Option  reporting
and the complete list of their associated SNOMED codes. All organisms in the Workbook
are eligible for reporting. Refer to the AR Option Pathogen Roll-up Reference Guide, also
found  in  the  AR  Toolkit,  for  guidance  using  the  workbook  and  determining  which
SNOMED  codes  are  accepted  into  NHSN.    Q11:  How  can  I  remove  missing  AR  Event
data alerts? The NHSN Alerts tell you that you haven’t yet submitted data for something
listed in your Monthly Reporting Plan. The Missing Event alert is specifically telling you
that you have reported AR Option summary data for those location/month(s), but you
have not yet reported AR Events. Missing Event alerts will appear on the Missing Events
tab of the alert screen as shown in the screenshot below:   To clear the Missing Event
alerts, you will need to submit the AR Event CDA files for the month(s) listed on your
alerts  screen.  If  you  thought  you  had  already  uploaded  these  data,  there  is  a  good
chance  an  error  occurred  during  the  original  upload  process  and  these  specific  files
failed to import. During the re-submission process, make sure you pay special attention
to any errors that may show up on the PDF submission report. Once you have uploaded
these data, be sure to generate new datasets. It would be rare, but not unheard of, to
have zero AR Events to report for a given month based on the criteria for determining
whether something is an AR Event. For example, any urine specimen in which E. coli
was  cultured  would  be  eligible  to  be  reported  regardless  of  the  susceptibility  of  that
organism  to  the  drugs  tested  by  the  lab.  However,  if  there  were  zero  specimens
collected  with  eligible  organisms  for  these  months,  you  can  click  the  “Report  No
Events” box for the month(s) in question on the Alerts screen. View our guide for more
information on how to report no events [PDF – 395 KB]. If you do not yet have AR Event
reporting  from  your  vendor  software  set  up,  we  request  that  instead  of  clicking  the
“Report  No  Events”  box,  you  remove  the  AR  Option  check  boxes  on  your  Monthly
Reporting Plan for the time being. Clicking the “Report No Events” box, tells NHSN that
your  facility  identified  no  specimens  that  met  the  criteria  for  an  AR  Event  (in  other
words, a “true zero”). It would not be appropriate to “Report No Events” because you
were not able to report AR Events from your vendor software. See Q5 in the General
Submission  Requirements  section  for  how  to  edit  the  Monthly  Reporting  Plan.    Q12:
How can I remove missing AR Summary data alerts? The Missing Summary Data alert is
specifically telling you that you have not yet reported AR summary records for those
location(s)/month(s) listed in your Monthly Reporting Plan. Missing Summary alerts will
appear  on  the  Missing  Summary  tab  of  the  alert  screen  as  shown  in  the  screenshot
below:  To  clear  the  Missing  Summary  Data  alerts,  you  will  need  to  submit  the  AR
summary  records  (also  known  as  the  “denominator”  data)  for  the  month(s)  listed  on
your alerts screen. If you thought you had already uploaded these data, there is a good
chance  an  error  occurred  during  the  original  upload  process  and  these  specific  files
failed to import. During the re-submission process, make sure you pay special attention
to any errors that may show up on the PDF submission report. Once you have uploaded
these data, be sure to generate new datasets.   Q13: How should date of admission be
defined?  For  the  AUR  Module,  the  number  of  admissions  is  defined  as  the  aggregate
number of admissions to any of the inpatient locations within the facility (facility-wide
inpatient) starting on the first day of each calendar month through the last day of the
calendar  month.  An  admission  is  counted  when  the  patient  arrives  in  an  NHSN
designated  inpatient  location  regardless  of  patient  status  (for  example,  inpatient,
observation). Further, an admission to an inpatient unit is counted even if the patient is
discharged that same calendar day. Additionally, a patient transfer from an inpatient to
an  outpatient  location  then  back  to  an  inpatient  location  is  counted  as  two  separate
admissions. Please note, the admissions definition used in the AUR Module is different
than the definition used in the NHSN MDRO/CDI Module. Within the AR Event file, the
date of admission is the calendar date that the patient physically locates to an inpatient
location.  If  the  specimen  was  collected  in  an  outpatient  location  (for  example,
Emergency Department), use the admission status variable as a guide. If the admission
status  variable  is  “True”  (Yes),  then  use  the  date  the  patient  was  admitted  to  the
inpatient location for this field. If the admission status variable is “False” (No), then use
the encounter date (the date the patient arrived in the first outpatient location) for this
field.   Q14: I’m from a state health department. Could you tell me the names and NHSN
OrgIDs  of  the  facilities  submitting  AR  data  from  my  state?  Yes.  NHSN’s  updated
Agreement  to  Participate  and  Consent  allows  the  NHSN  Team  to  share  specific
information  with  State  &  Local  Health  Departments,  Veterans  Affairs  (VA),  and
Department  of  Defense  (DoD)  for  prevention  purposes  such  as  the  NHSN  OrgIDs  and
names of facilities submitting AU and/or AR data into NHSN. Please send your request
to NHSN@cdc.gov. For the purposes of disease surveillance and prevention, state, local,
and territorial health departments can have a special Data Use Agreement (DUA) with
the  CDC,  which  allows  them  to  gain  access  to  NHSN  data  from  the  facilities  in  their
jurisdiction.  Facilities  in  your  jurisdiction  are  automatically  added  to  a  Group  through
the  DUA  process  and  health  departments  do  not  have  to  wait  for  facilities  to  accept
Confer Rights Template. You can find more information about the DUA process in the
DUA Announcement.   Q15: Does the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
require  reporting  to  the  NHSN  AUR  Module?  Beginning  in  CY  2024,  CMS  finalized
changes  to  the  Medicare  Promoting  Interoperability  (PI)  Program  for  eligible  hospitals
and critical access hospitals (CAHs) that include a new AUR Surveillance measure under
the  Public  Health  and  Clinical  Data  Exchange  Objective.  To  obtain  credit  for  calendar
year 2024, eligible hospitals and CAHs must attest to being in active engagement with
CDC’s  NHSN  to  submit  AUR  data  for  the  EHR  reporting  period,  or  else  claim  an
applicable exclusion. Further, to meet the CMS PI Program requirement, facilities must
use CEHRT updated to meet 2015 Edition Cures Update criteria, including criteria at 45
CFR  170.315  (f)(6).   Refer  to  CDC’s  Promoting  Interoperability  Program  webpage  for
more information. Q1: When is the deadline to upload AR Summary and AR Event CDA
files  into  NHSN  each  month?  The  AR  Summary  CDA  file  is  a  summary  of  the  entire
month and, as such, facilities should not submit the AR Summary CDA file to NHSN any
earlier than the first day of the subsequent month. For example, a facility may upload
October  AR  Summary  data  beginning  November  1.  NHSN  recommends  that  facilities
submit both AR Summary and AR Event data files to NHSN for a given calendar month
by  the  end  of  the  subsequent  calendar  month  to  make  the  data  most  actionable  by
your facility. However, facilities should wait at least seven calendar days following the
end  of  the  month  before  submitting  AR  Event  data  to  ensure  the  lab  completed  all
susceptibility  testing  and  reported  results  to  the  electronic  health  record  (EHR).
Facilities  participating  in  AUR  reporting  to  get  credit  for  the  CMS  PI  Program  must
upload data for the calendar year by February 1 of the following year in order to have
all submissions included in the annual report summarizing AUR submission status.   Q2:
Can  we  submit  AR  and  AU  CDA  files  together  in  the  same  CDA  zip  file?  Yes,  but  for
manual upload into the NHSN application, all the files in the zipped file must be from
one facility. If submitting files via DIRECT CDA Automation, the zipped file can contain
CDA  files  for  multiple  facilities.  For  both  manual  and  DIRECT  CDA  Automation
submission,  the  zipped  CDA  file  can  contain  up  to  1000  files  or  be  2  MB  in  size,
whichever comes first. Please note, the application only allows alphanumeric, hyphen,
and  underscores  in  the  CDA  file  names  and  zip  file  names.  The  application  does  not
allow special characters in file or zip file names.   Q3: How do I know if all the CDA files I
am  submitting  together  in  the  same  zip  file  were  successfully  uploaded  into  NHSN?
Sometimes, when you are batch uploading multiple AR files, some files will successfully
upload, and others will not. Here is a screenshot of what it looks like when you submit
files together and you have some records pass and others fail. Note that both the Error
Report and Submit buttons are enabled: If you click on the Events tab in the Validation
Results table, you can see the files that passed and failed validation by looking in the
Status column. In this instance, 13 records were submitted. Four passed validation and
nine failed. When you click the Submit button, the application will only accept the four
files that successfully passed validation. The PDF report generated after you click the
Submit button will also show the file(s) that successfully imported and the files that did
not pass NHSN validation and were therefore not imported. Please view and save the
PDF report for your records each time you import data into the AR Option. Below is an
example of the PDF report that shows you which files passed validation and which files
failed  validation.  For  each  file  that  failed,  the  reasons  for  failure  are  included  in  the
section below the record information. The NHSN Help Desk requires information from
the PDF report to assist users with inquiries related to data import errors.   Q4: When I
try  to  upload  my  AR  files,  I  get  an  error  message  that  says,  “Antimicrobial  Use  and
Resistance  Module  not  followed  for  this  month,  year,  and  location.”  What  does  that
mean  and  how  do  I  fix  it?  If  you  receive  this  error  for  a  specimen  collected  in  an
inpatient location, it means that you have not included FacWideIN for this month and
year  in  the  Antimicrobial  Resistance  portion  of  your  Monthly  Reporting  Plan.  If  you
receive this error for a specimen collected in a 24-hour Observation Unit, Emergency
Department  or  Pediatric  Emergency  Department  then  you  have  not  included  that
location for that month and year in the Antimicrobial Resistance portion of your Monthly
Reporting Plan. Therefore, you’ll need to add the location(s) (either FacWideIN or the
specific  outpatient  location)  to  the  Antimicrobial  Resistance  portion  of  your  Monthly
Reporting Plan for every month you plan to submit AR data. NHSN will not accept any
data that is out of plan. To edit your Monthly Reporting Plan, follow the steps in Q5 in
the  General  Submission  Requirements  section.  After  you  have  edited  your  Monthly
Reporting Plan to include the AR data you are wanting to upload, NHSN should accept
the CDA file for that month, year, and location. If you have verified FacWideIN or the
specific  24-hour  Observation  Unit,  Emergency  Department  or  Pediatric  Emergency
Department  is  on  your  Monthly  Reporting  Plan,  incorrect  location  information  in  your
CDA file could be the cause of this error. See the question below for details on location
errors.    Q5:  When  I  try  to  upload  my  AR  files,  I  get  an  error  message  that  says  my
location does not exist and I need to add it to my NHSN facility. I know my location is
already in NHSN. What does this error mean? The location in the CDA file must be the
exact  match  of  the  “Your  Code”  value,  “NHSN  HL7  code”  and  location  type  of  the
values  in  the  NHSN  Location  Manager  (see  screenshot  below).  This  error  message  is
telling  you  that  the  location  name  used  in  your  CDA  file  does  not  match  a  location
currently mapped in your NHSN facility. To see how your locations are mapped within
NHSN, select Facility in the left-hand navigation bar and then Locations and Find. If you
don’t have access to this section of your NHSN facility, please reach out to your NHSN
Facility  Administrator  to  have  them  export  the  location  list  (Facility  >  Locations  >
Export  Location  List)  so  you  can  compare  what’s  in  NHSN  to  what’s  in  your  vendor
system.  Decide  the  best  way  to  rectify  the  differences  (update  NHSN  or  update  the
vendor  software)  with  your  Infection  Control/Infection  Prevention  department.  Once
you’ve  matched  the  locations  across  both  systems,  re-export  your  AR  CDA  files  and
import them into NHSN.   Q6: When trying to import an AR Event CDA file I received the
following error: Unable to determine panel drug size. What does this mean? Based on
the organism reported, the NHSN application requires you to include specific drugs in
the  CDA  file.  The  list  of  drugs  for  each  organism  is  called  the  drug  panel  and  the
number of drugs included in each panel varies. The organism and corresponding drug
panel can be found in Appendix F of the AUR Module Protocol  [PDF – 1 MB]. Work with
your  vendor  to  ensure  the  CDA  file  includes  all  required  drugs.  The  CDA  file  must
include all drugs in the specific panel regardless of whether the lab tested them.   Q7:
How far back can we submit AR Option data? Retrospective data submission is always
encouraged! Your facility can submit AR Option data as far back as January 2012, if you
have  existing  Monthly  Reporting  Plans  during  that  time,  or  January  of  the  previous
calendar  year  (if  no  Monthly  Reporting  Plans  previously  existed).  Below  are  two
scenarios  to  help  explain  this:  Q1:  We  noticed  a  mistake  in  our  AR  Summary  record.
Can we just resubmit the file? There are two options for correcting AR Summary files:
Manual Deletion: To manually delete the record, log into NHSN, select ‘Summary Data’
from the navigation menu on the left side and then select ‘Delete AUR Data’. Use the
Summary Data Type drop down menu to select ‘Antimicrobial Resistance Data.’ Select
the  Location  Code  (for  example,  FACWIDEIN,  Emergency  Department),  and  use  the
Month and Year drop down menus to select the month/year you’d like to delete from
NHSN. Then click the ‘Delete’ button to delete the record. See the screen shot below for
reference. Succession Management: Your vendor software may be able to automatically
update AR summary files in NHSN using succession management. Many vendors have
implemented this feature by allowing users to simply export a new version of the file
but be sure to work with your vendor to determine if this approach is appropriate for
you.  Please  note  that  succession  management  does  not  allow  you  to  delete  a  record
without  overwriting  it  with  a  new  record  for  that  location/month.    Q2:  We  noticed  a
mistake in our AR Event record. Can we just resubmit the file? There are two options:
Manual  Deletion:  To  manually  delete  the  event  record,  log  into  NHSN,  select  ‘Event’
from the navigation menu on the left side and then select ‘Find’. Use the Event Type
drop down menu to select ‘AR – Antimicrobial Resistance’ and optionally input any other
identifying information. Select ‘Find’.   Next locate the AR Event you want to delete on
the Event List table. Check the box in the Delete column next to the AR Event. Click the
‘Delete’ button at the top of the column to delete the event. Succession Management:
Your vendor software may be able to automatically update AR Event files in NHSN using
succession  management.  Many  vendors  have  implemented  this  feature  by  allowing
users to simply export a new version of the file but be sure to work with your vendor to
determine  if  this  approach  is  appropriate  for  you.  Please  note  that  succession
management does not allow you to delete a record without overwriting it with a new
record for that patient.   Q3: When using Succession Management, can I delete records
without replacing them? No. Succession management will only overwrite or replace an
existing record with a new record. If you need to completely delete an AR Event or AR
Summary record without replacing it with an updated version, you’ll need to follow the
steps in Q1 and Q2 above to manually delete the record. Q1: Do the 14-day (blood &
CSF) and 1 per month (urine & lower respiratory) duplicate rules extend across calendar
months? The 14-day duplicate rule for invasive specimens (blood & CSF) does extend
across calendar months. Even across calendar months there should be 14 days with no
positive  culture  result  from  the  laboratory  for  the  patient  and  specific  organism
SNOMED code before your facility can report another invasive source AR Event in NHSN
for the same patient and specific organism SNOMED code. See the below example to
visualize  the  14-day  duplicate  rule  for  invasive  sources:    However,  the  1  per  month
duplicate rule for non-invasive specimens (urine or lower respiratory) does not extend
across calendar months. For urine and lower respiratory specimen isolates, report the
first  non-invasive  source  AR  Event  per  month.  Report  no  more  than  1  non-invasive
specimen  per  patient  per  organism  to  NHSN  per  calendar  month.  See  the  below
example to visualize the 1 per month duplicate rule for non-invasive sources:   Q2: Do
the 14-day (blood & CSF) and 1 per month (urine & lower respiratory) duplicate rules
extend  across  patient  admissions?  Both  the  14-day  duplicate  rule  for  invasive
specimens  (blood  &  CSF)  and  1  per  month  duplicate  rule  for  non-invasive  specimens
(urine & lower respiratory) extend across patient admissions. See the examples below
for  clarification.  Invasive  specimen  (blood  &  CSF)  example  of  the  14-day  rule  for  a
specific  organism  from  a  single  patient  across  admissions:    Non-invasive  specimen
(urine & lower respiratory) example of the 1 per month rule for a specific organism from
a single patient across admissions:   Q3: Do the 14-day (blood & CSF) and 1 per month
(urine  &  lower  respiratory)  duplicate  rules  apply  to  specimens  collected  while  the
patient  was  at  another  healthcare  facility?  No.  The  14-day  duplicate  rule  for  invasive
specimens  (blood  &  CSF)  &  1  per  month  duplicate  rule  for  non-invasive  specimens
(urine & lower respiratory) apply only to specimens collected in the reporting facility.
Do not include specimens obtained while the patient was at another healthcare facility
in the 14-day (blood & CSF) or 1 per month (urine & lower respiratory) calculations.  
Q4: Do the 14-day (blood & CSF) and 1 per month (urine & lower respiratory) duplicate
rules apply to multiple pathogens identified across a 14-day period? No. The duplicate
rules  are  specific  to  a  single  pathogen.  If  the  laboratory  identifies  another  pathogen,
regardless  of  the  specimen  source  or  the  date  the  previous  pathogen  was  identified,
this is not considered a duplicate event. The subsequent pathogens should be reported
as AR Events. See the example below for clarification.   Q1: Should I report preliminary
antimicrobial  susceptibility  test  results  to  NHSN?  No.  You  should  report  only  final  or
corrected  susceptibility  testing  results  to  NHSN.  Do  not  report  preliminary  laboratory
results for NHSN AR Option reporting. Facilities should wait at least seven calendar days
following the end of the month before submitting data to ensure the lab completed all
susceptibility testing and reported final results back to the EHR.   Q2: If I’m not able to
send  susceptibility  data  for  specific  tests  (minimum  inhibitory  concentration  [MIC],
E-Test, Kirby-Bauer [KB]), can I still participate in AR reporting? Yes, facilities can still
participate if they are still able to send the final interpretation provided by the lab for
the  given  drug.  NHSN  requires  the  specific  test  result  interpretations  for  MIC,  E-Test,
and  KB  are  included  in  the  AR  Event  CDA  file.  However,  if  your  facility  cannot  send
test-specific data, report these tests as “Not Tested” in the CDA file.   Q3: My laboratory
suppresses some susceptibility test results. Can I still participate in the AR Option if I’m
unable  to  send  all  susceptibility  results?  Data  suppression  prevents  complete
antimicrobial  susceptibility  data  from  being  reported  to  the  AR  Option.  We  have
observed  that  there  are  two  types  of  suppression.  The  first  is  that  the  testing
instrument  suppresses  the  results  for  organism-drug  combinations  that  are  not
supposed to be reported for microbiology purposes, such as ampicillin for Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.  The  second  is  data  suppression  for  the  purpose  of  antimicrobial
stewardship;  for  example,  suppressing  carbapenems  for  E.  coli  isolates  that  are
susceptible  to  first,  second,  or  third  generation  cephalosporins  to  reduce  the  use  of
carbapenems. For purpose #1, we would recommend keeping those results suppressed
and  not  submitting  them  to  NHSN.  For  the  organism-drug  combinations  that  are
suppressed for purpose #2, generally we would recommend that, if feasible, allow labs
to release complete AST results to the EHR and perform data suppression at the EHR
level (as opposed to suppression at the susceptibility testing instrument or laboratory
information system level). This way, complete data will still be available in the EHR and
theoretically  should  be  available  for  data  extraction  and  submission  for  surveillance
purposes.  You  might  need  to  work  with  your  microbiology  lab  to  identify  which
combinations  belong  to  which  purpose.  However,  if  your  facility  cannot  obtain  and/or
send suppressed data to the NHSN AR Option, NHSN will accept the data your facility is
able  to  provide.  Please  be  sure  that  your  vendor  is  using  ‘Not  Tested’  for  the
unavailable tests/drugs. The NHSN application will not accept AR Event CDA files that
do  not  contain  all  the  required  drugs  for  a  given  organism.    Q4:  Should  I  report  an
isolate to the AR Option if all drugs tested were Susceptible? Yes. Isolates are eligible
for  reporting  to  the  AR  Option  regardless  of  the  susceptibility  results.    Q5:  Should  I
report  an  isolate  to  the  AR  Option  if  my  laboratory  did  not  test  for  all  required
antimicrobials  but  did  test  at  least  one  non-required  drug?  Yes.  Isolates  where  the
laboratory did not test for all NHSN required antimicrobials but did test for at least one
non-required  antimicrobial  are  eligible  for  NHSN  AR  Option  reporting.  For  example,  if
your  laboratory  tested  a  Staphylococcus  aureus  isolate  for  the  non-required  drug
oritavancin,  but  not  for  any  NHSN  required  antimicrobials,  that  isolate  would  still  be
considered eligible for reporting to the AR Option. In this case, your facility would report
“Not  Tested”  for  the  required  antimicrobials.     Q6:  Should  I  report  an  isolate  if  my
laboratory did not perform any susceptibility testing? No. Your facility must perform at
least one antimicrobial test for an isolate to be eligible for inclusion in the AR Option.
For example, if your facility does not routinely perform susceptibility testing on Candida
albicans
 isolates
 from
 non-invasive
 sites,
 you
 would
 not
 include
 Candida
albicans  isolates  from  urine  specimens  in  your  AR  Event  reporting.  However,  if  a
provider requested testing on a Candida albicans isolate and your laboratory performed
at least one antimicrobial test, then this specific Candida albicans isolate from the urine
specimen  would  be  eligible  for  inclusion  in  the  AR  Option  and  should  be  reported
regardless of the result of this test.    Q7: If the laboratory reports additional information
beyond required drugs in the NHSN drug panels, should I report those drugs to NHSN?
No. Do not report additional drugs to NHSN. NHSN will only accept the drugs listed in
the  specific  organism’s  drug  panel.    Q8:  If  the  penicillin-binding  protein  2a  (PBP2a)
and/or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) mec-gene variables are not available from the
electronic data for Staphylococcus aureus, should I still report this organism to NHSN?
NHSN requires that Staphylococcus aureus isolate CDA files include the PBP2a and PCR
mec-gene test variables. However, facilities unable to electronically obtain the results
of the PBP2a-agglutination and/or PCR mec-gene tests for Staphylococcus aureus may
report  “Unknown”  for  these  specific  tests  in  the  AR  Event  CDA  file.    Q9:   If  my
laboratory  performs  the  same  specific  test  (E-Test,  MIC,  KB)  on  the  same  isolate  but
they produce conflicting results, what should we report to the NHSN application for the
final interpretation? Report the final interpretation provided by the laboratory. If your
laboratory provides no final interpretation, then report the most resistant interpretation
(Not Susceptible [NS] > Resistant [R] > Intermediate [I] > Susceptible-Dose Dependent
[S-DD] > Susceptible [S] > Not Tested [NA]). For example, if your laboratory performs
two  E-Tests  for  the  same  drug  on  the  same  isolate  and  one  produces  “Intermediate”
(“I”) and the other produces “Susceptible” (“S”), report “Intermediate” (“I”) as the final
interpretation  for  that  specific  drug  susceptibility.    Q10:  If  my  laboratory  performs
multiple  specific  antimicrobial  tests  (E-Test,  MIC,  KB)  on  the  same  isolate  and  they
produce conflicting results, what should we report to the NHSN application for the final
interpretation?  Report  the  final  interpretation  provided  by  the  laboratory.  If  your
laboratory provides no final interpretation, then report the most resistant specific test
interpretation as the final interpretation (NS > R > I > S-DD > S > NA). For example, if
drug  susceptibility  results  produced  MIC  =  “Resistant”  (“R”)  and  E-Test  =
“Intermediate”  (“I”)  but  your  laboratory  provides  no  final  interpretation,  report
“Resistant” (“R”) as the final interpretation for that specific drug susceptibility.   Q11: If
two  isolates  from  the  same  day  have  conflicting  susceptibilities  to  the  panel  of
antimicrobials  tested,  which  isolate  should  I  report?  Report  the  isolate  with  the  most
resistant final interpretation (NS > R > I > S-DD > S > NA). If your laboratory does not
provide  a  final  interpretation,  report  the  isolate  with  the  higher  amount  of  drug
resistance based on the number of antimicrobials testing first “Not Susceptible” (“NS”),
if equal amount of “NS” then move to the amount of “Resistant” (“R”), then “I”, then
“S-DD”, then “S”. If it cannot be determined which isolate is the most resistant, report
the isolate that was the first entered into the LIS. For example, suppose the laboratory
isolated Staph aureus from two blood specimens collected from the same patient on the
same calendar day and provided no final interpretation. The first isolate tested resistant
to  three  of  the  eight  antimicrobials  tested  and  the  second  isolate  tested  resistant  to
four  of  the  eight  antimicrobials  tested.  Report  the  second  isolate  to  NHSN  since  it
showed the higher amount of resistance.   Q12: If my LIS does not differentiate between
Penicillin G and Penicillin V, how should I report my penicillin susceptibility results? If
the  LIS  does  not  differentiate  between  Penicillin  G  and  Penicillin  V,  list  susceptibility
results under Penicillin G and report Penicillin V as not tested.   Q13: If my LIS produces
meningitis  and  non-meningitis  breakpoint  results,  which  should  I  report  to  the  NHSN
application? If the LIS produces meningitis and non-meningitis breakpoint results, rely
on  the  specimen  source  to  determine  which  susceptibility  results  to  report.  If  the
specimen source is CSF, report the meningitis breakpoint susceptibility. If the specimen
source  is  blood,  urine,  or  lower  respiratory,  report  the  non-meningitis  breakpoint
susceptibility.    Q14:  Will  NHSN  add  the  D-Test  or  other  testing  methods  to  the  AR
Option?  No. At this time, NSHN will not add additional laboratory testing methods, such
as  the  D-Test,  to  the  AR  Option  requirements.  Q1:  How  do  I  count  AR  Option
denominator data? Report combined denominator data for all inpatient locations within
the  facility  (FacWideIN)  monthly.  This  includes  patient  days  (the  number  of  patients
present in the facility at the same time on each day of the month, summed across all
days in the month) and admissions (the number of admissions to an inpatient location
in  the  facility  each  month).  A  patient  is  counted  in  the  patient  days  and  admissions
count for the facility if they are physically located in an NHSN-defined inpatient location
regardless  of  patient  status  (for  example,  inpatient,  observation).  Further,  a  patient
admitted to an inpatient unit is counted as an admission even if they were discharged
that  same  calendar  day.  Additionally,  a  patient  transfer  from  an  inpatient  to  an
outpatient  location  then  back  to  an  inpatient  location  is  counted  as  two  separate
admissions.  Neither  the  FacWideIN  patient  days  nor  admissions  denominators  should
include the counts from outpatient locations (ED, pediatric ED, and 24-hour observation
area).  Facilities  should  also  report  AR  Option  denominator  data  from  the  outpatient
locations  included  in  their  AR  Option  reporting  plan  (ED,  pediatric  ED,  and  24-hr
observation area). The number of outpatient encounters for the month for that location
is included in each individual outpatient location AR Summary file. Each patient visit to
the  outpatient  location  counts  as  a  single  encounter.    Q2:  How  do  I  count  patient
admissions  for  AR  calculations  when  a  patient’s  stay  extends  from  one  month  to
another? The day a patient enters the door to a facility or a location is the date of their
admission to that facility or location regardless of patient status (for example, inpatient,
observation).  If  the  patient  remains  in  an  inpatient  location  and  the  facility  does  not
discharge the patient, then that stay is all part of the same admission, no matter how
long.  A  stay  that  continues  across  multiple  calendar  months,  assuming  the  patient
remains in an inpatient location the entire stay, is still only one admission counted in
the  month  the  patient  was  originally  admitted.  If  the  patient  discharges  and  then
returns on a separate calendar day, then count the patient as a new admission with a
new admission date. If the patient discharges and then returns on the same calendar
day, then do not count the patient as another admission.   Q3: Are Patient Days and
Admissions  reported  for  outpatient  locations  for  the  AR  Option?  Patient  Days  and
Admissions are not reported for outpatient locations for the AR Option. These location
types  report  outpatient  encounters  only.  Additionally,  outpatient  locations  are  not
included in the FacWideIN patient day and admission counts.   Q1: How do I view my AR
Option data once I’ve uploaded it into NHSN? You can view AR Option data using the
NHSN Analysis function. You can find specific details on the AR Option analysis in the
AUR Module Protocol [PDF – 3 MB] or in the Analysis Resources section of the NHSN AUR
Module webpage. Additionally, NHSN developed short analysis Quick Reference Guides
to assist with viewing, modifying, and interpreting the AR Option event and summary
data:  Remember to generate data sets within your NHSN facility before running your
analysis reports so the data set includes any newly uploaded data. See question below
for information on generating data sets.   Q2: I uploaded AR Option data but I don’t see
it when I run my reports within analysis. What happened to my data? Newly uploaded
data  do  not  appear  in  the  analysis  reports  until  you  generate  new  data  sets  within
NHSN. Your data set is a snapshot of the data currently in your NHSN facility during the
time  period  specified  when  you  click  the  “Generate  New  Data  Sets”  button.  Always
generate new data sets after uploading data into NHSN. See the Generating Datasets
Guide [PDF – 359 KB] for more information. Note: Each NHSN user has their own data
sets. You may not see the same data as your coworkers if you generated data sets at
different times or with different parameters.   Q3: What are the differences between AR
Events  and  AR  Organisms  within  the  analysis  reports?  AR  Events  include  all  events
reported into the AR Option regardless of susceptibility results (specifically, a positive
culture). Reports for AR Organisms allow you to analyze AR Events from your facility (or
group)  in  which  a  specific  antimicrobial  resistant  organism  (or  “phenotype”)  was
identified.  CDC  has  defined  16  AR  Option  phenotypes  of  epidemiologic  importance.
Criteria and definitions for the pre-defined phenotypes can be found in Appendix I of the
AUR  Module  Protocol  [PDF  –  3  MB].    Q4:  How  do  I  read  the  AR  Event  Line  List?  The
Antimicrobial  Resistance  Event  Line  List  report  is  an  organized,  detailed  list  of  each
record a facility reports into NHSN. You may have to modify the report by filtering by
month,  pathogen,  specimen,  or  other  variable  as  the  default  settings  may  produce  a
report that is too lengthy to be useful and/or displayed. Users can review the report to
verify the data imported successfully and can also be helpful for data validation. Below
is an example AR Event Line List report showing fictitious data and a description of how
to read this report:  
The  Laboratory  isolated  Stenotrophomonas  maltophilia  from  a  patient’s  cerebrospinal
fluid  collected  in  the  MSICU  on  October  14,  2021.  This  isolate  was  resistant  to
cefiderocol, ceftazidime, chloramphenicol, levofloxacin, and minocycline. The laboratory
did  not  test  for  sulfamethoxazole  with  trimethoprim.  (Please  note  that  data  on  this
report are fictitious and for example only.) You can find more information about the AR
Event  Line  List  in  the  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Event  Line  List  quick  reference  guide
[PDF – 323 KB].   Q5: How do I read the AR Summary Line List?  The AR Summary line
list  is  a  report  summarizing  denominator  data  reported  into  NHSN  for  FacWideIN  and
the  individual  outpatient  locations.  For  FacWideIN,  this  includes  data  on  patient  days
and  admissions  whereas  outpatient  encounters  are  reported  for  the  outpatient
locations.  By  default,  this  report  also  includes  the  “Report  No  AR  Events”  variable.
Information on how to modify the AR Summary Line List, for example filtering by month
or changing the variables displayed, is available in our AR Denominator Line List [PDF –
394 KB] quick reference guide. NHSN has also developed a guide for more information
on how to report no AR events [PDF – 394 KB]. Below is an example AR Summary Line
List report showing fictitious data and a description of how to read this report: Please
note that data on this report are fictitious and for example only.  
This report includes the default variables included in the AR summary line list report.
The first line shows that in January 2021 for FacWideIN, there were 5,241 patient days
and  264  admissions.  The  second  line  shows  in  July  2021  for  EMER,  there  were  375
patient encounters. The third line shows in July 2021 for FacWideIN, there were 2,350
patient  days  and  460  admissions  reported.  In  January  2021,  the  Report  No  AR  Event
variable  =  N,  indicating  that  there  are  AR  Events  reported  for  that  calendar  month.
However, in both rows for July 2021, the Report No AR Event variable = Y, indicating
that there were no AR Events to be reported for that calendar month and the facility
checked  the  “Report  No  Events”  boxes  for  both  FacWideIN  and  EMER.    Q6:  What
validation checks should I conduct on my AR Option data? NHSN provides guidance on
recommended  AR  validation  [PDF  –  400  KB].  This  guidance  is  helpful  for  all  facilities
including those implementing AR Option reporting, those that have undergone a vendor
system change, and those that have been reporting for years. Suppression can lead to
significant  biases  in  the  antimicrobial  resistance  data  available  for  surveillance  or
infection  control.  Facilities  should  make  every  effort  to  report  all  antimicrobial
resistance data that meet the NHSN protocol requirements, regardless of whether those
data  are  suppressed  from  clinical  end  users.  Refer  to  Q3  in  the  Laboratory  Testing
Results  section  for  more  information.  Review  of  AR  Option  data,  including  the  steps
outlined  in  the  AR  Validation  guidance  [PDF  –  400  KB],  can  be  an  important  step  in
ensuring data reported to NHSN are complete and accurate.   Q7: Could you provide
more details on the NHSN AR Option Facility-Wide Antibiogram calculation? The NHSN
facility-wide antibiogram shows the organisms from the specimens reported into the AR
Option for a specified time period of interest. It lists all antimicrobials and the percent
of isolates that were susceptible (S) to the antimicrobial. Below is the calculation: The
percent susceptible is only calculated when 30 or more isolates were tested for a drug.  
Q8: Is the antibiogram produced in NHSN the same as the antibiogram produced by my
lab? No, if your lab uses CLSI M39 guidance, the antibiograms will be different. While
the NHSN AR Option Protocol and the CLSI M39 guidance differ in deduplication rules,
the  results  should  be  similar.  Further,  both  can  be  used  to  guide  the  selection  of
empirical  antimicrobial  therapy.  When  a  longer  period  of  the  analysis  is  applied  the
NHSN-CLSI difference is likely to be larger but not be huge. If you see a large difference,
we recommend reviewing and validating the data [PDF – 1MB]. Also, NHSN users should
keep  in  mind  that  NHSN  AR  Option  surveillance  does  not  include  specimen  sources
other than blood, CSF, lower respiratory tract, or urine. Other specimen types, such as
wound  cultures,  can  be  included  in  your  lab  produced  M39  antibiogram.  As  a  result,
only  specimen-specific  antibiograms  can  be  compared,  and  use  of  NHSN  AR  Option
surveillance data as guidance for empirical antimicrobial therapy is limited to infections
of specific infection sites (bacteremia, pneumonia, central nervous system infections, or
UTI).      Q9:  How  do  I  read  the  NHSN  AR  Option  Facility-Wide  Antibiogram?  The
facility-wide antibiogram table displays the calculated percent susceptible (%S) for each
organism-antimicrobial  combination  for  the  time  period  of  interest.  Users  can  modify
the  antibiogram  table  to  further  customize  this  output.  Additional  information  on  the
antibiogram is available in the antibiogram quick reference guide  [PDF – 537 KB].
Below  is  an  example  of  a  facility-wide  antibiogram  showing  fictitious  data  and  a
description of how to read it:    Please note that data on this report are fictitious and for
example only.  
The column headers list the organism category and specific pathogen while the rows
represent each antimicrobial, sorted by drug class. In this example, 49% of the Candida
glabrata  isolates  tested  were  susceptible  to  fluconazole.  Cells  with  “.”  represent
organism/drug  combinations  for  which  there  were  less  than  30  isolates  tested.  Cells
shaded  in  grey  represent  non-valid  organism/drug  combinations.  For  the  full  drug
name,  see  the  List  of  Antimicrobial  Agents  Eligible  for  AUR  Module  [XLS  –
479KB]  spreadsheet,  which  is  found  in  the  Supporting  Materials  section  of  the  AUR
Module  webpage.    Q10:  How  are  AR  Events  classified  as  community-onset  (CO)  or
healthcare  facility-onset  (HO)?  NHSN  automatically  calculates  AR  Event  onset
categorization based on the number of hospital days between the date the patient is
admitted  to  the  facility  and  the  specimen  collection  date.  Facility  admission  date  is
considered  Day  1.  The  table  and  graphic  below  indicate  the  onset  of  an  AR  Event
collected on specific hospital days. Please note: any specimen collected in an outpatient
location will be categorized as community-onset (CO).
  Q11: Could you provide more details on the calculation of the AR Option Incidence and
Prevalence  Rates?  The  AR  Option  Incidence  and  Prevalence  reports  utilize  AR  Event
data and AR Summary data to calculate the incidence and prevalence rates for specific
pathogens  (or  pathogen  groups)  and  AR  phenotypes  [PDF  –  1MB].  We  use  the  term
incidence  for  our  hospital-onset  AR  Events.  We  use  the  term  prevalence  for  our
community-onset AR Events. Rates are provided for each individual specimen type (i.e.,
blood,  urine,  cerebrospinal  fluid,  lower  respiratory)  and  for  all  specimen  types
combined.  Incidence  Rate  =    Community-onset  Prevalence  Rate  =    Outpatient
Prevalence Rate =   Q12: Are the data in the AR incidence and prevalence reports the
same as the data in the rate tables in the Multidrug-Resistant Organism & Clostridioides
difficile  Infection  (MDRO/CDI)  Module?  No,  AR  Option  reporting  is  separate  and
independent of events reported through the MDRO/CDI Module. The AR Option and the
MDRO/CDI Module use different definitions for event and summary data. For example,
the two modules include different specimen sources and different de-duplication rules.
Additionally, while the patient days definition used in the AR Option is the same as the
definition  used  in  the  MDRO/CDI  Module,  the  admissions  definition  used  in  the  AR
Option is different than the definition used in the MDRO/CDI Module.   
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-ar.html
