Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.  If the date of specimen collection is on or after the date of
documentation  of  evidence  of  consent  AND  the  patient  is  being  supported  for  organ
donation  purposes,  an  event  identified  using  the  specimen  culture  result  or
microbiologic non-culture based diagnostic test result should not be reported as an HAI.
For criteria without a specimen collected, if the date of event (DOE) is on or after the
date of documentation of evidence of consent AND the patient is being supported for
organ  donation  purposes,  the  event  identified  should  not  be  reported  as  an  HAI.  The
patient should, however, still be included in device and patient day denominator data
collection. Yes. The repeat infection timeframe (RIT) is set by the date of event (DOE). 
For surveillance purposes a POA infection may only have a DOE on the day of admission
or the next day. If the first element within the infection window period (IWP) occurred in
the 2 days before admission, the DOE is considered the day of admission. The RIT is the
14-day time period where no new infections of the same type are reported, beginning
with the date of event. Example: A UTI with E. coli identified with DOE on the day of
admission is considered POA. If 10 days later a new urine culture shows K. pneumonia
>100,000 CFU/ml, then the organism is added to the original UTI (no new event is cited
but  rather  is  considered  a  continuation  of  the  original  event).  The  UTI  RIT  remains
Hospital  Days  1-14.  NOTE:   If  a  patient  is  admitted  with  a  POA  BSI  and  subsequent
blood  specimens  are  collected,  the  POA  BSI  must  be  identified  as  either  primary  or
secondary in nature.  A primary POA BSI will set a BSI RIT.  However, a POA BSI that is
secondary to another site of infection will NOT set a BSI RIT.  It will only set an RIT for
the type of infection to which the BSI is secondary. Please see the article on page 3 of
the  September  2015  NHSN  Newsletter  for  more  details.  September  2015  NHSN
Newsletter  [PDF  –  2  MB].  Several  studies  have  demonstrated  there  was  subjective
application of the NHSN HAI surveillance definitions by different IPs and facilities, prior
to  2013.   During  this  time,  the  NHSN  definitions  allowed  facilities  to  subjectively
determine  evidence  that  an  infection  was  present  or  incubating  on  admission,  which
was not reportable to NHSN because it was not “healthcare-associated”.  Subjectivity,
providing  an  opportunity  for  inconsistent  data  collection,  must  be  removed  from
surveillance  definitions  whenever  possible.   With  this  in  mind,  CDC  and  the  HICPAC
surveillance  working  group,  a  group  made  up  of  infectious  disease  professionals,
healthcare
 epidemiologists,
 infection
 preventionists,
 and
 state
 public
 health
representatives,  developed  a  set  of  objective  surveillance  criteria  to  be  implemented
into  NHSN  and  used  by  all  facilities  reporting  data  to  NHSN.   Through  the  use  of  the
same set of objective criteria it is expected that data reported to the system is useful
for quality improvement activities. For infections of all types except VAE, PedVAE, SSI,
LabID
 Event,
 to
 make
 a
 proper
 determination
 regarding
 a
 possible
healthcare-associated infection, proceed in this order: 1.      First, determine the date of
the diagnostic test that is an element of the NHSN site-specific infection criterion that is
met. 2.      Next determine the infection window period (3 days before the diagnostic
test,  the  day  of  the  test,  and  3  days  after  for  a  total  of  7  days).   NOTE:  when  the
diagnostic  test  used  to  set  the  IWP  is  hospital  day  3  or  earlier,  the  days  before  the
diagnostic test can only include those that occur in the POA timeframe, specifically the
2 days prior to admission. 3.      Then determine if all of the elements of the criterion
are met during the infection window period.  If they are, there is an infection event.  If
they are not, there is no event. 4.      If there is an event, next determine the date of
event, specifically, the date that the first element used to meet the infection criterion
occurs for the first time within the infection window period. 5.      Is the date of event in
the  POA  time  period  (specifically,  during  the  2  days  before  admission,  the  day  of
admission, or the next day)?  If yes, the infection is POA; if not, it is an HAI. Please note,
when assigning a repeat infection timeframe (RIT) for a POA event, if the date of event
is determined to be either of the two days prior to inpatient admission then the date of
event, and therefore day 1 of the RIT, is considered hospital day 1. Chapter 2 of the
NHSN  PSC  Manual  –  Identifying  HAI  for  NHSN  Surveillance  provides  guidance  and
examples.  Please see: Chapter 2 of the NHSN PSC Manual – Identifying HAI for NHSN
Surveillance [PDF – 1 MB]. Surveillance definitions are designed to study and identify
trends in a population.  The application of these standardized criteria, and only these
criteria, in a consistent manner allows confidence in aggregation and analysis of data.
Alternatively, clinical diagnoses are patient specific. Unlike surveillance definitions, ALL
available  diagnostic  data  are  considered  in  a  clinical  diagnosis,  including  additional
clinical, epidemiological and laboratory data not used for NHSN surveillance. Therefore,
a clinical diagnosis may be made even when a surveillance definition may not be met
and  vice  versa  is  also  true.   Failure  to  meet  a  surveillance  definition  should  never
impede  or  override  clinical  judgment  during  diagnosis,  management,  or  treatment  of
patents. Nor should failure to meet clinical definitions result in non-reporting to NHSN
infections  meeting  the  NHSN  surveillance  criteria.  The  following  are  considered
diagnostic tests only when they are an element of the criteria that is met:  This term
refers  to  the  identification  of  microorganisms  using  a  method  of  testing  other  than  a
culture.  Culture  based  testing  requires  inoculation  of  a  specimen  to  culture  media,
incubation,  and  observation  for  actual  growth  of  microorganisms.  Depending  on  the
organism  identified,  culturing  can  take  several  days  to  weeks  for  a  final  report.  In
contrast,  non-culture-based  testing  (NCT)  methods  generally  provide  faster  results,
which can assist with early diagnosis and tailoring of antimicrobial therapy. Examples of
non-culture-based  testing  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  PCR  (polymerase  chain
reaction) and ELISA (Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) as well as DNA sequencing.
   For  purposes  of  NHSN  surveillance,  Active  Surveillance  Culture/Testing  (ASC/AST)
refers to testing that is intended to identify the presence/carriage of microorganisms for
the  purpose  of  instituting  or  discontinuing  isolation  precautions  (for  example,  nasal
swab for MRSA, rectal swab for VRE), or monitoring for eradication of a carrier state.
ASC/AST  does  NOT  include  identification  of  microorganisms  with  cultures  or  tests
performed  for  diagnosis  and  treatment  purposes  (for  example,  specimens  collected
from  sterile  body  sites,  including  blood  specimens).  “In  plan”  surveillance  is
surveillance which a facility has indicated in their NHSN Monthly Reporting Plan (MRP)
will be performed.  By including the data in the NHSN MRP, the facility is stating that
the NHSN surveillance protocol(s) will be used, in its entirety, for that particular event. 
Only  in-plan  data  are  submitted  to  CMS  in  accordance  with  CMS’s  Quality  Reporting
Programs. Only data that are entered into NHSN “in-plan” are included in NHSN annual
reports  or  other  NHSN  publications.  If  the  facilities  are  physically  separate  buildings
from each other, whether on the same property or over multiple campuses, then they
should be enrolled separately in NHSN. Each facility should have its own, unique NHSN
OrgID. When a CCN is shared across multiple facilities, the CDC will aggregate the data
from  all  applicable  NHSN  OrgIDs  and  will  send  to  CMS  under  the  single  CCN  for  CMS
reporting  purposes.  Each  distinct  facility  should  monitor  HAIs  and  prevention  efforts
separately,  for  the  purposes  of  accurate  tracking  and  targeted  infection  control.  A
positive screening culture at admission does not mean that any subsequent infection
with that organism is not a healthcare-associated infection (HAI). Many HAIs are caused
by  organisms  from  endogenous  patient  sources  and  prevention  efforts  may  be
employed  to  prevent  these  organisms  from  causing  an  HAI.   A  positive  screening
culture  without  evidence  of  infection  usually  represents  colonization  NOT  incubation.
Unless such a patient meets all other required criteria to fulfill the present on admission
(POA) definition, no POA infection is identified. Because fever is a non-specific sign of
infection,  it  is  possible  that  an  individual  may  run  a  fever  due  to  more  than  one
infection at a time. It would be impossible to determine which infection (if not both) was
the cause of the fever. Therefore, in this example, if all other criteria besides fever are
met,  the  patient  would  have  both  an  NHSN  PNEU  and  an  NHSN  UTI.  This  process
negates the use of clinical, subjective decision making to determine NHSN HAI events.
The issue of the route of temperature measurement was considered here at NHSN and
a decision was made to forego requiring a certain route of measurement, since our aim
is not to direct care, but rather to measure the effect of care on outcomes.  A detailed
literature  search  was  performed  and  subject  matter  experts  consulted  regarding  the
many routes of measurement and what they may mean when compared to others.  The
final  determination  was  that  there  are  no  research-based  guidelines  concerning
converting  temperatures  based  on  route  of  measurement.   When  using  fever  as  an
element  of  an  NHSN  infection  criterion,  use  the  temperature  documented  in  the
patient’s medical record (no conversion of temperature based on route of collection). If
a specific value for a vital sign is not stated in a CDC/NHSN HAI definition criterion (for
example bradycardia, hypotension), the facility should use the vital sign parameters as
stated  in  its  own  policies  and  procedures  for  clinical  practices.   Additionally,
documentation of these conditions in the medical chart may also be used, for example,
“…patient is hypotensive” would satisfy the element of “hypotension.” The patient ID is
the  key  identifier  in  NHSN  for  each  facility.  Therefore,  the  patient  ID  should  be  an
identifier  that  remains  constant  for  the  patient  on  any  subsequent  visits;  oftentimes,
this is the medical record number. The use of an identifier that changes with each visit
to the facility, for example, would result in the inability to link an SSI to a procedure, as
well  as  inappropriate  assignment  and  calculation  of  LabID  events  and  subsequent
measures.  For  determining  accurate  device  and/or  patient  day  counts  in  inpatient
locations, any patient present in an inpatient location at the time of the count(s) should
be included, regardless of whether they spend the night. The facility’s designation of a
patient as “inpatient” is not necessary to meet the NHSN inpatient definition. Yes. All
patients residing in an inpatient unit should be included in the surveillance efforts for
that unit regardless of the facility’s categorization as “observation” or “hospice” patient
(including patients being provided only palliative or supportive care), or that they are in
a swing bed within an inpatient location. The designation of Mixed Acuity Unit should be
used only when both of the following are true: AND  Use of virtual locations requires the
ability to identify separate patient days and device days for these groups of patients. 
Correct mapping of facility locations is vital for appropriate comparison and calculation
of
 device-associated
 SIRs.
 Detailed
 guidance
 can
 be
 found
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/PDFs/pscManual/15LocationsDescriptions_current.pdf  [PDF  –
677 KB]. For CMS IPPS reporting, CLABSI reporting is mandatory for adult & pediatric
ICUs, medical wards, surgical wards, and combined medical/surgical wards as well as
neonatal ICUs for acute care facilities.   Long-Term Acute Care facilities are required to
report CLABSIs for all inpatient locations.   The data that NHSN shares with CMS will not
include data for locations mapped as Mixed Acuity Units. For more details regarding the
reporting requirements for CMS Quality Reporting Programs, as they pertain to NHSN
surveillance,  please  visit:  CMS  Requirements.  Please  refer  to  the  guidance  that  is
provided in the CDC Locations and Descriptions Chapter (Chapter 15). The beginning of
this  chapter  offers  a  guide  which  will  help  you  set  up  your  locations  properly.   CDC
Locations  and  Descriptions  Chapter  (Chapter  15)  [PDF  –  1  MB]  Only  if  physician
diagnosis  is  a  part  of  an  NHSN  site-specific  infection  criteria  may  it  be  used  in  the
determination that an infection was present on admission (POA). For example, since the
BSI  criteria  do  not  include  physician  diagnosis  as  part  of  the  criteria,  a  physician
documentation  of  BSI  cannot  be  used  to  meet  CDC/NHSN  criteria  for  a  BSI.   As  a
reminder, the date of event of a CDC/NHSN site-specific infection criterion must occur
within  the  POA  time  period  (specifically  the  2  days  before  admission,  the  day  of
admission,  or  the  day  after  admission)  for  the  infection  to  be  considered  present  on
admission. This is regardless of admitting diagnosis or treatments the patient may be
receiving upon admission (for example, antibiotics). If a device is present for any part of
a  calendar  day,  then  that  day  contributes  to  the  minimum  day  requirement  for  the
device-associated  infection.  Examples  include  when  a  device  is  removed  and  then
reinserted  on  that  calendar  day  or  the  next.   If  instead,  a  full  calendar  day  passes
without device presence, then the day count begins anew for device days if the device
is  reinserted.  An  example  is  the  removal  of  a  device  on  Monday,  without  reinsertion
until Wednesday or later. Denominator data are collected at the same time, every day,
per  location.   Alternatively,  a  denominator  sampling  method  can  be  used  where  the
number of patients in the location (patient days) and the number of patients with an
indwelling device (urinary catheter/central line/ventilator) is collected on a designated
day  each  week  at  the  same  time.   For  accuracy,  do  not  use  Saturday  or  Sunday  for
sampling  purposes  and  only  non-oncology  ICUs  and  wards  with  an  average  of  75  or
more device days per month in the previous year are eligible to use this method.  When
using  this  method,  the  patient  days  must  also  be  counted  each  day  of  the  week.    
Positive cultures from broth only are considered a positive culture result and treated as
such for surveillance purposes.  Such media can be enriched to identify organisms that
might otherwise be missed. Please see NHSN’s Requirements and Recommendations on
usage NHSN’s Requirements and Recommendations. Try logging completely out of the
application. Close your browser, clear your cookies. (Go to Tools, Internet options, then
delete,  check  off  cookies,  etc.)  Instead  of  using  Internet  Explorer  please  try  using
Microsoft Edge or Google Chrome. Attempt to enter data again.  If you continue to have
issue,  contact  NHSN@cdc.gov.  Gross  anatomic  evidence  of  infection  is  evidence  of
infection elicited or visualized on physical examination or observed during an invasive
procedure.  This includes findings elicited on physical examination of a patient during
admission  or  subsequent  assessments  of  the  patient  and  may  include  findings  noted
during a medical/invasive procedure, dependent upon the location of the infection as
well as the NHSN infection criterion. Examples: Note: Imaging test evidence of infection
cannot be applied to meet gross anatomic evidence of infection.  Imaging test evidence
has distinct findings in the HAI definitions (for example, IAB ‘3b’). For NHSN surveillance
purposes,  an  imaging  finding  of  ‘free  fluid’  is  not  definitive  or  equivocal  for  an  NHSN
infection  criterion.  ‘Free  fluid’  is  not  indicative  of  an  infectious  process  and  is
considered  a  negative  imaging  finding.   However,  a  ‘fluid  collection’  imaging  finding
could be indicative of infection (such as an abscess or early formation of an abscess)
and therefore is considered an equivocal imaging finding and eligible to cite an NHSN
site-specific  infection  if  clinical  correlation  is  also  present.   Clinical  correlation  is
physician documentation of antimicrobial treatment for site-specific infection related to
equivocal  findings  (not  clearly  identified)  of  infection  on  imaging  test.  Up  to  three
pathogens  may  be  reported.  If  multiple  pathogens  are  identified,  enter  the  pathogen
judged to be the most important cause of infection as #1, the next most as #2, and the
least as #3 (usually this order is indicated on the laboratory report). If the species is not
given  on  the  lab  report  or  is  not  found  on  the  NHSN  drop  down  list,  then  select  the
genus  only.   (Report  all  site-specific  pathogens  before  secondary  BSI  pathogens).
Additional pathogens recovered during the Repeat Infection Timeframe (RIT) from the
same  type  of  infection  are  added  to  the  event.   Example:   Patient  admitted  1/1/23
meeting criteria of Symptomatic Urinary Tract Infection (SUTI), urine culture = E. coli
>100,000  CFU/ml.   On  1/12  another  urine  culture  shows  K.  pneumoniae  >100,000
CFU/ml.  The assignment is SUTI – E. coli and K. pneumonia.  The exception to this is
that excluded organisms for a specific type of infection cannot be added to that type of
infection.  For example, Candida albicans cannot be added to a previously reported UTI,
as Candida is an excluded pathogen for UTI.    We did not include in our definition a
length of time for the patient to be considered ‘confirmed’; however, we focus strictly
on  the  current  hospitalization  and  the  response  should  be  based  on  the  lab  test
available within the current patient record. It is our hope that the data received over
time will enable us to identify the risk of the COVID-19 condition on HAIs.      
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faqs-miscellaneous.html
