Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Where can I find guidance on what’s required to report to CMS
for my facility type? Where can I find the exact language of the CMS Reporting Program
for  my  facility  type?  Where  can  I  find  tips  to  make  sure  my  NHSN  facility  is  set  up
correctly to report to CMS? I need some guidance on how to set up locations within my
NHSN facility to comply with CMS reporting. Where can I find this information? Where
can I get a waiver to indicate that my acute care facility doesn’t fit the requirements to
report  to  CMS?  Where  can  I  direct  my  questions  regarding  CMS  payment  and/or
validation or any other questions not related to NHSN reporting?  Top of Page Do I need
to confer rights or join a CMS group in order to share my data with CMS for reporting
purposes? How does my data get from NHSN to CMS? Why do some facility types report
rates and others report SIRs to CMS? What are the data submission deadlines for CMS
reporting? Where can I see what data will be sent to CMS from my NHSN facility? What
if the data in CMS’ Hospital Compare don’t match the data that I had in NHSN? Where
can I find information on how to validate my data? CDC offers guidance on validation of
CLABSI, CAUTI, COLO and HYST SSI, and MRSA Bacteremia and CDI LabID event data
within your facility. Guidance is located on the NHSN Data Validation web page.  Top of
Page My CCN wasn’t validated when I enrolled my facility into NHSN. What do I do now
and how will that affect my CMS reporting? I share a CMS Certification Number (CCN)
with a sister healthcare facility(s). What happens to our data when it gets submitted to
CMS? My facility has been bought out or combined with another facility and I now have
a different CCN. What should I do to make sure this change is captured within my NHSN
facility?  Top of Page What training do I need to complete before I can submit my data?
Where  can  I  find  the  training  courses?  My  facility  isn’t  an  acute  care  hospital.  Do  I
complete  the  same  trainings?  How  often  do  I  need  to  complete  the  NHSN  trainings?
 Top  of  Page  Does  each  NHSN  user  need  his/her  own  SAMS  credentials?  Do  I  need
separate  SAMS  credentials  to  access  other  parts  of  NHSN  such  as  the  Healthcare
Personnel  Safety  Component?  For  additional  SAMS  FAQs  please  see  the  SAMS  NHSN
User FAQ webpage .  Top of Page 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/cms/faq_cms_hai.html
