Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Q1:  I’m  interested  in  submitting  data  into  the  Antimicrobial
Use (AU) Option. Where do I start? The first step is to ensure your facility meets the
requirements for NHSN AU Option participation: 1) ability to obtain data from either an
electronic  medication  administration  record  (eMAR)  or  bar  coding  medication
administration  (BCMA)  system  and  2)  ability  to  package  data  into  Clinical  Document
Architecture  (CDA)  standardized  format  for  upload  into  NHSN.  The  NHSN  AU  Option
does not allow manual data entry due to the amount of data submitted each month.
Many facilities use a vendor system to package and submit AU data to NHSN in CDA
format.  As  of  January  2021,  all  vendors  that  submit  data  to  the  NHSN  AU  Option  are
required to pass Synthetic Data Set (SDS) validation. The Vendors that have Passed the
AU  SDS  Validation  website  lists  vendors  that  have  an  NHSN-validated  AU  reporting
solution. Your facility may already use one of these vendors so start by asking if 1) your
facility already has the capability to submit AU data to NHSN using your current vendor
or 2) your current vendor offers this capability as an “add on” feature. Some facilities
can leverage internal information technology and informatics resources to report these
data via a “homegrown” system. However, NHSN does not recommend this submission
method for most facilities because it requires specialized knowledge of coding and data
aggregation.  Please  note  facilities  that  create  their  AU  CDA  files  in-house  using  their
own “homegrown” IT or informatics resources must also pass AU SDS Validation. You
can  find  details  about  the  NHSN  AU  Option  data  requirements  on  the  NHSN  AUR
Module webpage, within the training slides and AUR protocol. If your facility would like
to  begin  submitting  AU  and  Antimicrobial  Resistance  (AR)  data  for  the  Centers  for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Promoting Interoperability (PI) Program, please
see  the  additional  guidance  document  [PDF  –  356  KB].  If  your  facility  is  considering
taking up this work internally rather than using a vendor, you can find the AU and AR
CDA  toolkits,  which  contain  sample  CDA  files,  the  link  to  the  CDA  Implementation
Guide, and other helpful hints here: NHSN CDA Submission Support Portal (CSSP).   Q2:
Do I need Secure Access Management Services (SAMS) credentials to view or submit AU
data to NHSN? Yes, you need SAMS credentials to submit and/or view AU data. If you
are new to NHSN, a user with administrative rights at your facility, such as the facility
administrator, must first add you to the NHSN AU Option following the steps in question
#6  in  this  section.  After  you  receive  the  invitation  to  NHSN,  review  and  accept  the
NHSN Rules of Behavior and complete the SAMS enrollment process  [PDF – 542 KB]. All
NHSN users must follow these steps before using the application. While waiting for your
SAMS credentials, you can complete the training in the AUR Educational Roadmap. After
you receive your SAMS credentials, you’ll be able to log into your NHSN facility. You can
find more information about SAMS on the About SAMS webpage.   Q3: I received my
SAMS credentials and now have access to my NHSN facility. How do I submit AU data to
NHSN? Now that you have access to the NHSN AU Option, you must set up a monthly
reporting  plan  before  submitting  your  AU  data.  See  question  #1  in  the  Monthly
Reporting  Plan  section  for  details  on  how  to  create  a  monthly  reporting  plan.  CDC
developed  a  12-minute  Quick  Learn  video  discussing  uploading  CDA  files  into  NHSN
[Video – 12 min] to help facilities with this process.   Q4: When is the deadline to submit
AU data into NHSN each month? We recommend facilities upload data into NHSN within
30  days  following  the  completion  of  the  month  to  make  the  data  most  actionable.
Facilities participating in AUR reporting to get credit for the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) Promoting Interoperability (PI) Program must upload data for
the calendar year by February 1 of the following year in order to have all submissions
included in the annual report summarizing AUR submission status. We also encourage
facilities
 to
 upload
 retrospective
 data,
 if
 available,
 after
 initial
 AU
 Option
implementation.  See  question  #5  in  this  section   for  retrospective  data  submission
restrictions.    Q5:  How  far  back  can  we  submit  retrospective  AU  Option  data?
Retrospective  data  submission  is  always  encouraged!  Your  facility  can  submit  AU
Option data as far back as January 2012, if you have existing monthly reporting plans
during that time, or January of the previous calendar year if no past monthly reporting
plans exist. Below are two examples to help explain this:   Q6: How do I allow someone
at  my  facility  to  view  or  upload  data  into  the  AU  Option?  A  user  with  administrative
rights,  such  as  the  facility  administrator,  must  follow  the  steps  below  to  grant  users
access to the AU Option. For complete details and instructions, please refer to the User
Rights in NHSN – AUR Module document [PDF – 491 KB].   Q7: Who can see my facility’s
AU data in NHSN? Once you upload data into NHSN, only users at your NHSN facility
have access to view or edit your data unless one of the situations below applies. Users
must  generate  data  sets  within  NHSN  data  upload  to  view  the  AU  data.  There  is  a
special  option  for  Groups  (such  as  corporate  healthcare  systems  or  quality
improvement organizations) to request rights to view your data, but you must accept
the  request  before  NHSN  shares  your  data  with  them.  For  the  purposes  of  disease
surveillance and prevention, state, local, and territorial health departments can have a
special Data Use Agreement (DUA) with the CDC, which allows them to gain access to
NHSN  data  from  the  facilities  in  their  jurisdiction.  Facilities  in  the  state,  local,  or
territorial health department’s jurisdiction are automatically added to a Group through
the DUA process and health departments do not have to wait for facilities to accept the
Confer Rights Template. You can find more information about the DUA process in the
DUA Announcement. In both cases, only users at the Group level can view your data.
Facilities  in  the  Group  cannot  view  other  facilities’  data.  Additionally,  Groups  do  not
have the ability to add or edit your facility’s AUR data. Further, NHSN does not share
any AU Option data your facility submits to NHSN with CMS. The AUR measure included
in the CMS PI Program is attestation-based so facilities simply attest yes or no to being
in active engagement with NHSN.   Q8: How do I validate that my AU data are correct?
When  you  first  start  reporting  data  to  the  NHSN  AU  Option  or  change  vendors,  we
recommend  you  use  the  Data  Validation  materials  on  the  AUR  Module  webpage  to
perform an AU Option Implementation Data Validation [PDF – 459 KB]. These materials
focus  validation  efforts  on  key  AU  Option  protocol  definitions  and  CDA  requirements,
including potential sources of error. Additionally, we recommend you validate your AU
Option data annually using the AU Option Annual Data Validation materials [PDF – 876
KB].  This  validation  is  shorter  and  less  comprehensive  than  the  implementation  data
validation to reduce burden on facility staff responsible for AU Option reporting. After
importing AU data and generating data sets (see Data Import section of the AU FAQ), it
is always a good idea to run the Antimicrobial Use Line List [PDF – 264 KB] and make
sure what you submitted looks accurate.   Q9: How do I delete AU data? You can delete
AU data by following the steps below:   Q10: How do I edit AU data I already imported
into  NHSN?  The  NHSN  AU  Option  does  not  allow  manual  data  editing.  Many  vendors
offer a feature called succession management, which allows users to simply export a
new version of files to NHSN. To update an existing record with new information, you
can  use  succession  management  if  your  vendor  offers  this  option.  You  can  find
additional  details  on  succession  management  on  the  NHSN  CSSP.  Please  note  that
succession  management  does  not  allow  you  to  delete  a  record  without  overwriting  it
with  a  new  record  for  that  location/month.  If  your  vendor  does  not  offer  this  feature,
you can manually delete and re-upload the data by following the steps in question #9 in
this section. You must regenerate data sets within NHSN after uploading the corrected
CDA file(s) to run analysis reports with the updated data.   Q11: When using Succession
Management,  can  I  delete  records  without  replacing  them?  No.  Succession
management will only overwrite or replace an existing record with a new record. If you
need to completely delete an AU Summary record without replacing it with an updated
version, you’ll need to follow the steps in question #9 in this section to manually delete
the record.   Q12: I logged into my facility and can see that I have alerts for missing AU
data.  How  do  I  get  rid  of  them?  The  missing  summary  data  alerts  mean  that  you
included the AU Option in your monthly reporting plan but did not import these data
into  NHSN.  You  can  clear  the  missing  summary  data  alerts  by:  The  alerts  are  just  a
reminder  and  don’t  affect  your  AU  data  in  any  way.    Q13:  I’m  from  a  health
department. Could you tell me the names and NHSN orgIDs of the facilities submitting
AU data in my jurisdiction? Yes. NHSN’s updated Agreement to Participate and Consent
allows  NHSN  to  share  specific  information  with  state,  local,  and  territorial  health
departments,  Veterans  Affairs  (VA),  and  the  Department  of  Defense  (DoD)  for
prevention  purposes,  such  as  the  NHSN  orgIDs  and  names  of  facilities  submitting  AU
and/or AR data within your jurisdiction. Please send your request to NHSN@cdc.gov. For
state,  local,  and  territorial  health  departments  that  require  this  information  on  an
ongoing  basis,  we  suggest  setting  up  a  DUA  with  the  CDC,  which  allows  you  to  gain
access to NHSN data from the facilities in your jurisdiction. Facilities in your jurisdiction
are automatically added to a Group through the DUA process and you do not have to
wait  for  the  facilities  to  accept  the  Confer  Rights  Template.  You  can  find  more
information about the DUA process in the DUA Announcement.   Q14: Does the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) require reporting to the NHSN AUR Module?
Beginning in CY 2024, CMS finalized changes to the Medicare Promoting Interoperability
Program  for  eligible  hospitals  and  critical  access  hospitals  (CAHs)  that  include  a  new
AUR  Surveillance  measure  under  the  Public  Health  and  Clinical  Data  Exchange
Objective.  To  obtain  credit  for  calendar  year  2024,  eligible  hospitals  and  CAHs  must
attest to being in active engagement with CDC’s NHSN to submit AUR data for the EHR
reporting  period,  or  else  claim  an  applicable  exclusion.  Further,  to  meet  the  CMS  PI
Program requirement, facilities must use CEHRT updated to meet 2015 Edition Cures
Update criteria, including criteria at 45 CFR 170.315 (f)(6).  Refer to CDC’s Promoting
Interoperability  Program  webpage  for  more  information.  Q1:  How  do  I  include  the  AU
Option in my monthly reporting plan? You need to add the AU Option to your monthly
reporting plan for every month you plan to submit AU data. You cannot enter AU data
“off-plan”. NOTE: You do not have to check the AR boxes unless you also plan to submit
AR Option data.   Q2: Is a monthly reporting plan required for AU reporting? Yes, the AU
Option requires a monthly reporting plan with AU reporting indicated for every month
you plan to submit AU data. You cannot enter AU data “off-plan”. See question #1 in
this section for how to set up a monthly reporting plan.   Note: The AUR Measure of the
CMS PI Program is attestation-based so CDC will not share AUR data with CMS, even if
included in the monthly reporting plan. View the complete list of data required for each
CMS Quality Reporting Program [PDF – 1 MB]. Q1: What locations can I report AU data
for? NHSN strongly encourages the submission of data from all NHSN-defined inpatient
locations  (including  procedural  areas  like  operating  rooms),  FacWideIN,  and  select
outpatient  acute  care  settings  (specifically,  outpatient  emergency  department,
pediatric emergency department, and 24-hour observation area) from which AU Option
numerator and denominator data can be accurately captured. Your facility should not
submit data from locations that cannot accurately capture electronic data. Additionally,
your facility should exclude these locations’ data from the FacWideIN record.   Q2: Can I
submit only FacWideIN data to the AU Option or do I have to submit location-level data
as well? You can submit only FacWideIN data to the NHSN AU Option; however, NHSN
does not recommend doing this. When FacWideIN data are uploaded into NHSN, they
represent  aggregate  data  for  all  the  inpatient  locations  reported  by  each  facility  and
NHSN  doesn’t  have  the  ability  to  tease  apart  the  data  to  separate  it  into  specific
locations. Your facility will be limited in the AUR Module features and Analysis Reports
you  can  use  by  submitting  only  FacWideIN  data.  The  SAARs  are  risk-adjusted  using
location-level information, so you will be unable to generate SAARs or use the Targeted
Assessment  for  Antimicrobial  Stewardship  (TAS)  reports  and  dashboards  when
submitting only FacWideIN data. Additionally, you will not be able to save your monthly
reporting plan with only FacWideIN and no other locations selected for the AU Option
(see  question  #2  in  the  Monthly  Reporting  Plan  section).  Adding  a  location  to  the
monthly reporting plan without submitting data from it each month will produce missing
data alerts on the NHSN Alerts page. These alerts are just reminders and they do not
affect  your  AU  data  in  any  way.    Q3:  Should  I  include  outpatient  locations  in  the
FacWideIN  record  for  AU  data  submission?  No.  For  AU  data  submission,  your  facility
should  only  include  inpatient  locations  with  electronically  captured  numerator
(antimicrobial  days)  and  denominator  (days  present  and  admissions)  data  in  the
FacWideIN  record.  Your  facility  should  not  include  outpatient  locations  such  as
emergency  department,  pediatric  emergency  department,  and  24-hour  observation
area  in  the  FacWideIN  record.    Q4:  Should  I  count  antimicrobials  administered  to
observation  patients  in  my  AU  data?  Your  facility  should  include  antimicrobials
administered  to  all  patients  physically  residing  in  an  inpatient  location  at  any  time
during  a  given  month  in  the  location-specific  and  FacWideIN  CDA  files,  regardless  of
patient  status  (inpatient,  outpatient,  observation,  etc.).  While  NHSN  considers  the
24-hour observation area location an outpatient location, not all facilities designate a
separate  physical  location  for  observation  patients.  If  your  facility  has  a  24-hour
observation  area  mapped  in  its  NHSN  Location  Manager,  you  should  not  include
antimicrobials  administered  to  patients  physically  residing  in  the  24-hour  observation
area in the FacWideIN record. However, if your facility does not have a separate unit for
observation  patients,  you  may  include  their  antimicrobial  administrations  in  the
location-specific  and  FacWideIN  CDA  files  for  the  location  in  which  they  physically
reside, regardless of patient status (inpatient, outpatient, observation, etc.).   Q5: Can I
include  AU  data  from  the  inpatient  rehabilitation  facility  (IRF)  and/or  inpatient
psychiatric facility (IPF) physically located in my hospital with the rest of my AU data?
You can include IRF and/or IPF AU data for IRFs/IPFs mapped as locations within your
facility  in  NHSN.  Your  facility  can  also  include  the  IRF/IPF  location  in  your  facility’s
FacWideIN record. If your facility mapped the IRF/IPF as an NHSN location, you can add
it  to  the  AUR  section  of  the  monthly  reporting  plan  regardless  of  whether  it  has  a
separate CMS Certification Number (CCN) from your hospital. If your facility enrolled the
IRF/IPF as a separate facility in NHSN (i.e., using a different orgID), you cannot report its
AU data with the acute care hospital, but you can report it under the separate NHSN
facility.  The  AU  Option  accepts  data  from  an  IRF  or  IPF  enrolled  in  NHSN  as  its  own
facility
 using
 the
 rehabilitation
 hospital
 or
 psychiatric
 hospital
 designations,
respectively.  The  AU  data  submission  process  for  these  hospital  designations  is  no
different than a general acute care hospital.   Q6: How should I account for locations
that  changed  function  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in  my  AU  data  submissions?
NHSN provides general guidance for location mapping during the COVID-19 pandemic in
the COVID-19 Location Mapping document  [PDF – 173 KB]. However, because AU data
are submitted electronically from vendor systems and it may not be possible to make
certain  changes  within  those  systems,  there  are  some  additional  considerations  for
reporting AU data. There are three options facilities can consider: Q1: Should I include
topical, ophthalmic, and otic antimicrobial administrations in my AU data? No. The AU
Option only accepts four routes of administration: intravenous (IV), intramuscular (IM),
digestive,  and  respiratory.  Your  facility  should  exclude  any  other  routes  of
administration  (for  example,  topical,  antibiotic  locks,  intracavity,  intrapleural,
intraperitoneal,  intraventricular,  ophthalmic,  otic,  or  irrigation)  from  AU  Option
reporting,  including  total  antimicrobial  days  and  sub-stratification  of  the  routes  of
administration.  Please  refer  to  the  spreadsheet  titled  SNOMED  AU  Routes  of
Administration within the AU CDA Toolkit for the complete list of eligible SNOMED codes
and check with your vendor to make sure they only include the four routes listed above
in  your  total  antimicrobial  days  count.    Q2:  If  a  patient  receives  two  different
antimicrobials  in  one  day,  does  that  count  as  one  or  two  antimicrobial  days?  The  AU
Option  considers  each  antimicrobial  separately.  If  a  patient  receives  two  different
antimicrobials (for example, meropenem and amikacin) in the same calendar day, that
patient contributes one meropenem antimicrobial day and one amikacin antimicrobial
day to the location where the provider administered the antimicrobials. See Appendix C
of  the  AUR  Module  Protocol  [PDF  –  1  MB]  for  additional  examples.    Q3:  If  a  patient
receives the same antimicrobial via two different routes in one day, does that count as
one  or  two  antimicrobial  days?  If  a  patient  is  on  a  single  antimicrobial  (for  example,
ciprofloxacin) and the provider administers one dose in the morning via IV and another
dose in the evening PO, that patient contributes one IV ciprofloxacin antimicrobial day
and  one  digestive  ciprofloxacin  antimicrobial  day.  Because  a  single  patient  cannot
contribute  more  than  one  antimicrobial  day  to  the  total  antimicrobial  days  for  each
antimicrobial
 in
 a
 single
 calendar
 day,
 the
 patient
 only
 contributes
one total ciprofloxacin antimicrobial day for each location. See Appendix C of the AUR
Module  Protocol  [PDF  –  1  MB]  for  additional  examples.  Q4:  Providers  administer
vancomycin  to  patients  in  renal  failure  every  other  day  but  the  drug  stays  in  their
system  for  two  days.  Does  this  count  as  one  or  two  vancomycin  antimicrobial  days
within the AU Option? This counts as one vancomycin antimicrobial day because, even
in the case of renal impairment, the AU Option only counts antimicrobials on the day of
administration.    Q5:  Why  don’t  the  total  antimicrobial  days  in  my  FacWideIN  record
equal  the  sum  of  antimicrobial  days  from  all  my  location  records?  The  sum  of
location-specific antimicrobial days will always be greater than FacWideIN antimicrobial
days  because  multiple  administrations  of  the  same  antimicrobial  in  separate  patient
care  locations  within  a  single  calendar  day  account  for  one  antimicrobial  day
within each location but only one FacWideIN antimicrobial day. For example, if a patient
received  one  dose  of  vancomycin  in  the  medical  ward  and  then  transferred  to  the
medical intensive care unit (ICU), where they received another dose of vancomycin on
the same day, this patient contributes one vancomycin antimicrobial day to the medical
ward  and  one  vancomycin  antimicrobial  day  to  the  medical  ICU  but  only  one
vancomycin  antimicrobial  day  to  FacWideIN.  Patients  may  only  contribute  one
antimicrobial day to each location (including FacWideIN) per day.   Q6: The sum of the
routes of administration in my AU line list does not equal total antimicrobial days for
some  antimicrobials.  Why  is  this?  The  sum  of  the  four  routes  of  administration  for  a
given antimicrobial should always be greater than or equal to the antimicrobial’s total
antimicrobial  days.  In  cases  where  a  provider  administered  the  same  antimicrobial
more than once per day via multiple routes, the sum of the routes can be greater than
the  total  antimicrobial  days  for  that  antimicrobial.  Keep  in  mind  that  the  total
antimicrobial days for a given antimicrobial should only include administrations via one
of the four routes accepted into the AU Option (IV, IM, digestive, and respiratory). Your
facility  should  exclude  administrations  via  any  other  routes  (see  question  #1  in  this
section for examples) from all AU Option data. Check with your vendor to make sure
they only include the four routes listed above in your total antimicrobial days count.  
Q7: Should incomplete antimicrobial administrations count towards antimicrobial days?
No.  Your  facility  should  not  include  incomplete  antimicrobial  administrations  (for
example, partial infusions) nor antimicrobials that were ordered but not administered.
Your facility should only include completed administrations in AU Option data. Q1: Is the
days  present  denominator  used  in  the  AU  Option  the  same  as  the  patient  days
denominator  used  in  other  parts  of  NHSN?  No.  The  days  present  denominator  is
different from the patient days denominator. Days present are the number of patients
present at any time on a given calendar day in each patient care location. Patient days
are  the  number  of  patients  present  in  each  patient  care  location  during  the  once
daily census count. For example as highlighted in the screenshot below, Patient A was
admitted  to  the  medical  ICU  at  00:01.  They  were  transferred  to  the  medical  ward  at
08:31. They stayed in the medical ward until they were discharged from the hospital at
24:00.  Patient  A  would  contribute  one  day  present  to  the  medical  ICU  and  one  day
present to the medical ward because they were in each location at some point during
that  calendar  day.  Patient  A  would  contribute  one  patient  day  to  the  medical  ward
because they were present in the medical ward at during the census at midnight. They
do not contribute a patient day to the medical ICU because they were not present in the
medical ICU at midnight during the once daily census. Please note, the NHSN AU Option
only  counts  a  patient  once  for  each  location  each  day.  For  a  given  location  or
FacWideIN,  the  days  present  count  should  almost  always  be  higher  than  the  patient
days  count  because  days  present  take  patient  transfers  and  discharges  into  account
while patient days do not.    Q2: Should my days present be equal to my patient days
for a given location? No. For a given location or FacWideIN, the days present count will
almost always be higher than the patient days count because days present take patient
transfers  and  discharges  into  account  while  patient  days  do  not.  On  average,  for  all
NHSN AU Option reporting hospitals, days present are 24% higher than patient days for
the  same  month/location.  There  is  some  variation  based  on  the  location  type.  The
percent  difference  is  generally  smaller  in  locations  with  longer  lengths  of  stay  and
larger  in  locations  with  shorter  lengths  of  stay.  The  table  below  provides  the  median
percent difference between days present and patient days for select location types and
the  interpretation  based  on  the  average  for  all  AU  Option  reporting  facilities.  NHSN
calculated  the  percent  difference  with  the  following  formula:      NHSN  recommends
validating your AU days present denominators using the methodology starting on page
10 in the AU Option Implementation Data Validation protocol  [PDF – 1 MB] to ensure
your  vendor  system  aggregates  them  correctly,  as  they  can  influence  your  SAAR
calculations.    Q3:  If  a  patient  transfers  between  locations  in  one  calendar  day,  how
many days present does that patient contribute to the FacWideIN record? The patient
contributes one day present to the FacWideIN record. The NHSN AU Option only counts
a  patient  once  per  calendar  day  for  the  FacWideIN  record.    Q4:  Which  patients  are
counted  in  the  FacWideIN  admissions?  Admissions  are  defined  as  the  aggregate
number  of  patients  admitted  to  an  inpatient  location  within  the  facility  (FacWideIN)
starting  on  first  day  of  each  calendar  month  through  the  last  day  of  the  calendar
month. A patient is counted as an admission when they arrive in an NHSN designated
inpatient location regardless of patient status (for example, inpatient, observation). A
patient admitted to an inpatient location is counted as an admission even if they are
discharged that same calendar day. However, a patient transfer from an inpatient to an
outpatient  location  then  back  to  an  inpatient  location  is  counted  as  two  separate
admissions. Please note, the admissions definition used in the AUR Module is different
than
 the
 definition
 used
 for
 the
 NHSN
 Multidrug-Resistant
 Organism
(MDRO)/Clostridioides  difficile  Infection  (CDI)  Module.    Q5:  How  do  I  count  patient
admissions  when  a  patient’s  stay  extends  from  one  month  to  another?  The  day  a
patient  enters  the  door  to  a  facility  or  location  is  the  date  of  their  admission  to  that
facility/location regardless of patient status (for example, inpatient, observation). If the
patient remains in an inpatient location and the facility does not discharge the patient,
then  that  stay  is  all  part  of  the  same  admission,  no  matter  how  long.  A  stay  that
continues  across  multiple  calendar  months,  assuming  the  patient  remains  in  an
inpatient location the entire stay, is still only one admission counted in the month the
patient  was  originally  admitted.  If  the  patient  is  discharged  and  then  returns  on  a
separate  calendar  day,  then  count  the  patient  as  a  new  admission  with  a  new
admission date. If the patient is discharged and then returns on the same calendar day,
do not count the patient as another admission. Q1: Can I enter AU data manually by
hand?  No.  Though  some  NHSN  Modules  allow  for  both  CDA  import  and  manual  data
entry by hand, the AU Option only accepts data via CDA import due to the amount of
data  submitted  each  month.  Please  review  the  Uploading  CDA  Files  into  NHSN  Quick
Learn video [Video – 12 min] for additional details.   Q2: My vendor asked me to provide
my facility’s OID. What is an OID and where do I get one? An Object Identifier (OID) is a
unique  identifier  for  your  NHSN  facility.  The  AU  Option  uses  the  OID  in  CDA  files  to
identify  which  facility  submitted  the  files.  If  your  facility  submits  data  to  other  NHSN
Modules via CDA import, you may already have an OID. To verify if your facility has or
needs  an  OID,  users  with  administrative  rights  can  navigate  through  the  NHSN
application following the steps below: If you’ve verified that your facility does not have
an  OID,  follow  the  steps  outlined  here  to  obtain  one:  Object  Identifier  (OID)  Entry
Procedure  [PDF – 30 KB].   Q3: Can I submit AU and AR CDA files together in the same
zip  file?  Yes,  you  can  submit  AU  and  AR  CDA  files  together  in  the  same  zip  file.  For
manual  upload,  all  the  CDA  files  in  a  zip  file  must  be  from  one  facility.  For  DIRECT
submission, the zip file can contain CDA files for multiple facilities. For both manual and
DIRECT submission, the zip file can contain up to 1,000 CDA files or a maximum of 2
MB, whichever comes first. Please note: NHSN only accepts alphanumeric characters,
hyphens,  and  underscores  in  CDA  and  zip  file  names.  NHSN  does  not  accept  other
special characters.   Q4: Do I need to include all antimicrobials that are required by the
NHSN AU Option in my AU CDA file? Yes, all required antimicrobials for the reporting
calendar year must be included in the AU Option CDA files, regardless of whether your
facility used all of them that month. Appendix B of the AUR Protocol  [PDF – 1 MB] lists
the  required  antimicrobials  for  the  reporting  calendar  year.  See  question  #5  in  this
section  for how to report required antimicrobials that were not administered during a
calendar month.   Q5: What do I do if I did not have at least one administration of all
required antimicrobials each month? You must report a value – a specific number, 0, or
NA  –  for  every  antimicrobial  listed  in  Appendix  B  of  the  AUR  Protocol  [PDF  –  1  MB],
regardless  of  actual  administration  in  your  facility/location  in  a  given  month.    Q6:  I
don’t  see  an  option  for  uploading  AU  data.  Please  help!  In  NHSN,  after  selecting
Import/Export on the navigation bar, you should see “AUR Summary Data” or “Events,
Summary Data, Procedures Denominators” as an option to upload CDA files [Video – 12
min]. Both options allow you to upload AU data into NHSN. If you do not see either of
these options, a user with administrative rights must change your user rights. See the
NHSN AUR User Rights  [PDF – 350 KB] document for more information.   Q7: How do I
know if all the CDA files I submitted together in the same zip file uploaded into NHSN
successfully?  Sometimes,  when  uploading  multiple  AU  files  together,  some  files
successfully upload and others do not. Here is a screenshot of what it looks like when
you  submit  files  together  and  some  records  pass  but  others  fail.  Note  that  both  the
Error Report and Submit buttons are enabled:   If you click on the Summary Data tab in
the Validation Results table, you can see the files that passed and failed validation by
looking  in  the  Status  column.  In  this  instance,  the  user  submitted  two  records  –  one
passed validation and one failed. When they click the Submit button, only the file that
successfully passed validation uploads to NHSN. Clicking the submit button generates a
PDF report, which shows the file(s) that successfully imported and the file(s) that did
not pass validation and did not import. Please view and save the PDF report for your
records each time you import data into the AU Option. The NHSN Help Desk requires
information  from  the  PDF  report  to  assist  you  with  inquiries  related  to  data  import
errors.    Q8:  I  just  uploaded  data  to  the  AU  Option,  but  I  don’t  see  it  in  the  analysis
reports. What happened to my data? Newly uploaded data do not appear in the NHSN
analysis  outputs  until  you  generate  new  data  sets  within  NHSN.  Your  data  set  is  a
snapshot  of  the  data  currently  in  your  NHSN  facility  during  the  time  period  specified
when you click the “Generate Reporting Data Sets” button. Always generate new data
sets after uploading data into NHSN. See the Generating Datasets Guide  [PDF – 400
KB] for more information. Note: Each NHSN user has their own data sets. You may not
see the same data as your coworkers if you generated data sets at different times or
with different parameters. Q9: How do I view my AU data once I upload it into NHSN?
You can view AU Option data using the NHSN Analysis function. You can find details on
AU Option analysis in the NHSN AUR Module Protocol  [PDF – 1 MB] or in the Analysis
Resources  section  of  the  NHSN  AUR  Module  web  page.  NHSN  provides  short  analysis
quick  reference  guides  to  assist  with  viewing,  modifying,  and  interpreting  AU  Option
data:  You  must  generate  data  sets  within  NHSN  after  uploading  new  data  to  run
analysis reports with the most current data. See question #8 in this section for more
information about generating data sets. Q1: When I try to upload my AU data, I get an
error message that says “Please upload files with .zip extensions only. Try again.” What
does that mean? The NHSN AU Option requires users to upload CDA files in a zip file.
Try zipping the file(s) and resubmitting. Note that each zip file can contain up to 1,000
CDA files or a maximum of 2 MB, whichever comes first.   Q2: When I try to upload my
AU data, I get an error message that says, “Antimicrobial Use and Resistance Module
not  followed  for  this  month,  year,  and  location.”  What  does  that  mean?  This  error
message  means  that  you  did  not  add  the  month,  year,  and  location  in  the  CDA  file
you’re trying to upload in the Antimicrobial Use and Resistance portion of your Monthly
Reporting Plan. You must add the location(s) to the Antimicrobial Use and Resistance
portion  of  your  Monthly  Reporting  Plan  for  every  month  you  plan  to  submit  AU  data.
NHSN will not accept out-of-plan data. To edit your monthly reporting plan to include
AU, follow the steps in question #1 in the Monthly Reporting Plan section. After you edit
your  monthly  reporting  plan  to  include  AU  for  the  desired  month,  year,  and  location,
NHSN  should  accept  the  CDA  file.  If  you  verified  this  location  is  on  your  monthly
reporting plan and NHSN still does not accept the file, incorrect location information in
your CDA file may be causing the error. See question #3 in this section  for details on
location errors.   Q3: When I try to upload my AU data, I get an error message that says
my location does not exist and I need to add it to my NHSN facility. I know my location
is already mapped in NHSN. What does this error mean? The location in the CDA file
must  be  the  exact  match  to  the  NHSN  “Your  Code”  value,  “NHSN  HL7  code”  and
location type values in the NHSN Location Manager. This error message is telling you
that  the  location  name  used  in  your  CDA  file  does  not  match  a  location  currently
mapped  in  your  NHSN  facility.  We  recommend  meeting  with  your  NHSN  Facility
Administrator to have them export the location list out of NHSN (Facility > Locations >
Export  Location  List)  so  you  can  compare  what’s  in  NHSN  to  what’s  in  your  vendor
system.  Decide  the  best  way  to  rectify  the  differences  (update  NHSN  or  update  the
vendor  software)  with  your  Infection  Control/Infection  Prevention  department.  Once
you’ve  matched  the  locations  across  both  systems,  re-export  your  AU  CDA  files  and
import  them  into  NHSN.    Q1:  What  is  the  Standardized  Antimicrobial  Administration
Ratio  (SAAR)  and  how  is  it  calculated?  The  SAAR  is  a  metric  developed  by  CDC  to
analyze  and  report  summary  antimicrobial  use  data.  NHSN  calculates  the  SAAR  by
dividing observed antimicrobial days by predicted antimicrobial days. More information
on how NHSN calculates the SAAR can be found in the NHSN AUR Module Protocol  [PDF
– 1 MB] and the Guide to the SAAR [PDF – 1 MB]. Additionally, the Keys to Success with
the  SAAR  webpage  provides  a  short  overview  of  the  SAAR  and  its  components,  and
SAAR training videos can be found under: NHSN AUR Training.   Q2: My facility has a
SAAR over 1. Is that bad?  A high SAAR that achieves statistical significance indicates
that location or group of locations used more antimicrobials than predicted. A SAAR that
is  not  statistically  different  from  1.0  indicates  antimicrobial  use  is  equivalent  to  the
referent population’s antimicrobial use. A low SAAR that achieves statistical significance
indicates that location or group of locations used fewer antimicrobials than predicted.
However,  the  SAAR  alone  is  not  a  definitive  measure  of  the  appropriateness  or
judiciousness  of  antibacterial  use.  Any  SAAR  may  warrant  further  investigation.  For
example,  a  SAAR  above  1.0  that  does  not  achieve  statistical  significance  may  be
associated  with  meaningful  antimicrobial  overuse  and  require  further  investigation.
Keep  in  mind,  a  SAAR  statistically  different  from  1.0  may  still  not  lead  to  productive
investigation.   Q3: What locations are included in the SAAR? NHSN only generates 2017
baseline  adult  and  pediatric  SAARs  for  locations  mapped  using  one  of  the  following
thirteen CDC location types:   NHSN only generates 2018 baseline neonatal SAARs for
locations  mapped  using  one  of  the  following  four  CDC  location  types:    While  NHSN
encourages  facilities  to  submit  AU  data  from  all  NHSN-defined  inpatient  locations
(including  procedural  areas  like  operating  rooms),  FacWideIN,  and  select  outpatient
acute-care
 settings
 (specifically,
 emergency
 department,
 pediatric
 emergency
department, and 24-hour observation area), the only locations that can generate SAARs
are  those  mapped  to  the  CDC  locations  listed  above.  In  the  future,  as  more  facilities
submit AU data, NHSN hopes to develop SAARs for additional location types. You can
still examine antimicrobial use in other locations using line lists, rate tables, or charts.
See question #9 in the Data Import section for more information on NHSN AU Option
Analysis. You can find more information about NHSN location mapping for the SAAR in
Table 5 of the AUR Protocol  [PDF – 1 MB].   Q4: I uploaded FacWideIN AU data to NHSN
but cannot generate a SAAR report. Why not? FacWideIN is not a SAAR-eligible location.
It is the aggregate of ALL individual inpatient locations. The FacWideIN record captures
facility-wide  data;  specifically,  data  from  all  inpatient  locations  from  which  the  AU
numerator  and  denominator  are  captured.  When  FacWideIN  data  are  uploaded  into
NHSN, they represent aggregate use for all inpatient locations reported by your facility.
NHSN is not able to tease apart the FacWideIN counts to know how many antimicrobial
days and days present came from each individual inpatient location. The SAAR models
were developed for specific patient care locations. FacWideIN was not included in the
SAAR modeling because it includes different patient and location types mapped within
NHSN for each facility. Please refer the list of locations in questions #3 in this section to
see which adult, pediatric, and neonatal location types can generate SAAR reports. To
generate  a  SAAR  report,  you  must  report  data  from  at  least  one  of  the  individual
inpatient location types listed in questions #3 in this section. Please refer to question
#2  in  the  Locations  section  for  additional  information  on  limitations  of  reporting  only
FacWideIN AU data.   Q5: Why did my SAAR values change from the last time I looked
at  them?  NHSN  uses  data  from  the  most  recent  Patient  Safety  Component  Annual
Hospital  Survey  for  facility-level  risk  adjustment  in  the  SAAR  models.  Once  a  facility
completes the most recent survey and generates new data sets within NHSN, the SAAR
reports  update  to  use  the  most  recent  survey  data  for  risk-adjustment.  For  example,
prior to the completion of the 2022 survey, 2022 facility SAARs are risk adjusted based
on the 2021 survey responses. After completion of the 2022 survey, the 2022 SAARs
will be risk adjusted based on the 2022 survey responses. It is possible that a facility’s
survey responses moved them into a different risk adjustment category for one or more
SAARs. The survey is due in March each year and it is normal to see small changes in
the  predicted  antimicrobial  days  and  SAAR  values  from  what  they  were  before  the
survey was completed. Please refer to the “Survey data and risk-adjustment” section of
the SAAR Guide [PDF – 1 MB] for more information.   Q6: Can I generate a SAAR for just
one  location  and  one  month?  Yes.  You  can  generate  a  SAAR  by  month,  quarter,  half
year, year, or cumulative time periods. You can generate a SAAR report for a specific
location or location type. To generate a SAAR by location and month, follow the steps in
the SAAR Table — by location Quick Reference Guide [PDF – 500 KB]. NHSN provides
quick  reference  guides  for  each  SAAR  report  on  the  Analysis  Quick  Reference
Guides webpage.   Q7: Can I generate a SAAR for one specific antimicrobial? No. Each
SAAR  includes  a  grouping  of  antimicrobial  agents  (with  the  exception  of  pediatric
azithromycin  and  neonatal  ampicillin,  fluconazole,  and  vancomycin).  NHSN  designed
the SAAR antimicrobial agent groupings to enable hospitals and other entities to assess
progress toward antibiotic stewardship goals. These categories are generally mutually
exclusive,  meaning  individual  antimicrobials  are  found  in  only  one  SAAR  category,
except for the All antibacterial agents SAAR and the Antibacterial agents posing highest
risk  for  CDI  SAAR,  which  include  antimicrobials  found  in  other  SAAR  categories.  The
SAAR antimicrobial groupings are listed in Appendix E in the AUR Module Protocol [PDF
– 3 MB].   Q8: What years can I generate SAARs for? NHSN currently offers three SAAR
baselines, each applicable to a select set of patient care locations and time periods. You
can  generate  historical  2014  baseline  adult  and  pediatric  SAARs  for  data  between
January  1,  2014  and  December  31,  2018.  You  can  generate  2017  baseline  adult  and
pediatric SAARs for data from January 1, 2017 going forward. You can generate 2018
baseline neonatal SAARs for data from January 1, 2018 going forward. Please note: You
cannot directly compare SAARs calculated under the 2014 baseline with 2017 baseline
SAAR values.   To generate a SAAR by location and month, follow the steps in the SAAR
Table—by location Quick Reference Guide.  [PDF – 500 KB].   Q9: I uploaded AU data to
NHSN, generated data sets, and ensured my location is one of the SAAR locations, but I
still cannot generate a SAAR report. What is going on? You may not have the correct
user  rights  to  view  the  SAAR  reports.  NHSN  uses  the  Patient  Safety  Annual  Facility
Survey for risk adjustment in the SAARs. Without access to the survey data, you cannot
view the SAAR data. Review your user rights with your NHSN Facility Administrator and,
once the Facility Administrator corrects your rights, generate new data sets. Refer to
the guidance document  [PDF – 350 KB] that outlines minimum AUR rights. There are a
few  circumstances  under  which  you  cannot  either  generate  SAAR  reports  or  obtain  a
SAAR value for certain locations.   You will not be able to obtain a SAAR value in the
following situations. All SAARs:   You will not be able to generate SAAR reports in the
following situations: Adult SAARs: Adult SAAR locations in a long-term acute care (LTAC)
hospital, orthopedic hospital, psychiatric hospital, or rehabilitation hospital are not able
to generate SAAR reports. The 2017 SAAR baseline adult referent population does not
include these facility types. Pediatric SAARs: Pediatric SAAR locations in a critical access
hospital, LTAC hospital, oncology hospital, orthopedic hospital, pediatric LTAC hospital,
psychiatric  hospital,  rehabilitation  hospital,  surgical  hospital,  women’s  hospital,  or
Veterans Affairs (VA) hospital are not able to generate SAAR reports. The 2017 SAAR
baseline  pediatric  referent  population  does  not  include  these  facility  types.  Neonatal
SAARs:    If  you  tried  everything  in  the  FAQ  above  and  still  can’t  generate  a  SAAR,
please email the NHSN Helpdesk at nhsn@cdc.gov.   Q10: How can I compare my SAAR
values  to  other  facilities?  The  NHSN  AU  Data  Reports  provide  summaries  of  SAAR
distributions  and  percentages  of  use  within  SAAR  antimicrobial  agent  categories  in
adult,  pediatric,  and  neonatal  locations.  The  SAAR  distributions  can  help  inform
stewardship  efforts  by  enabling  hospitals  to  see  how  their  SAARs  compare  to  the
national  distribution.  Facilities  can  use  distributions  to  help  set  facility-specific  SAAR
goals.  The  percentage  of  AU  by  class  and  drug  within  a  SAAR  antimicrobial  agent
category  provides  insight  into  prescribing  practices  across  differing  patient  locations,
such as medical critical care units compared to medical wards. Facilities may evaluate
these  usage  patterns  in  context  of  their  local  treatment  guidelines,  antimicrobial
resistance rates, and formulary.   Q11: How do I figure out whether my SAAR values are
going up or down over time? Tracking AU over time using SAARs should be limited to
comparing two SAAR values across two points in time. You can find more information
about comparing two SAAR values in NHSN’s Guide to the SAAR [PDF – 1 MB]. You can
also visually assess SAAR values over time to get a sense of whether values increased
or  decreased  during  that  time  period  using  the  SAAR  Plot  report  [PDF  –  661  KB].
However,  you  should  not  use  SAARs  for  trend  analyses,  where  SAAR  values  are
simultaneously compared across many points in time to determine whether there is a
statistically  significant  change  in  AU.    Q12:  Why  can’t  I  use  SAAR  values  for  trend
analysis?  Trend  analyses,  where  SAAR  values  are  simultaneously  compared  across
many points in time to determine whether there is a statistically significant change in
AU,  may  violate  the  proportionality  assumption  that  the  SAAR  models  rely  on.  When
statistically  (as  opposed  to  visually)  comparing  any  pair  of  SAARs,  the  comparison  is
most valid when the constant proportionality assumption is satisfied. Specifically, when
the  distribution  of  exposure  among  the  model  strata  is  proportional  to  that  of  the
referent  population.  Please  see  NHSN’s  Guide  to  the  SAAR  [PDF  –  1  MB]  for  more
information  about  scalability  of  the  SAAR  and  the  proportionality  assumption.  For
example, let’s say in the referent population for the pediatric antifungal SAAR model,
the  proportion  of  days  present  (exposure)  was  80%  in  pediatric  ICUs  and  20%  in
pediatric wards. The SAAR models assume other facilities not in the referent population
have a similar distribution of days present. If one facility has 50% of its days present in
pediatric ICUs and 50% in pediatric wards, comparisons can still be made, but there is a
higher  chance  that  changes  in  SAAR  values  over  time  are  due  to  this  difference  in
exposure  rather  than  due  to  other  factors  such  as  stewardship  interventions.  As  the
distribution  of  the  exposure  shifts  over  time,  then  chances  of  violating  the  constant
proportionality assumption increase. If you are comparing SAARs within one facility and
the days present distribution does not change much across the factors in the model and
your  time  period  of  interest,  it  may  be  fine  to  make  pair-wise  comparisons  of  SAARs
across various time points (2017 vs. 2018, 2018 vs. 2019, 2019 vs. 2020 etc). You can
also use rates for trend analyses to determine whether antimicrobial use has increased
or decreased in a statistically significant way over your time period of interest. If you
are assessing rates across various hospitals (rather than just within your own facility),
you can work with a statistician to include risk-factors from SAAR models as factors in
the  trend  analysis.    Q13:  I’m  not  submitting  data  into  the  AU  Option,  but  I’d  like  to
compare my antimicrobial use against other facilities using the SAAR. Is this possible?
NHSN only makes the SAAR available for facilities reporting into the AU Option. NHSN
published  papers  on  the  2017  SAAR  methodology  and  baseline  model  details  (NHSN
SAARs:  A  Progress  Report  and  Risk  Modeling  Update  Using  2017  Data)  and  2018
neonatal  SAAR  methodology  (National  Healthcare  Safety  Network  2018  Baseline
Neonatal Standardized Antimicrobial Administration Ratios) for reference. Keep in mind,
facilities  not  participating  in  the  NHSN  AU  Option  must  still  capture  the  NHSN  AU
Option-defined  antimicrobial  days  and  days  present  accurately  to  calculate  their  own
SAARs  using  NHSN’s  SAAR  models.    Q14:  Does  the  SAAR  account  for  changes  in
antimicrobial use during the COVID-19 pandemic? No. The AU Option does not collect
patient-level information, including information on indication for use, co-morbidities, or
severity  of  illness,  nor  does  NHSN  collect  data  on  hospitals’  burden  of  COVID-19.
Because of this, the SAARs are not adjusted for COVID-19 rates. It is also possible that
NHSN  patient  care  locations  changed  function  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  These
location changes may not be reflected in the SAARs because hospitals may not have
remapped  their  patient  care  locations  within  NHSN  due  to  the  ongoing  public  health
emergency.  See  question  #6  in  the  Locations  section  for  additional  information  on
location  changes  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The  2020  and  2021  NHSN  AU  Data
Reports provide additional insight on AU rates during the COVID-19 pandemic. Q1: What
is  the  Antimicrobial  Use  Cumulative  Attributable  Difference  (AU-CAD)  and  how  do  I
interpret  it?  The  AU-CAD  is  the  number  of  antimicrobial  days  needed  to  achieve  a
desired  SAAR  target.  The  higher  the  AU-CAD  value,  the  greater  the  number  of
antimicrobial days that need to be reduced to meet the SAAR target. NHSN calculates
the  AU-CAD  by  multiplying  a  numerical  SAAR  target  value  by  predicted  antimicrobial
days  and  then  subtracting  that  from  observed  antimicrobial  days,  rounded  to  the
nearest whole number.   A positive AU-CAD value can be interpreted as the number of
antimicrobial  days  to  reduce  per  time  period  to  decrease  the  SAAR  value  and  reach
your  SAAR  target.  A  negative  AU-CAD  value  can  be  interpreted  as  the  number  of
antimicrobial days to add per time period to increase the SAAR value and reach your
SAAR target.   Q2: How do I choose a SAAR target? There are many factors to consider
when  defining  target  SAAR  values.  Unlike  the  Healthcare  Association  Infection  (HAI)
Targeted Assessment for Prevention (TAP) Strategy and Standardized Infection Ratios
(SIRs), there are no national SAAR goals. Higher SAARs might reflect opportunities to
improve  use,  but  these  values  might  be  justified  in  some  instances.  Additionally,  a
SAAR  value  of  1.000  does  not  necessarily  mean  AU  is  ideal.  Clinical  judgement  and
patient  information  should  be  considered  when  interpreting  SAAR  values  and  setting
SAAR targets. SAAR target values may differ among facilities based on factors such as
the  original  SAAR  value  for  a  given  SAAR  agent  category,  stewardship  priorities,  and
clinical  relevance.  Additionally,  SAAR  target  values  may  differ  among  SAAR  agent
categories  and/or  populations  (adult,  pediatric,  neonatal)  within  a  given  facility.  The
TAS Guide [PDF – 2 MB] contains resources to help you select SAAR targets.   Q3: Can
my  SAAR  target  be  zero?  No,  zero  is  not  an  appropriate  SAAR  target.  While  working
towards zero healthcare associated infections is a meaningful goal, zero antimicrobial
use  is  not  the  goal  of  antimicrobial  stewardship.  Stewardship  interventions  focus  on
reducing inappropriate antimicrobial use not eliminating antimicrobial use altogether.  
Q4: How do I set a SAAR target within NHSN? You have to enter SAAR targets within the
NHSN application before using the TAS reports or TAS dashboard. These SAAR target
values will be saved and used each time you run TAS reports and TAS dashboard until
you manually update the values. You can update your SAAR target values at any time
by following the same steps. To enter your SAAR target values within the TAS Reports,
select any TAS report and click Modify Report. To enter your SAAR target values from
the TAS dashboard, navigate to the TAS dashboard by selecting “Dashboard” from the
lefthand  menu  in  NHSN,  and  then  “TAS  Dashboard”.  Please  be  sure  to  enter  a  SAAR
target for each population and SAAR Type. Click Save after entering the SAAR target
values for each population.   Q5: How do I determine which TAS report to use? The Keys
to Success with TAS webpage provides a flow chart and questions to help you choose
which TAS report fits your needs. You can read more about each of the reports in the
TAS Guide [PDF – 2 MB] and TAS quick reference guides.   Q6: What is the difference
between the TAS reports and TAS dashboard? The TAS reports and TAS dashboard are
both tools to help stewards identify where stewardship efforts may have the greatest
impact.  The  TAS  reports  display  AU-CADs  for  the  most  recent  complete  12  calendar
months  at  the  group,  facility,  location  group,  and  location  level.  The  TAS  reports  are
modifiable and allow you to drill down AU-CAD values by a variety of factors. The TAS
dashboard  allows  you  to  visualize  AU-CAD  values  over  time  by  quarter  for  the  most
recent complete four calendar quarters at the group, facility, and location level. Unlike
the  TAS  Reports,  the  time  period  and  level  of  aggregation  displayed  by  the  TAS
Dashboard cannot be changed.   Q7: How many months of data are included in the TAS
reports? Can I include more months? By default, the TAS reports use data reported from
the most recent 12 calendar months. Specifically, a TAS report run on July 15, 2022, will
automatically include all reported AU data from July 2021 through June 2022. You can
modify  the  output  to  display  tables  according  to  calendar  year,  half-year,  quarter,  or
month  within  that  12-month  span.  For  example,  a  TAS  report  run  on  July  15,  2022,
using  the  modification  to  “group  by  summaryYQ”  would  produce  4  tables  for  the
quarters in the 12-month span between July 2021-June 2022 (Quarter 3, 2021, Quarter
4, 2021, Quarter 1, 2022, and Quarter 2, 2022). You cannot modify the TAS reports to
include additional months outside of the most recent 12 calendar months.   Q8: What
locations are included in the TAS reports and TAS dashboard? The TAS reports and TAS
dashboard include only those location types that can generate SAARs; in other words,
the same locations in your SAAR reports will also be included in the TAS reports. See
question #3 in the SAARs section for more information on which locations are included
in the SAARs. 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-au.html
