Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Responders are likely to come into contact with a mixture of
illicit drugs during routine job duties. These mixtures of illicit drugs can include cocaine,
methamphetamines, cannabinoids, cathinones, and opioids such as fentanyl and heroin
for example. Exposure* to illicit drugs can be harmful. Although the components of illicit
drug  mixtures  might  not  be  known  at  the  time,  emergency  responders  can  use  the
following  information  to  learn  about  safe  operating  procedures,  and  proper  use  of
personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  when  responding  to  incidents  that  may  involve
illicit  drugs.  NIOSH  offers  the  following  recommendations  to  help  prevent  emergency
responders’ exposures to illicit drugs, including fentanyl: NIOSH has developed a tool-kit
for first responders to help with training on this topic. Responders should follow their
department’s established work practices as well as these recommendations when illicit
drugs are known or suspected to be present. Illicit drugs can be in powder, pill, or liquid
forms. Emergency responders can come into contact with illicit drugs by: Pre-Hospital
Patient Care: Emergency medical services (EMS) providers, including first responders,
fire  department  and  private  companies  who  attend  to  patients  with  suspected  illicit
drug overdose. Responders may encounter illicit drugs or drug paraphernalia on or near
the  patient.  Law  Enforcement  Routine  Duties:  Officers  who  perform  day-to-day  law
enforcement duties may come into contact with illicit drugs during the course of their
daily  activities  such  as  traffic  stops,  apprehending  and  searching  subjects,  and
responding to overdose calls. Law Enforcement Investigation and Evidence Collection:
Law enforcement personnel who conduct investigations and handle evidence related to
illicit  drugs.  Activities  may  include  carrying  out  search  warrants  and  collecting,
transporting, processing, and storing evidence. Evidence collection activities in the field
have  the  potential  to  aerosolize  powders.  Law  enforcement  personnel  who  handle
evidence  in  the  chain  of  custody  have  the  potential  to  come  into  contact  with  illicit
drugs  unless  steps  are  in  place  to  prevent  exposures.  Special  Operations  and
Decontamination:  Workers  who  conduct  special  operations  where  exposure  to  large
amounts  of  illicit  drugs,  including  fentanyl  are  expected  and  may  enter  the  air.
Examples  include  hazardous  material  incident  response  teams  and  law  enforcement
officers carrying out search warrants at large scale illicit drug processing or distribution
sites,  or  law  enforcement  officers  participating  in  tactical  operations.  The  following
table provides PPE recommendations for protection against potential exposure to illicit
drugs.  Identify  the  PPE  appropriate  for  the  risk  by  first  selecting  the  correct  job
category,  as  defined  above,  and  then  the  potential  level  of  exposure  anticipated.
Potential exposure levels are defined as follows: Minimal: Response to a situation where
it is suspected that illicit drugs may be present, but no illicit drug products are visible
Moderate:  Response  to  a  situation  where  small  amounts  of  illicit  drugs  in  powder  or
liquid are visible High: Response to a situation where large amounts of illicit drugs in
liquid or powder form are visible It is important to recognize that the potential exposure
level initially selected can change and that PPE should be adjusted accordingly. Higher
levels of PPE may be necessary to protect responders from exposure to other hazards
(e.g.  in  a  methamphetamine  lab)  that  may  also  be  present  in  addition  to  the  illicit
drugs.  These  recommendations  cover  examples  of  common  exposures  but  are  not
intended to prescribe PPE for every responder or exposure or discuss all PPE options. 
Responders  who  perform  jobs  where  illicit  drugs  including  fentanyl  may  be  present
should  receive  special  training  in  how  to  conduct  an  on-scene  risk  assessment.
 Responders  should  demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  following:  NIOSH  has
developed a tool-kit for first responders to help with training on this topic. Naloxone will
not  reverse  overdoses  from  other  drugs,  such  as  alcohol,  benzodiazepines,  cocaine,
cannabinoids, or amphetamines.  In addition, recent scientific literature has suggested
that toxic effects of fentanyl and its analogues may include compromised breathing due
to  mechanisms  not  reversible  by  naloxone  alone.  Immediate  definitive  medical
attention  is  needed  for  every  suspected  drug  overdose  situation.  *The  Centers  for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has no occupational exposure data on illicit drugs
for workers that may come into contact with illicit drugs including drugs such as illicitly
manufactured  fentanyl,  cocaine,  methamphetamine,  etc.  There  are  no  established
federal
 or
 consensus
 occupational
 exposure
 limits
 for
 illicit
 drugs.
 The
recommendations  provided  are  based  on  the  reported  toxicity  and  the  chemical  and
physical  properties  of  illicit  drugs;  recommendations  from  NIOSH  health  hazard
evaluation reports about law enforcement personnel exposures to other illicit drugs and
chemicals;  and  the  basic  principles  of  industrial  hygiene.  As  new  research  becomes
available, these recommendations will be updated. Click here to visit the Opioids topic
page for more information.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/fentanyl/risk.html
