Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Safety working with illicit drugs: A tool-kit for First Responders
Click  here  to  visit  Fentanyl  and  its  analogues  pose  a  potential  hazard  to  a  variety  of
responders who could come into contact with these drugs in the course of their work.
Possible exposure routes to fentanyl and its analogues can vary based on the source
and  form  of  the  drug.  Responders  are  most  likely  to  encounter  illicitly  manufactured
fentanyl and its analogues in powder, tablet, and liquid form.  Potential exposure routes
of  greatest  concern  include  inhalation,  mucous  membrane  contact,  ingestion,  and
percutaneous  exposure  (e.g.,  needlestick).   Any  of  these  exposure  routes  can
potentially  result  in  a  variety  of  symptoms  that  can  include  the  rapid  onset  of
life-threatening respiratory depression. Skin contact is also a potential exposure route,
but is not likely to lead to overdose unless large volumes of highly concentrated powder
are encountered over an extended period of time.  Brief skin contact with fentanyl or its
analogues  is  not  expected  to  lead  to  toxic  effects  if  any  visible  contamination  is
promptly  removed.   There  are  no  established  federal  or  consensus  occupational
exposure  limits  for  fentanyl  or  its  analogues.  NIOSH  has  identified  the  following  job
categories as positions where responders might come into contact with fentanyl or its
analogues. NIOSH has no occupational exposure data on fentanyl or its analogues for
emergency responders. These recommendations are based on the reported toxicity and
the chemical and physical properties of fentanyl and its analogues; NIOSH guidance for
other similar chemicals (or in the same family); recommendations from previous NIOSH
health hazard evaluation reports about law enforcement personnel exposures to other
drugs  and  chemicals;  and  the  basic  principles  of  industrial  hygiene.  As  new  research
becomes  available,  these  recommendations  will  be  updated.  With  all  first  responder
operations  involving  hazardous  materials,  standard  safe  work  practices  must  be
followed when fentanyl or its analogues are known or suspected to be present. When
arriving  at  a  scene,  all  responders  should  analyze  the  incident,  assess  the  risk  for
hazards, and determine whether fentanyl or other drugs are suspected to be present.
Responders should follow established work practices as well as these recommendations
when fentanyl or its analogues are known or suspected to be present. Responders who
perform jobs where fentanyl or its analogues are reasonably anticipated to be present
should  receive  special  training  in  conducting  an  on-scene  risk  assessment  related  to
fentanyl  and  its  analogues  and  demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  following:
Employers must comply with OSHA’s hazardous materials standard (29 CFR 1910.120)
when conducting clean-up operations involving hazardous substances. When required,
responders should be trained on the potential hazards they might encounter and the
necessary  knowledge  and  skills  to  perform  their  work  with  minimal  risk  to  their  own
safety  and  health  and  that  of  other  responders.  The  following  table  provides  PPE
recommendations for protection against fentanyl and its analogues. Identifying the PPE
appropriate for the risk is done by first selecting the correct job category, as defined
above,  and  then  the  level  of  exposure  anticipated.  Exposure  levels  are  defined  as
follows: It is important to recognize that the exposure level initially selected can change
and  PPE  should  be  adjusted  accordingly.  Additionally,  higher  levels  of  PPE  may  be
necessary  to  protect  responders  from  exposure  to  other  chemicals  that  may  also  be
present  in  addition  to  fentanyl.  These  recommendations  cover  examples  of  common
exposures, but are not intended to prescribe PPE for every responder or exposure or
discuss  all  PPE  options.  In  all  cases,  employers  must  identify  hazards  to  which  their
workers might be exposed and provide appropriate PPE to protect them. All PPE should
be used in accordance with OSHA’s PPE standard (29 CFR 1910.132). When required,
respirator  use  should  be  in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  respiratory  protection
program  in  accordance  with  the  OSHA  respiratory  protection  standard  (29  CFR
1910.134) and other requirements. Responders who need to wear respirators must be
medically  cleared,  trained,  and  fit-tested  for  respirator  use.  Detailed  information  on
respiratory  protection  programs,  including  fit-testing  procedures,  can  be  accessed  at
OSHA’s  respiratory  protection  eTool  at  http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/respiratory.
Responders  who  come  into  contact  with  fentanyl  should  immediately  use  soap  and
water  to  thoroughly  wash  and  rinse  contaminated  skin.  They  should  take  care  not  to
break the skin during the decontamination process and to cover all open wounds. Do
not  use  hand  sanitizers  or  bleach  solutions  to  clean  contaminated  skin.   All
contaminated clothing should be removed and laundered, being careful not to disturb
any  areas  of  contamination.   Shower  immediately  after  a  potential  exposure.
Decontamination  of  reusable  PPE  and  equipment  should  be  done  according  to  the
manufacturer’s  recommendations.  Contaminated  single  use  PPE  should  be  placed  in
labeled durable 6 mil polyethylene bags and disposed of appropriately. Working dogs,
especially  police  K-9s  performing  detection  activities,  are  also  at  risk  of  exposure  to
fentanyl  and  its  analogues.  As  is  recommended  by  the  Interagency  Board’s  August
2017  document  regarding  opioids  (see  Other  Resources),  working  dogs  should  be
removed  from  an  area  where  suspect  synthetic  opioids  are  encountered.  If  exposed,
residual  drug  powder  might  remain  on  the  dog’s  body;  therefore,  the  proper
precautions and procedures mentioned above should be employed by those handling
the dog. A video, created by the University of Illinois, College of Veterinary Medicine, is
available as an educational tool for licensed veterinarians who might be asked to assess
and  treat  potentially  exposed  working  dogs  (see  Other  Resources).  This  video  should
not be used as a substitute for a consultation with a treating veterinarian. In the case of
a  suspected  canine  overdose,  contact  the  canine’s  treating  veterinarian  immediately.
Click here to visit the Opioids topic page for more information.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/fentanyl/risk_1.html
