Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.  F2011-08 Date Released: June 2011  On January 26, 2011, a
38-year-old male career fire fighter recruit (“Trainee”) participated in an entry-level fire
fighter  certification  class.  The  training  included  maneuvering  through  a  tunnel  maze
while wearing full turnout gear and self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). After he
completed  most  of  the  maze  evolution,  the  Trainee’s  SCBA  became  stuck  inside  the
tunnel. He tried to free himself for several minutes; meanwhile, his SCBA became low
on air. Instructors removed the Trainee from the maze and noted that he was breathing
hard  and  complaining  of  nausea.  After  rehabilitation,  his  symptoms  resolved,  and  his
vital signs returned to normal. The Trainee went on to complete the basement search
portion of the smokehouse training without difficulty. After lunch, the Trainee repeated
the maze evolution and became stuck in the same location. After assuring instructors
he  was  okay,  the  Trainee  suddenly  became  unresponsive.  Instructors  removed  the
Trainee from the maze and found him unresponsive, not breathing, and without a pulse.
An ambulance was requested, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was begun, and an
automated  external  defibrillator  was  utilized;  no  shock  was  advised.  Paramedics
assigned  to  a  nearby  flight  ambulance  responded  and  began  advanced  life  support
including the administration of intravenous cardiac resuscitation medications. A cardiac
monitor was placed, revealing asystole (no heart beat) and pulseless electrical activity.
The  ambulance  arrived  about  11  minutes  later  and  transported  the  Trainee  to  the
hospital’s emergency department (ED), where CPR and advanced life support treatment
continued. Approximately 47 minutes after his collapse, despite CPR and advanced life
support,  the  Trainee  died.  The  death  certificate  and  the  autopsy,  completed  by  the
medical examiner, listed “dilated cardiomyopathy” due to “hypertensive cardiovascular
disease”  as  the  cause  of  death.  NIOSH  investigators  concluded  that  the  Trainee’s
underlying  cardiomyopathy  coupled  with  the  physical  exertion  involved  in  performing
the  fire  fighter  training  triggered  his  sudden  cardiac  death.  NIOSH  investigators  offer
the  following  recommendations  to  address  general  safety  and  health  issues.  It  is
unlikely,  however,  that  any  of  these  recommendations  would  have  prevented  the
Trainee’s death.    On January 26, 2011, a 38-year-old male career fire fighter trainee
suffered sudden cardiac death during fire fighter training. Despite CPR and advanced
life support, the Trainee died. NIOSH was notified of this fatality on January 27, 2011, by
the U.S. Fire Administration. NIOSH contacted the affected fire department (FD) and the
state fire training academy (SFTA) on January 27, 2011, to gather additional information
and  on  April  19,  2011,  to  initiate  the  investigation.  On  April  26,  2011,  a  safety  and
occupational health specialist from the NIOSH Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation Team
conducted  an  on-site  investigation  of  the  incident.  During  the  investigation,  NIOSH
personnel  interviewed  the  following  people:   NIOSH  personnel  reviewed  the  following
documents:   Background  State  Fire  Training  Academy.  The  SFTA  provides  fire  and
emergency medical service (EMS) training for career and volunteer members. A variety
of training courses are offered at the SFTA including the Fire Fighter I and II course in
which  the  Trainee  was  participating.  The  25-acre  facility  is  composed  of  a  1-story
smokehouse with a basement (Figure 1), a 5-story drill tower, a 1-story burn building,
liquid  propane  props,  auto  extrication  props,  a  cascade  system,  and  a  fire  station
(under  construction),  all  built  according  to  NFPA  1402,  Guide  to  Building  Fire  Service
Training Centers [NFPA 2007a]. Also located on the SFTA grounds is a flight ambulance
staffed 24 hours a day with a flight nurse, paramedics, and a pilot. The air ambulance is
an independent agency not associated with the SFTA. Figure 1: Smokehouse   At the
time of this incident, medical clearance was not required for trainees, however, on their
SFTA application, trainees were asked to list allergies or medical conditions that would
require  special  consideration  during  attendance  at  the  Academy.  The  Trainee  did  not
list any conditions. Since this incident, applicants must now be medically cleared by a
physician  (personal  or  FD)  within  the  past  year.  The  medical  clearance  statement  is
given to the SFTA deputy director who makes the final determination whether to clear
the  fire  fighter  for  training.  The  Fire  Fighter  I  and  II  courses  consist  of  a  progressive
combination of classroom work, fitness exercises, and fire fighter drills lasting 8 hours
per day for 8 weeks. At the conclusion of the Fire Fighter II training, students must pass
the Fire Fighter Encounter Agility Test (FEAT) within the allotted time (Appendix A). The
training scheduled for January 26, 2011, consisted of navigating the maze tunnel while
wearing full turnout gear and SCBA (on-air) and conducting a simulated search in heavy
smoke  conditions  using  a  right-hand  search  pattern.  The  maze  tunnel,  where  the
Trainee became stuck and unresponsive, was inside the smokehouse. The tunnel was
constructed of three plywood sections in an inverted “U” arrangement (Figure 2). The
three sections could be quickly opened and disassembled so that fire fighters could be
assisted  quickly  if  needed  (Figure  3).  The  tunnel’s  interior  measures  2  feet  by  2  feet
(Figure  4)  and  tests  students  for  claustrophobia,  Fire  Fighter  I  critical  performance
standards, and restricted passage negotiation as required in NFPA 1001, Standard for
Fire Fighter Professional Qualifications [NFPA 2008a].  Figure 2: Maze tunnel   Figure 3:
Maze sections   Figure 4: Maze tunnel interior   Incident. On Wednesday, January 26,
2011,  28  students  met  at  0745  hours  to  begin  their  8th  day  of  Fire  Fighter  I  and  II
training. Weather conditions included a temperature of 27 degrees Fahrenheit and 96%
relative  humidity  [Weather  Underground  2011].  Two  instructors  discussed  the  day’s
scheduled  training,  which  included  a  maze  tunnel  and  basement  search.  Instructors
then inspected participants’ turnout gear and SCBAs. The Trainee’s SCBA was a Scott
PosiChek3®  with  integrated  personal  alert  safety  system.  His  SCBA  was  full  of  air
(2,216  pounds  per  square  inch  [psi]  capacity),  and  he  had  been  fit  tested.  Students
entered  the  maze  tunnel  individually.  The  course  was  typically  completed  within  5
minutes, but it could take up to 10 minutes if problems were encountered. The Trainee
was  the  last  student  to  enter  the  tunnel  and  had  his  hand  on  the  leg  of  the  student
ahead of him. While moving through the maze, instructors remained in voice contact
with the Trainee from just outside the maze wall. He was near the end of the tunnel at
the second 90-degree turn when he became stuck (Figure 2). The Trainee’s SCBA was
caught  on  a  wooden  cross  beam  and  became  low  on  air  as  he  attempted  to  free
himself. At that point the instructors pulled the tunnel apart, and the Trainee crawled
out. Once outside the smokehouse, the Trainee doffed his SCBA and turnout coat and
complained of nausea. His vital signs were taken (blood pressure of 120/78 millimeters
of mercury [mmHg], pulse rate of 100 beats per minute) as he entered rehab (hydration
and  rest).  After  a  10-minute  rest,  he  donned  his  gear  and  completed  the  basement
right-hand search component of the training without incident. The class was dismissed
for  lunch  at  1150  hours.  At  1300  hours  participants  reassembled  to  repeat  the  maze
tunnel drill. As the Trainee encountered the second 90-degree turn, he again became
stuck.  The  Trainee  told  instructors  that  he  was  okay  while  he  tried  several  times  to
move  forward.  At  this  point  an  instructor  reached  through  a  crack  in  the  maze  to
disengage the Trainee’s SCBA bottle. When asked to move forward again, the Trainee
did  not  respond.  It  appeared  that  the  Trainee  was  pushing  on  the  inside  wall  of  the
tunnel  to  escape,  so  the  instructors  opened  the  escape  hatch  and  pulled  the  tunnel
apart. An instructor grabbed the Trainee’s SCBA strap and pulled him from the maze
and  outside  the  building  (1537  hours).  The  Trainee  was  unresponsive,  not  breathing,
and had no pulse; an ambulance was called. The Trainee’s SCBA, helmet, and turnout
coat were removed. His SCBA contained approximately 2,000 psi of air. CPR was begun
as  the  medical  bag  and  an  AED  were  retrieved.  The  AED  advised  “no  shock.”
Paramedics from the air ambulance arrived within 2 minutes and began advanced life
support including placing an intravenous line and administering cardiac medications. A
cardiac  monitor  was  placed  revealing  asystole  and  pulseless  electrical  activity.  The
ambulance  arrived  at  1548  hours;  after  three  unsuccessful  intubation  attempts,  a
Combitube® was placed. The ambulance departed the scene at 1600 hours en route to
the hospital’s ED. The ambulance arrived at the ED at 1610 hours where advanced life
support continued with no change in his clinical condition. At 1622 hours the Trainee
was pronounced dead by the attending physician (45 minutes after his collapse), and
resuscitation  efforts  were  stopped.  Medical  Findings.  The  death  certificate  and  the
autopsy,  completed  by  the  medical  examiner,  listed  “dilated  cardiomyopathy”  due  to
“hypertensive  cardiovascular  disease”  as  the  cause  of  death.  Key  findings  from  the
autopsy included cardiomegaly, biventricular dilatation, and no coronary artery disease.
Histologic  (microscopic)  examination  revealed  “mild  increased  inflammation  between
cardiomyocyte  fibers”  and  “widening  of  the  myocardial  fiber  and  enlarged  boxcar
nuclei,”  findings  consistent  with  cardiomyopathy.  Specific  findings  from  the  autopsy
report  are  listed  in  Appendix  B.  The  Trainee  was  72  inches  tall  and  weighed  308
pounds, giving him a body mass index of 41.8 kilograms per meters squared (kg/m2). A
body  mass  index  greater  than  30.0  is  considered  obese  [CDC  2011].  In  April  2007,  a
single episode of hyperlipidemia (a low density lipoprotein level of 137 milligrams per
deciliter)  was  identified  during  an  annual  checkup  with  his  personal  physician,  but
subsequent  tests  were  normal.  He  was  found  to  have  high  blood  pressure  (130/92
mmHg)  in  March  2010  but  was  not  prescribed  a  blood  pressure-lowering  medication.
Subsequent  visits  to  his  personal  physician  in  September  2010  and  at  the  FD
preplacement  medical  evaluation  in  November  2010  revealed  blood  pressures  of
120/80  mmHg  and  138/88  mmHg,  respectively.  According  to  medical  records,  no
electrocardiogram or echocardiogram was ever performed. The Trainee did not report
heart-related  symptoms  (chest  pain,  chest  pressure,  angina,  shortness  of  breath  on
exertion, etc.) at any time to his physicians, his family, the FD, or the SFTA. The SCBA
the  Trainee  was  wearing  was  tested  by  the  manufacturer,  and  no  problems  were
identified.  At the time of the NIOSH investigation, the career FD consisted of four fire
stations with 60 uniformed personnel serving 28,000 residents in a geographic area of
29 square miles. Membership and Training. The FD requires new fire fighter applicants
to be 18 years of age; complete an application; and pass a candidate physical ability
test (Appendix C), an oral interview, a drug screen, and a psychological evaluation prior
to being approved. The candidate is then offered a job and, if the job is accepted, the
new member begins training. After CPR training, the new member is sent to SFTA for
the  8-week,  380-hour  course  to  become  certified  to  the  Fire  Fighter  I  and  II,
EMT-Ambulance,  and  Hazardous  Materials  Technician  levels.  Once  the  member
graduates, the FD places the member on a shift, working 24 hours on duty, 24 hours off
duty for three tours, then off duty for 4 days. The state requires career firefighters to be
certified  as  a  Firefighter  II  within  the  first  year  of  employment.  There  is  no  minimum
training requirement for volunteer firefighters. The Trainee was attending the SFTA for
FFI and FFII certification. The Trainee had previously taken CPR and First Aid courses
and was hired by his FD 2 months earlier. Preplacement Medical Evaluations. The FD
requires  preplacement  medical  evaluations  for  all  applicants.  Components  of  the
medical evaluation include the following: The evaluations are performed by a contract
physician.  Once  this  evaluation  is  complete,  the  contract  physician  makes  a
determination  regarding  medical  clearance  for  fire  fighting  duties  and  forwards  this
decision to the FD. The Trainee had his medical evaluation on November 16, 2010, and
was  cleared  for  fire  fighting  duties.  Periodic  Medical  Evaluations.  Because  all  FD
members are hazardous materials certified, an annual medical evaluation is required.
Components  of  the  medical  evaluation  include  the  following:  The  evaluations  are
performed  by  a  contract  physician.  Once  this  evaluation  is  complete,  the  contract
physician  makes  a  determination  regarding  medical  clearance  for  fire  fighting  duties
and forwards this decision to the FD. An annual SCBA facepiece fit test is required by
the FD. Annual SCBA medical clearance is not required. Members injured on duty must
be evaluated by the FD contract physician who makes the final determination regarding
return  to  duty.  Health  and  Wellness  Programs.  The  FD  has  no  formal  wellness/fitness
program, but exercise equipment is available in the fire stations, and employees have
access to the local high school weight room. No annual physical ability test is required.
All  SCBAs  are  tested  in  accordance  with  NFPA  1981,  Standard  on  Open-Circuit
Self-Contained  Breathing  Apparatus  (SCBA)  for  Emergency  Services  [NFPA  2007b].
Breathing  air  quality  is  tested  quarterly  in  accordance  with  NFPA  1989,  Standard  on
Breathing  Air  Quality  for  Emergency  Services  [NFPA2008b].   Cardiomyopathy.  The
autopsy revealed dilated cardiomyopathy. Cardiomyopathies are conditions that involve
damage  to  the  heart  muscle  not  due  to  hypertension;  ischemia  (coronary  artery
disease);  or  valvular,  pericardial,  or  congenital  heart  disease  [Wynne  and  Braunwald
2008]. There are three types of cardiomyopathy based on functional impairment: The
Trainee  had  components  of  dilated  and  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy.  Dilated
Cardiomyopathy. Dilated cardiomyopathy is characterized by cardiac enlargement and
impaired  systolic  function  of  one  or  both  ventricles,  congestive  heart  failure,
arrhythmias,  and  emboli  [Dec  and  Fuster  1994].  Microscopic  findings  are  nonspecific,
typically  being  myocyte  hypertrophy  (best  appreciated  as  nuclear  hypertrophy  [i.e.,
“boxcar  nuclei”])  with  varying  degrees  of  interstitial  fibrosis  [Dec  and  Fuster  1994;
Virmani  1997].  As  the  ventricular  function  deteriorates,  the  following  signs  and
symptoms of congestive heart failure appear: shortness of breath with exertion or when
lying flat, ankle swelling, fatigue, weakness, etc. Laboratory studies (radionuclide and
cardiac  catheterization)  are  necessary  to  diagnose  left  ventricular  enlargement  and
dysfunction,  mitral  and/or  tricuspid  regurgitation,  elevated  left-sided  and  often
right-sided  filling  pressures,  elevated  pulmonary  artery  wedge  pressures,  and
diminished  cardiac  output  [Dec  and  Fuster  1994;  Wynne  and  Braunwald  2008].  The
Trainee was asymptomatic and had no laboratory studies conducted, but was found to
have  dilated  cardiomyopathy  and  enlarged  boxcar  nuclei  on  autopsy.  The  incidence
rate  of  dilated  cardiomyopathy  in  the  United  States  is  5  to  8  cases  per  100,000  per
year,  with  an  age-adjusted  prevalence  of  36  cases  per  100,000  [Virmani  1997].
Although most cases of dilated cardiomyopathy are of unknown etiology (idiopathic), a
variety of acquired or hereditary disorders can cause the disorder. These secondary and
potentially reversible forms are listed in Appendix D [Dec and Fuster 1994]. Inherited
factors  account  for  approximately  one  third  of  all  idiopathic  dilated  cardiomyopathy
cases,  and  20%  of  patients  with  idiopathic  dilated  cardiomyopathy  have  at  least  one
first-degree relative with a decreased ejection fraction and cardiomegaly [Michels et al.
1992;  Keeling  et  al.  1995;  Grunig  et  al.  1998].  Although  idiopathic  dilated
cardiomyopathy  can  be  transmitted  as  a  recessive  or  X-linked  trait,  autosomal
dominant inheritance occurs most frequently and exhibits both clinical variability and
genetic heterogeneity [Fatkin et al. 1999]. It is unclear if the Trainee’s idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy  was  due  to  inherited  factors  or  an  acquired  condition  such  as  viral
myocarditis. The Trainee had no medical history consistent with viral myocarditis and
no  known  relatives  with  cardiomyopathy.  In  either  case,  because  of  the  possibility  of
the condition being inherited, first-degree relatives should consult with their physicians
regarding  when,  or  if,  a  screening  echocardiogram  is  warranted.  The  prognosis  for
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy is poor; studies report an average 5-year death rate
of 20% [Ikram et al. 1987; Di Lenarda et al. 1990; Komajda et al. 1990; Sugrue et al.
1992]. Dilated cardiomyopathy is also associated with an increased incidence of sudden
cardiac  death,  mostly  from  arrhythmias  [Dec  and  Fuster  1994;  Bansch  et  al.  2002;
Wynne and Braunwald 2008]. Although sudden death is rarely the initial presentation
[Komajda  et  al.  1990;  Sugrue  et  al.  1992],  it  is  a  common  cause  of  death  among
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy patients, accounting for 28% of all idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy  deaths  [Dec  and  Fuster  1994].  Although  a  variety  of  symptoms  and
medical  tests  can  provide  prognostic  information,  patients  at  greatest  risk  of  sudden
cardiac
 death
 are
 hard
 to
 identify
 [Dec
 and
 Fuster
 1994].
 Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a rare heart condition affecting
approximately 0.2% of the population [Spirito et al. 1997]. Diagnosis is typically made
by  echocardiogram  and  EKG  findings  of  left  ventricular  hypertrophy  by  voltage.  The
Trainee  was  asymptomatic,  and  no  screening  EKG  was  performed.  Most  patients  are
asymptomatic, and sudden cardiac death is often the first clinical manifestation [Wynne
and Braunwald 2001]. Risk factors for sudden death among HCM patients include young
age (less than 30 years old) at diagnosis, a family history of HCM with sudden death, an
abnormal  blood  pressure  response  to  exercise,  severe  symptoms,  nonsustained
ventricular tachycardia, marked hypertrophy, marked left atrial dilatation, and genetic
abnormalities  associated  with  increased  prevalence  of  sudden  death  [Spirito  et  al.
1997;  Olivotto  et  al.  1999;  Wynne  and  Braunwald  2001].  Approximately  half  of  HCM
cases are transmitted genetically, typically as an autosomal dominant trait. Because of
this,  medical  evaluation  of  first-degree  relatives  is  warranted  to  determine  whether
screening  tests  (e.g.,  echocardiogram)  are  appropriate.  Although  hypertension  can
cause both cardiomegaly and left ventricular hypertrophy, given the Trainee’s mild and
short duration of high blood pressure, it is unlikely that hypertension was responsible
for  either  of  these  conditions.  A  much  more  likely  cause  was  the  Trainee’s
cardiomyopathy  (dilated  and/or  hypertrophic).  Sudden  Cardiac  Death.  Epidemiologic
studies have found that heavy physical exertion sometimes immediately precedes and
triggers sudden cardiac death [Albert et al. 2000]. The Trainee performed maze training
while  wearing  full  turnout  gear  and  SCBA.  The  training  is  considered  heavy  physical
activity [AIHA 1971; Gledhill and Jamnik 1992]. NIOSH investigators conclude that the
Trainee  probably  had  a  fatal  cardiac  arrhythmia  associated  with  his  dilated  and
hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy;  this  likely  was  triggered  by  the  physical  stress  of  the
maze  tunnel  training.  Occupational  Medical  Standards  for  Structural  Fire  Fighters.  To
reduce  the  risk  of  sudden  cardiac  arrest  or  other  incapacitating  medical  conditions
among  fire  fighters,  the  NFPA  developed  NFPA  1582,  Standard  on  Comprehensive
Occupational  Medical  Program  for  Fire  Departments  [NFPA  2007c].  This  voluntary
industry  standard  provides  the  components  of  a  preplacement  and  annual  medical
evaluation  and  medical  fitness  for  duty  criteria.  Dilated  cardiomyopathy  is  not
specifically  mentioned  in  NFPA  1582.  However,  it  is  one  type  of  cardiomyopathy,  a
Category  A  condition  for  candidates  that  “precludes  a  person  from  performing  as  a
member in a training or emergency operational environment by presenting a significant
risk  to  the  safety  and  health  of  the  person  or  others”  [NFPA  2007c].  NFPA  considers
HCM a category B medical condition for fire fighter candidates. Category B is defined as
“a  medical  condition  that,  based  on  its  severity  or  degree,  could  (emphasis  ours)
preclude  a  person  from  performing  as  a  fire  fighter  in  a  training  or  emergency
operational environment by presenting a significant risk to the safety and health of the
person  or  others.”  NFPA  1582  notes  this  distinction  in  its  members  section  when  it
states,  “Hypertrophic  obstructive  cardiomyopathy  (idiopathic  hypertrophic  subaortic
stenosis) might compromise the member’s ability to function as an integral component
of a team, where sudden incapacitation can result in mission failure or in risk of injury
or  death  to  civilians  or  other  team  members”  [NFPA  2007c].  The  final  decision  for
clearing  an  individual  with  HCM  for  duty  lies  with  the  FD  physician.  The  Trainee  was
asymptomatic,  and  prior  medical  evaluations  detected  no  cardiac  abnormality.  NFPA
1582  recommends  an  EKG  and  a  chest  x-ray  as  part  of  its  candidate  medical
evaluation. Had an EKG or chest x-ray been conducted as part of the FD’s candidate or
member medical evaluation, it is remotely possible the Trainee’s enlarged heart could
have been detected. However, both EKG and chest x-ray have very low sensitivities to
detect  cardiomegaly  [Kerber  and  Sherman  1975].   NIOSH  investigators  offer  the
following recommendations to address general safety and health issues. However, it is
unlikely that any of these recommendations would have prevented the Trainee’s death.
Recommendation #1: Provide preplacement and annual medical evaluations compliant
with  National  Fire  Protection  Association  (NFPA)  1582  to  fire  fighters.  Guidance
regarding the content and frequency of these medical evaluations can be found in NFPA
1582  and  in  the  International  Association  of  Fire  Fighters  (IAFF)/International
Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC) Fire Service Joint Labor Management Wellness/Fitness
Initiative [NFPA 2007c; IAFF, IAFC 2008]. These evaluations are performed to determine
fire fighters’ medical ability to perform duties without presenting a significant risk to the
safety  and  health  of  themselves  or  others.  To  ensure  improved  health  and  safety  of
candidates  and  members,  and  to  ensure  continuity  of  medical  evaluations,  it  is
recommended the FD and the SFTA comply with this recommendation. However, the FD
and  the  SFTA  are  not  legally  required  to  follow  the  NFPA  standard  or  the  IAFF/IAFC
initiative.  Recommendation  #2:  Perform  a  preplacement  and  an  annual  physical
performance  (physical  ability)  evaluation.  NFPA  1500,  Standard  on  Fire  Department
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Program,  requires  the  fire  department  to  develop
physical  performance  requirements  for  candidates  and  members  who  engage  in
emergency  operations  [NFPA  2007d].  Members  who  engage  in  emergency  operations
must be annually qualified (physical ability test) as meeting these physical performance
standards for structural fire fighters [NFPA 2007d]. This Trainee completed a physical
ability test in October 2010; his fitness level was appropriate for unrestricted duty as a
structural  fire  fighter.  Recommendation  #3:  Ensure  that  fire  fighters  are  cleared  for
return  to  duty  by  a  physician  knowledgeable  about  the  physical  demands  of  fire
fighting,  the  personal  protective  equipment  used  by  fire  fighters,  and  the  various
components of NFPA 1582. Guidance regarding medical evaluations and examinations
for structural fire fighters can be found in NFPA 1582 and in the IAFF/IAFC Fire Service
Joint  Labor  Management  Wellness/Fitness  Initiative  [NFPA  2007c;  IAFF,  IAFC  2008].
According  to  these  guidelines,  the  FD  should  have  an  officially  designated  physician
who is responsible for guiding, directing, and advising the members with regard to their
health, fitness, and suitability for duty. The physician should review job descriptions and
essential  job  tasks  required  for  all  FD  positions  and  ranks  to  understand  the
physiological  and  psychological  demands  of  fire  fighters  and  the  environmental
conditions  under  which  they  must  perform,  as  well  as  the  personal  protective
equipment  they  must  wear  during  various  types  of  emergency  operations.  This
recommendation  is  made  based  on  review  of  the  FD  health  and  medical  programs.
Recommendation #4: Phase in a comprehensive wellness and fitness program for fire
fighters. Guidance for fire department wellness/fitness programs to reduce risk factors
for cardiovascular disease and improve cardiovascular capacity is found in NFPA 1583,
Standard  on  Health-Related  Fitness  Programs  for  Fire  Fighters  and  the  IAFF/IAFC  Fire
Service  Joint  Labor  Management  Wellness/Fitness  Initiative  [IAFF,  IAFC  2008;  NFPA
2008c]. Worksite health promotion programs have been shown to be cost effective by
increasing
 productivity,
 reducing
 absenteeism,
 and
 reducing
 the
 number
 of
work-related injuries and lost work days [Stein et al. 2000; Aldana 2001]. Fire service
health  promotion  programs  have  been  shown  to  reduce  coronary  artery  disease  risk
factors and improve fitness levels, with mandatory programs showing the most benefit
[Dempsey et al. 2002; Womack et al. 2005; Blevins et al. 2006]. A study conducted by
the Oregon Health and Science University reported a savings of more than $1 million
for  each  of  four  large  fire  departments  implementing  the  IAFF/IAFC  wellness/fitness
program compared to four large fire departments not implementing a program. These
savings  were  primarily  due  to  a  reduction  of  occupational  injury/illness  claims  with
additional  savings  expected  from  reduced  future  nonoccupational  healthcare  costs
[Kuehl 2007]. Recommendation #5: Provide fire fighters with medical clearance to wear
SCBA as part of the Fire Department’s medical evaluation program.  The Occupational
Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  Revised  Respiratory  Protection  Standard
requires employers to provide medical evaluations and clearance for employees using
respiratory protection [29 CFR 1910.134]. These clearance evaluations are required for
private industry  employees  and  public  employees  in  states  operating  OSHA-approved
state plans. Arkansas does not operate an OSHA-approved state plan; therefore, neither
the FD nor the SFTA is required to ensure all members have been medically cleared to
wear
 an
 SCBA.
 However,
 we
 recommend
 voluntary
 compliance
 with
 this
recommendation to improve fire fighter health and safety. Recommendation #6: Ask an
independent  third  party  entity  such  as  the  NIOSH  National  Personal  Protective
Technology  Laboratory  to  perform  post-incident  SCBA  inspection  and  testing.  The
NIOSH NPPTL has the expertise to test the function of respiratory protective equipment
used in this incident. The NPPTL staff can evaluate the performance of the SCBA as a
system and provide an independent, third party opinion regarding the functionality of
the SCBA and whether it contributed to the injury/death [NIOSH 2009]. The SCBA in this
incident was tested by the manufacturer and was found to be in proper working order.
While  NIOSH  did  not  suspect  any  SCBA  problem,  we  recommend  testing  by  an
independent  entity.    AIHA  [1971].  Am  Ind  Hyg  Assoc  J  32(8):560–564.   Albert  CM,
Mittleman MA, Chae CU, Lee IM, Hennekens CH, Manson JE [2000]. Triggering of sudden
death  from  cardiac  causes  by  vigorous  exertion.  N  Engl  J  Med  343(19):1355–1361.  
Aldana  SG  [2001].  Financial  impact  of  health  promotion  programs:  a  comprehensive
review of the literature. Am J Health Promot 15(5):296–320.  Bansch D, Antz M, Boczor
S, Volkmer M, Tebbenjohanns J, Seidl K, Block M, Gietzen F, Berger J, Kuck KH [2002].
Primary prevention of sudden cardiac death in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. The
cardiomyopathy  trial  (CAT).  Circulation  105(12):1453–1458.   Blevins  JS,  Bounds  R,
Armstrong E, Coast JR [2006]. Health and fitness programming for fire fighters: does it
produce results? Med Sci Sports Exerc 38(5):S454.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control
and
 Prevention)
 [2011].
 Adult
 BMI
 calculator.
[https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/english_bmi_calculator/re
sults_obese.html?pounds=308&inches=72].  Date  accessed:  July  2011.   CFR.  Code  of
Federal  Regulations.  Washington,  DC:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  Office  of  the
Federal  Register.   Dec  GW,  Fuster  V  [1994].  Medical  progress:  idiopathic  dilated
cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 331(23):1564–1575.  Dempsey WL, Stevens SR, Snell CR
[2002]. Changes in physical performance and medical measures following a mandatory
firefighter wellness program. Med Sci Sports Exerc 34(5):S258.  Di Lenarda A, Lardieri
G,  Mestroni  L,  Miani  D,  Pinamonti  B,  Salvi  A,  Singuara  G,  Camerini  F  [1990].  Dilated
cardiomyopathy: changing survival in the last 20 years. Circulation 82:Suppl III:III-387,
abstract.  Fatkin D, MacRae C, Sasaki T, Wolff MR, Porcu M, Frenneaux M, Atherton J,
Vidaillet HJ, Spudich S, De Girolami U, Seidman JG, Seidman CE, Muntoni F, Muehle G,
Johnson W, McDonough B [1999]. Missense mutations in the rod domain of the Lamin
A/C gene as causes of dilated cardiomyopathy and conduction-system disease. N Engl J
Med 341(23):1715–1724.  Gledhill N, Jamnik VK [1992]. Characterization of the physical
demands of firefighting. Can J Spt Sci 17(3):207–213.  Grunig E, Tasman JA, Kucherer H,
Franz  W,  Kubler  W,  Katsu  HA  [1998].  Frequency  and  phenotypes  of  familial  dilated
cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 31(1):186–194.  IAFF, IAFC [2008]. The fire service
joint
 labor
 management
 wellness/fitness
 initiative.
 3rd
 ed.
 Washington,
 DC:
International Association of Fire Fighters, International Association of Fire Chiefs.  Ikram
H, Williamson HG, Won M, Crozier IG, Wells EJ [1987]. The course of idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy in New Zealand. Br Heart J 57(6):521–527.  Keeling PJ, Gang Y, Smith
G,  Seo  H,  Bent  SE,  Murday  V,  Caforio  AL,  McKenna  WJ  [1995].  Familial  dilated
cardiomyopathy in the United Kingdom. Br Heart J 73(5):417–421.  Kerber RE, Sherman
B [1975]. Echocardiographic evaluation of pericardial effusion in myxedema. Incidence
and  biochemical  and  clinical  correlations.  Circ  52(5):823–827.   Komajda  M,  Jais  JP,
Reeves F, Goldfarb B, Bouhour JB, Juillieres Y, Lanfranchi J, Peycelon P, Geslin PH, Carrie
D,
 Grosgogeat
 Y
 [1990].
 Factors
 predicting
 mortality
 in
 idiopathic
 dilated
cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 11(9):824–831.  Kuehl K [2007]. Economic impact of the
wellness  fitness  initiative.  Presentation  at  the  2007  John  P.  Redmond  Symposium  in
Chicago, IL on October 23, 2007.  Michels VV, Moll PP, Miller FA, Tajik AJ, Chu JS, Driscoll
DJ,  Burnett  JC,  Rodeheffer  RJ,  Chesebro  JH,  Tazelaar  HD  [1992].  The  frequency  of
familial  dilated  cardiomyopathy  in  a  series  of  patients  with  idiopathic  dilated
cardiomyopathy.  N  Engl  J  Med  326(2):77–82.   NFPA  [2007a].  Guide  to  building  fire
service training centers. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 1402. 
NFPA [2007b]. Standard on Open-Circuit Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) for
Emergency  Services.  Quincy,  MA:  National  Fire  Protection  Association.  NFPA  1981.  
NFPA  [2007c].  Standard  on  comprehensive  occupational  medical  program  for  fire
departments.  Quincy,  MA:  National  Fire  Protection  Association.  NFPA  1582.   NFPA
[2007d]. Standard on fire department occupational safety and health program. Quincy,
MA: National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 1500.  NFPA [2008a]. Standard for fire
fighter  professional  qualifications.  Quincy,  MA:  National  Fire  Protection  Association.
NFPA 1001.  NFPA [2008b]. Standard on Breathing Air Quality for Emergency Services.
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 1989.   NFPA [2008c]. Standard
on health-related fitness programs for fire fighters. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection
Association.  NFPA  1583.   NIOSH  [2009].  The  National  Personal  Protective  Technology
Laboratory.  [https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/about.html].  Date  accessed:  July  2011.  
Olivotto  I,  Maron  BJ,  Montereggi  A,  Mazzuoli  F,  Dolara  A,  Cecchi  F  [1999].  Prognostic
value  of  systemic  blood  pressure  response  during  exercise  in  a  community-based
patient
 population
 with
 hypertrophic
 cardiomyopathy.
 J
 Am
 Coll
 Cardiol
33(7):2044–2051.   Spirito  P,  Seidman  CE,  McKenna  WJ,  Maron  BJ  [1997].  The
management  of  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy.  N  Engl  J  Med  336(11):775–785.   Stein
AD,  Shakour  SK,  Zuidema  RA  [2000].  Financial  incentives,  participation  in  employer
sponsored  health  promotion,  and  changes  in  employee  health  and  productivity:
HealthPlus health quotient program. J Occup Environ Med 42(12):1148–1155.  Sugrue
DD, Rodeheffer RJ, Codd MB, Ballard DJ, Fuster V, Gersh BJ [1992]. The clinical course of
idiopathic  dilated  cardiomyopathy:  a  population-based  study.  Ann  Intern  Med
117(2):117–123.  Virmani R [1997]. Cardiomyopathy, idiopathic dilated. In: Bloom S, ed.
Diagnostic  criteria  for  cardiovascular  pathology  acquired  diseases.  Philadelphia,  PA:
Lippencott-Raven, pp. 26–27.  Womack JW, Humbarger CD, Green JS, Crouse SF [2005].
Coronary artery disease risk factors in firefighters: effectiveness of a one-year voluntary
health and wellness program. Med Sci Sports Exerc 37(5):S385.  Weather Underground
[2011].
 History
 for
 El
 Dorado,
 AR.
[http://www.wunderground.com/history/airport/KELD/2011/1/26/DailyHistory.html?req_c
ity=NA&req_state=NA&req_statename=NA].  Date  accessed:  July  2011.   Wynne  J,
Braunwald E [2001]. The cardiomyopathies and myocarditides. In: Braunwald E, Zipes
DP,  Libby  P,  eds.  Heart  disease:  a  text  of  cardiovascular  medicine.  6th  ed.  Vol.  2.
Philadelphia,  PA:  W.B.  Saunders  Company,  pp.  1760–1774.   Wynne  J,  Braunwald  E
[2008]. Cardiomyopathy and myocarditis. In: Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL, Hauser
SL,  Longo  DL,  Jameson  JL,  Loscalzo  J,  eds.  Harrison’s  principles  of  internal  medicine.
17th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 1481–1488.  This incident was investigated by the
NIOSH  Fire  Fighter  Fatality  Investigation  and  Prevention  Program,  Cardiovascular
Disease Component in Cincinnati, Ohio. Mr. Tommy Baldwin (MS) led the investigation
and co-authored the report. Mr. Baldwin is a Safety and Occupational Health Specialist,
a  National  Association  of  Fire  Investigators  (NAFI)  Certified  Fire  and  Explosion
Investigator, an International Fire Service Accreditation Congress (IFSAC) Certified Fire
Officer I, and a former Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Technician. Dr. Thomas Hales
(MD,  MPH)  provided  medical  consultation  and  co-authored  the  report.  Dr.  Hales  is  a
member  of  the  NFPA  Technical  Committee  on  Occupational  Safety  and  Heath,  and
Vice-Chair  of  the  Public  Safety  Medicine  Section  of  the  American  College  of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine (ACOEM).  Firefighter Encounter Agility Test
(FEAT)  [SFTA  2011]  Wearing  full  turnout  gear  including  SCBA,  the  fire  fighter  must
complete the following tests within 12 minutes: (1) Drag a 100-foot length of uncharged
2½-inch  hoseline  (started  with  hose  on  shoulder),  and  connect  and  disconnect  the
nozzle; (2) Roll and unroll a 50-foot length of 2½-inch hoseline; (3) Move three 2½-inch
hoseline rolls in circles (three rolls stacked on top of each other), (1) one roll moved to a
second location 20 feet away, (2) another roll moved from the first location to the third
location 20 feet away, (3) roll moved from first location to third location, (4) roll moved
from second location to third location to form a stack of three donut hoses; (4) Ladder
the 2nd story window, ascend ladder and touch window sill, implement leg lock, then
descend;  (5)  Pound  wooden  block  with  16-pound  sledge  hammer  (30  times)  as  in  a
ventilation chop; (6) Carry a high rise pack (50 feet of 2½-inch hoseline) to the fourth
floor. Set the high rise pack down and hoist the high rise pack tied to a rope with the
other end of the rope tied to the hand rail on the fourth floor. Lower the hoisted high
rise  pack  to  the  ground  or  the  starting  position.  Pick  up  the  original  high  rise  pack,
descend the stairs to ground level, and set the pack down; (7) Drag the rescue manikin
30  feet  and  then  back  30  feet  to  the  starting  position.  Once  the  manikin  is  dropped,
travel approximately 75 feet to the finish line. If students are unsuccessful on their first
attempt, they receive immediate remedial training and are given a second chance to
complete  the  evolution.  Students  are  allowed  two  evolution  attempts.  Students
unsuccessful  students  after  the  second  attempt  do  not  pass  the  training  program.  
Reference State Fire Training Academy (SFTA) [2011]. Firefighter Encounter Agility Test
(FEAT).    Autopsy  Findings   References   Colucci  WS,  Braunwald  E  [1997].
Pathophysiology of heart failure. In: Braunwald, ed. Heart disease. 5th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: W.B. Saunders Company, p. 401.  Connolly HM, Oh JK [2012]. Echocardiography. In:
Bonow  RO,  Mann  DL,  Zipes  DP,  Libby  P,  Braunwald  E,  eds.  Heart  disease:  a  text  of
cardiovascular  medicine.  9th  ed.  Vol.  1.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Elsevier  Saunders,  p.  216.  
Silver  MM  and  Silver  MD  [2001].  Examination  of  the  heart  and  of  cardiovascular
specimens  in  surgical  pathology.  In:  Silver  MD,  Gotlieb  AI,  Schoen  FJ,  eds.
Cardiovascular  pathology.  3rd  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,  pp.  8–9.   
Candidate  Physical  Agility  Test  (CPAT)  [Fire  Department  2011]  Candidates  must
perform  all  8  components  of  the  candidate  physical  agility  test  on  a  pass/fail  basis.
Candidates  are  fitted  with  a  turnout  coat  and  an  SCBA,  weighing  approximately  30
pounds  together.  Candidates  must  complete  the  untimed  ladder  climb  prior  to
attempting the timed portion of the test; the time limit is 7 minutes. Time begins when
the student takes the first step at the Hose Hoist portion. Components of the CPAT test
include  the  following:  (1)  Ladder  Climb  (not  timed):  After  receiving  a  safety  belt  and
instructions  for  climbing  the  75-foot  aerial  ladder,  the  applicant  shall  climb  a  fully
extended ladder, touch the top rung and descend the ladder. (2) Hose Hoist (timed):
Three taped rolls of 2½-inch hoseline are located 20 feet behind the fire apparatus. The
candidate will move the rolls one at a time from the starting point to the rear running
board of the fire apparatus. The candidate then steps upon the rear running board and
places the hose over the top bar onto the hose bed. After all three hose rolls have been
placed on the apparatus, the candidate then removes the hose rolls one at a time and
takes  the  hose  back  to  the  starting  point.  (3)  Ladder  Set-Up  (timed):  A  14-foot  roof
ladder, weighing approximately 45 pounds, will be lying on the ground with the feet of
the ladder against the building. The ladder will be raised to a vertical position against
the building. The candidate will then adjust the ladder to a simulated climbing angle.
The  ladder  will  then  be  returned  to  its  original  position.  To  pick  up  the  ladder,  the
candidate will assume a crouching position and grasp the top rung of the ladder with
both hands. The candidate will stand upright and raise the end of the ladder above his
or her head with the bottom of the ladder remaining on the ground against the building.
The  candidate  will  raise  the  ladder  by  walking  forward  grasping  consecutive  rungs,
without dropping or losing control of the ladder, until the ladder is placed in a vertical
position against the building. The candidate will then grasp the sides of the ladder and
bring  the  bottom  of  the  ladder  out  to  a  comfortable  climbing  position.  The  candidate
will  then  place  the  ladder  back  against  the  building  and  lower  the  ladder  by  walking
backwards, grasping consecutive rungs and place the ladder in its original position on
the ground without dropping or losing control of the ladder. (4) Hose Roll (timed): The
candidate will position his or herself at the male coupling of the 2½-inch hoseline. The
candidate will then bend over and begin rolling the fire hose into a circular roll. The fire
hose must be rolled the entire length of 50 feet. The candidate will then unroll the fire
hose back to the original position. (5) Ventilation (timed): The candidate stands on the
outside rails of the sled and straddles the metal sled. The candidate will strike the metal
sled with the sledge hammer until the metal sled is moved 36 inches. (6) Hose advance
(timed):  The  candidate  advances  a  charged,  100-foot  length  of  1¾-inch  hoseline  75
feet,  then  opens  the  nozzle,  and  sprays  water.  The  candidate  then  closes  the  nozzle
and places the nozzle on the ground. (7) Stairwell Exercise (timed): The candidate will
pick up a roll of 2½-inch hoseline at the base of the bleachers. The candidate will carry
the fire hose to the top of the bleachers and touch the fence. The candidate will carry
the fire hose back to the base of the bleachers and return the fire hose to the original
position.  The  candidate  will  make  sure  that  at  least  one  foot  touches  each  step  both
going up and coming down the bleachers. Running or skipping is not allowed. (8) Victim
Rescue (timed): The candidate will grasp the 165-pound rescue manikin in a manner
that is most compatible with the candidate. The candidate will move the rescue manikin
a  distance  of  100  feet.  The  neck  hook  on  the  rescue  manikin  may  not  be  used.  The
event  and  the  timed  part  of  the  course  is  complete  when  both  the  victim  and  the
candidate clear the 100 foot mark.  Reference Fire Department (FD) [2011]. Candidate
Physical Agility Test (CPAT).   Known Causes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy [Dec and Fuster
1994] Toxins
Ethanol
Chemotherapeutic agents (doxorubicin, bleomycin)
Cobalt
Anti-retroviral agents (zidovudine, didanosine, zalcitabine)
Phenothiazines
Carbon monoxide
Lead
Cocaine
Mercury Metabolic Abnormalities
Nutritional deficiencies (thiamine, selenium, carnitine)
Endocrinologic disorders (hypothyroidism, acromegaly, thyrotoxicosis,
Cushing Disease, pheochromocytoma, diabetes mellitus)
Electrolyte disturbances (hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia) Infectious
Viral (coxsackie virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus)
Rickettsial
Bacterial (diphtheria)
Mycobacterial
Fungal
Parasitic (toxoplasmosis, trichinosis, Chagas disease) Noninfectious
Collagen vascular disorders (scleroderma, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis)
Hypersensitivity myocarditis
Sarcoidosis
Peripartum dysfunction Neuromuscular Causes
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy
Erb limb-girdle dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy   The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH),
an institute within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), is the federal
agency  responsible  for  conducting  research  and  making  recommendations  for  the
prevention of work-related injury and illness. In 1998, Congress appropriated funds to
NIOSH to conduct a fire fighter initiative that resulted in the NIOSH “Fire Fighter Fatality
Investigation and Prevention Program” which examines line-of-duty-deaths or on duty
deaths of fire fighters to assist fire departments, fire fighters, the fire service and others
to  prevent  similar  fire  fighter  deaths  in  the  future.  The  agency  does  not  enforce
compliance  with  State  or  Federal  occupational  safety  and  health  standards  and  does
not determine fault or assign blame. Participation of fire departments and individuals in
NIOSH  investigations  is  voluntary.  Under  its  program,  NIOSH  investigators  interview
persons  with  knowledge  of  the  incident  who  agree  to  be  interviewed  and  review
available records to develop a description of the conditions and circumstances leading
to the death(s). Interviewees are not asked to sign sworn statements and interviews are
not  recorded.  The  agency’s  reports  do  not  name  the  victim,  the  fire  department  or
those  interviewed.  The  NIOSH  report’s  summary  of  the  conditions  and  circumstances
surrounding
 the
 fatality
 is
 intended
 to
 provide
 context
 to
 the
 agency’s
recommendations and is not intended to be definitive for purposes of determining any
claim or benefit.     Enter your email address to receive new reports/products.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/fire/reports/face201108.html
