Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.   F2001-25 Date Released: December 3, 2001    On June 15,
2001, due to being placed on restricted duty status for health reasons, a 55-year-old
male career Captain, was performing a Job Task evaluation (physical ability test) prior
to being returned to full duty and reassignment back to his regular fire station. During
the  evaluation,  he  began  having  breathing  difficulty;  however,  he  continued  with  the
evolutions.  After  completing  the  last  evolution  and  exiting  the  drill  tower,  crew
members  removed  his  self-contained  breathing  apparatus  (SCBA)  and  bunker  coat,
assisted  him  to  the  ground,  and  administered  oxygen.  Moments  later  he  became
unresponsive, stopped breathing, and was pulseless. Approximately 43 minutes later,
despite  cardiopulmonary  resuscitation  (CPR)  and  advanced  life  support  (ALS)
administered  on  the  scene  and  at  the  hospital,  the  victim  died.  The  death  certificate
listed “cardiac arrest” as the immediate cause of death. An autopsy, conducted by a
private  company,  listed  “cardiac  arrhythmia”  due  to  “myocardial  ischemia”  due  to
“coronary  artery  disease”  as  the  cause  of  death.  The  following  recommendations
address  some  general  health  and  safety  issues.  This  list  includes  some  preventive
measures  that  have  been  recommended  by  other  agencies  to  reduce  the  risk  of
on-the-job heart attacks and sudden cardiac arrest among fire fighters. These selected
recommendations have not been evaluated by NIOSH, but represent published research
or consensus votes of technical committees of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) or fire service labor/management groups.  On June 15, 2001, a 55-year-old male
Captain lost consciousness after completing a Job Task evaluation. Despite CPR and ALS
administered  by  crew  members,  the  Fire  Department  ambulance  crew,  and  in  the
emergency department, the victim died. NIOSH was notified of this fatality on June 18,
2001, by the United States Fire Administration. On July 6, 2001, NIOSH contacted the
affected Fire Department to initiate the investigation. On July 30, 2001, a Safety and
Occupational Health Specialist from the NIOSH Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation Team
traveled  to  Alabama  to  conduct  an  on-site  investigation  of  the  incident.  During  the
investigation  NIOSH  personnel  interviewed  the  following:  During  the  site  visit  NIOSH
personnel  reviewed  the  following:   Incident.  In  March,  and  again  in  April  2001,  the
Captain was unable to complete the Job Task evaluation within the time allotment (11
minutes,  15  seconds).  After  failing  to  pass  the  evaluation  a  second  time,  he  was
reassigned  to  a  light  duty  position  in  the  Safety  Division  and  was  subsequently
scheduled  for  physical  performance  rehabilitation  (fitness  training)  at  the  Fitness
Center. At the beginning of his rehabilitation, it was discovered by the Fitness Center
staff  that  the  Captain  had  a  possible  heart  condition.  He  was  referred  to  his  private
physician  for  treatment  prior  to  being  allowed  to  complete  rehabilitation.  After  the
initial evaluation, the victim’s private physician would not release him for return to work
until additional medical tests were performed. After an exercise stress test (EST) in April
2001,  the  Captain  was  diagnosed  with  coronary  artery  disease  and  prescribed
medications,  and  he  took  sick  time.  On  May  21,  the  Captain  underwent  a  cardiac
catheterization,  which  revealed  significant  coronary  artery  disease,  specifically  At  the
end  of  May,  the  Fire  Chief  met  with  the  Captain  to  discuss  the  Captain’s  request  to
return  to  work,  perform  a  Job  Task  evaluation,  and  return  to  a  possible  staff
assignment.  The  Fire  Chief  advised  the  Captain  to  see  him  personally  after  he  (the
Captain)  received  a  return-to-work  statement  from  his  physician.  On  June  7,  2001,
another  EST  using  the  Bruce  protocol  was  conducted.  The  victim  exercised  for  9
minutes  and  4  seconds  (10  METS)  before  stopping  due  to  fatigue  and  weakness.  He
achieved 86% of his target heart rate with a good blood pressure response. He reported
no chest pain or any other symptom suggestive of angina, but his EKG showed signs of
ischemia  (reversible  ST  segment  depression).  Despite  this  finding,  the  Captain  was
released  for  return-to-work  with  no  restriction  by  his  private  physician.  His  physician
advised  him  to  call  if  chest  pain  or  shortness  of  breath  occurred.  On  June  13,  the
Captain  reported  back  to  work  and  presented  a  return-to-work  statement  from  his
physician to Fire Administration. The Captain was advised to report to work at Safety,
where  he  also  presented  the  return-to-work  statement.  On  June  14,  the  Captain
performed various tasks at Training and requested to perform the Job Task evaluation
the next day, June 15, the day of the incident. On June 15, 2001, the victim reported to
the drill tower at 0730 hours to perform the Job Task evaluation (described in detail in a
later  section  of  this  report).  The  drill  tower  is  a  five-story,  noncombustible  brick
structure, measuring 25 feet by 25 feet. It has an exterior ladder on one side and an
exterior and an interior stairway with 16 steps leading to each of the four landings (64
total steps). (See photograph). Engine 24 and Rescue 24 (Fire Department ambulance)
arrived on the scene and crew members set up the required equipment, which included
two,  50-foot  sections  of  1¾-inch  hose,  150  feet  of  3-inch  hose,  and  a  150-pound
manikin.  Rescue  24  remained  on  the  scene  throughout  the  evaluations  in  case  a
medical emergency arose. The Training Instructors and Safety Officer briefed the fire
fighters  regarding  the  personal  protective  equipment  to  be  worn,  the  specific  tasks
involved,  and  the  time/score  required  to  pass  the  test.  The  victim  was  the  first  fire
fighter to take the evaluation that day. At approximately 0900 hours, the victim began
the job task procedures. The temperature was 79E Fahrenheit (F), relative humidity was
87%,  dry  bulb  temperature  was  77E  F,  and  the  wet  bulb  temperature  was  75E  F.
Wearing  full  bunker  gear  (weighing  approximately  25  pounds),  the  victim  completed
the  hose  hoist,  hose  pull,  dummy  (manikin)  drag,  and  hydrant  hookup/disconnect
portions  of  the  test.  During  these  evolutions,  he  began  having  breathing  difficulty;
however,  he  continued  to  perform  the  evolutions.  Lastly,  the  victim  donned  an  SCBA
(weighing approximately 22 pounds) and performed the tower climb (128 total steps). A
crew member retrieved the oxygen equipment from Rescue 24 and positioned it near
the drill tower door in case of need by the victim. After completing this final task, the
victim exited the drill tower. As crew members assisted the victim in removing his SCBA
and bunker coat, he began to collapse. Crew members attempted to guide the victim to
a nearby chair, but he was unable to walk. The crew members then assisted the victim
in  lying  down.  The  oxygen  mask  was  placed  over  his  nose  and  mouth,  and  crew
members  retrieved  a  cardiac  monitor  from  Rescue  24.  At  0941  hours,  the  victim
became  unresponsive,  stopped  breathing,  and  was  pulseless.  CPR  (ventilations  via
bag-valve-mask)  was  begun.  The  cardiac  monitor  was  then  attached  to  the  victim,
revealing ventricular fibrillation (a heart rhythm incompatible with life). The victim was
defibrillated (shocked) three times, each being unsuccessful at converting the victim’s
heart  rhythm.  Intubation  and  intravenous  (IV)  medications  consistent  with  ALS
procedures were administered. The cardiac monitor subsequently revealed asystole (no
heart beat) and CPR (now with chest compressions) continued. Rescue 24 transported
the  victim  to  a  nearby  hospital  at  0948  hours.  En  route,  ALS  procedures  and  CPR
continued. The cardiac monitor again revealed ventricular fibrillation, and an additional
shock was delivered, but the heart rhythm reverted to asystole. Rescue 24 arrived at
the hospital at 0956 hours. Inside the emergency department, CPR and ALS measures
continued until 1024 hours, when he was pronounced dead by the attending physician.
Medical  Findings.  The  death  certificate,  completed  by  the  Certifying  Physician,  listed
“cardiac arrest” as the immediate cause of death. Pertinent findings from the autopsy,
performed  by  a  private  company,  on  June  17,  2001,  included  The  Captain  had  the
following risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD): advancing age (greater than 45
years old), male gender, hypertension, mild obesity (body mass index [BMI] of 31.94),
lack of exercise, and diabetes mellitus. He was prescribed medications for high blood
pressure, diabetes, chest pain, and high triglycerides. According to his wife and crew
members,  the  victim  had  no  complaints  of  chest  pains  or  any  other  heart-related
illness. The day of the incident, the victim did not report any symptoms suggestive of
angina or heart attack to his wife or crew members. The crew members on the scene
did  notice  that  the  victim  began  having  breathing  difficulty  during  the  Job  Task
evaluation.  However,  given  the  physical  demands  of  the  Job  Task  evaluation  and  the
weight of the bunker gear and SCBA, heavy breathing is common.    At the time of the
NIOSH  investigation,  the  Fire  Department  consisted  of  628  uniformed  personnel  and
served  a  population  of  266,000  residents  in  a  geographic  area  of  163  square  miles.
There are 30 fire stations. Fire fighters work the following schedule: 24 hours on-duty;
48 hours off duty, from 0800 hours to 0800 hours. In 2000, the Department responded
to 47,791 calls: 26,145 advanced life support (ALS) calls, 11,203 basic life support (BLS)
calls,  3,626  alarm  calls,  3,471  other  service  calls,  1,081  automobile  fires,  922  house
fires, 689 trash fires, 314 apartment fires, 234 commercial structure fires, 56 fire EMS
calls, and 50 mass occupancy structure fires. The day prior to the incident, the victim
worked  an  8-hour  shift  at  his  light-duty  position  at  Training.  Training.  The  Fire
Department  requires  all  new  fire  fighter  applicants  to  pass  a  written  test,  a  fit  check
(described below), a Job Task evaluation, an interview, a physical examination, and a
drug screen prior to being hired. Newly hired fire fighters are then sent to the 17-week
fire fighter training course at the City Fire Academy to become certified as a Fire Fighter
I and II, emergency medical technician (EMT), and hazardous materials (HazMat) First
Responder.  Recruits  must  complete  monthly  training  modules  for  1  year.  The  recruit
training  program  is  based  on  the  State  minimum  requirement  for  fire  fighter
certification.  Recurrent  training  occurs  daily  on  each  shift.  There  is  no  State
requirement  for  fire  fighter  recertification.  Annual  recertification  is  required  for
hazardous  materials,  while  biannual  recertification  is  required  for  Apparatus/Operator
and  EMT/Paramedics.  The  victim  was  certified  as  a  Fire  Fighter  II,  Fire  Officer,  Fire
Inspector, Fire Investigator, Fire Service Instructor, and he had 27 years of fire fighting
experience.  Preemployment/Preplacement  Evaluations.  The  Department  requires  a
preemployment/preplacement medical evaluation for all new hires, regardless of age.
Components of this evaluation include the following: These evaluations are performed
by  a  physician  contracted  with  the  City.  Once  this  evaluation  is  complete,  the
contracted  physician  makes  a  determination  regarding  medical  clearance  for  fire
fighting  duties  and  forwards  this  decision  to  the  City’s  personnel  director.  Periodic
Evaluations.  Periodic  medical  evaluations  are  required  by  this  Department  for  all  fire
fighters  annually.  Components  of  this  evaluation  include  These  evaluations  are
performed  by  another  contracted  physician  who  makes  a  determination  regarding
medical clearance for fire fighting duties. Fire fighters may elect to have their personal
physician  perform  the  physical  evaluation.  Components  of  this  personal  physician
evaluation  include  The  results  of  these  annual  physical  evaluations  are  sent  to  the
contracted physician who then makes a final determination regarding annual medical
clearance  for  fire  fighting  duties.  While  annual  medical  clearance  for  fire  fighting  is
required for all fire fighters, annual SCBA medical clearance is not required. A fit check
is performed annually as part of the Job Task evaluation. The fire fighter must pass the
fit  check  prior  to  performing  the  Job  Task  evaluation.  Components  of  the  fit  check
include The Job Task evaluation is completed with the participant wearing full bunker
gear.  One  component  of  the  evaluation,  the  tower  climb,  requires  the  wearing  of  an
SCBA (without facepiece). The Job Task evaluation consists of If a fire fighter fails the
Job  Task  evaluation  two  times,  he/she  is  placed  on  administrative  assignment  to  the
Safety/Training Division and is required to enter a physical performance rehabilitation
program conducted by the City Fitness Center Director. Line personnel failing the Job
Task  after  completing  a  work  hardening  program,  or  failing  a  third  time,  remain  on
administrative  assignment  pending  a  determination  whether  they  may  return  to
emergency operations. If an employee is injured at work, or is ill and off work for one
24-hour  shift  or  more  (second  occurrence  within  12  months),  the  employee  must  be
evaluated by his/her personal physician. The employee then provides a proof of illness
form and a medical release form to his/her immediate supervisor and then to the Safety
Division,  who  makes  the  final  determination  regarding  “return  to  work.”  Fire  fighters
assigned to operations who are returning from an extended leave of 30 days or more
may be required to successfully complete a Job Task evaluation and/or Fit Check prior
to  returning  to  regular  duties.  An  employee  may  be  required  to  provide  a  proof  of
illness  form  if  sick  leave  abuse  is  suspected.  Light  duty  positions  are  available  for
employees  who  have  been  ill  or  injured  and  obtain  a  medical  release  from  their
personal  physician.  If  the  fire  fighter  is  incapable  of  returning  to  fire  fighting  duties,
they are reassigned to a nonemergency position within the City system (contingent on
availability). Exercise (strength and aerobic) equipment is located in 24 of the 30 fire
stations.  Fire  fighters  also  have  access  to  the  City  Health  and  Fitness  Center.
Mandatory,  on-duty  wellness/fitness  programs  are  in  place  for  the  Department;
however, compliance is not ensured. Health maintenance programs are available from
the  City.   In  the  United  States,  coronary  artery  disease  (atherosclerosis)  is  the  most
common  risk  factor  for  cardiac  arrest  and  sudden  cardiac  death.1  Risk  factors  for  its
development  include  age  over  45,  male  gender,  family  history  of  coronary  artery
disease,  smoking,  high  blood  pressure,  high  blood  cholesterol,  obesity,  physical
inactivity, and diabetes.2,3 The victim had six of these risk factors (age over 45, male
gender, hypertension, mild obesity, physical inactivity, and diabetes mellitus), and was
diagnosed with coronary artery disease at his last physical evaluation. The narrowing of
the  coronary  arteries  by  atherosclerotic  plaques  occurs  over  many  years,  typically
decades.4 However, the growth of these plaques probably occurs in a nonlinear, often
abrupt  fashion.5  Heart  attacks  typically  occur  with  the  sudden  development  of
complete  blockage  (occlusion)  in  one  or  more  coronary  arteries  that  have  not
developed  a  collateral  blood  supply.6  This  sudden  blockage  is  primarily  due  to  blood
clots  (thrombosis)  forming  on  the  top  of  atherosclerotic  plaques.  A  thrombus  was
identified  in  the  left  anterior  descending  coronary  artery  on  autopsy.  Blood  clots,  or
thrombus  formation,  in  coronary  arteries  are  initiated  by  disruption  of  atherosclerotic
plaques. Certain characteristics of the plaques (size, composition of the cap and core,
presence  of  a  local  inflammatory  process)  predispose  the  plaque  to  disruption.6
Disruption then occurs from biomechanical and hemodynamic forces, such as increased
blood  pressure,  increased  heart  rate,  increased  catecholamines,  and  shear  forces,
which occur during heavy exercise.7,8 Fire fighting is widely acknowledged to be one of
the most physically demanding and hazardous of all civilian occupations.9 Fire fighting
activities are strenuous and often require fire fighters to work at near maximal heart
rates  for  long  periods.  The  increase  in  heart  rate  has  been  shown  to  begin  with
responding  to  the  initial  alarm  and  persist  through  the  course  of  fire  suppression
activities.10-12  Even  when  energy  costs  are  moderate  (as  measured  by  oxygen
consumption) and work is performed in a thermoneutral environment, heart rates may
be high (over 170 beats per minute) owing to the insulative properties of the personal
protective  clothing.13  Furthermore,  fire  fighting  can  result  in  severe  fluid  loss  which
decreases  blood  volume  and  decreases  the  amount  of  blood  pumped  from  the  heart
(stroke  volume).14  Epidemiologic  studies  have  found  that  heavy  physical  exertion
sometimes immediately precedes and triggers the onset of acute heart attacks.15-18
The victim was in full bunker gear during the Job Task evaluation and wore an SCBA
during  the  last  portion  of  the  evaluation.  His  activities  ranged  from  walking  on  level
ground to dragging a manikin to carrying a standpipe package up five flights of stairs.
This  is  considered  a  heavy  level  of  physical  exertion.19,20  The  physical  stress  of
performing the Job Task evaluation and his underlying atherosclerotic CAD contributed
to  this  fire  fighter’s  heart  attack,  subsequent  cardiac  arrest,  and  sudden  death.  To
reduce the risk of heart attacks and sudden cardiac arrest among fire fighters, the NFPA
has developed guidelines entitled “Standard on Medical Requirements for Fire Fighters
and  Information  for  Fire  Department  Physicians,”  otherwise  known  as  NFPA  1582.21
NFPA  1582  recommends  a  yearly  physical  evaluation  to  include  a  medical  history,
height, weight, blood pressure, and visual acuity test.21 NFPA 1582 also recommends a
thorough examination to include vision testing, audiometry, pulmonary function testing,
a complete blood count, urinalysis, and biochemical (blood) test battery be conducted
on a periodic basis according to the age of the fire fighter (less than 30: every 3 years;
30-39:  every  2  years;  over  40  years:  every  year).  The  Department  requires  a
preemployment/preplacement  medical  examination  for  all  new  hires  and  requires
periodic medical evaluations for all fire fighters. However, neither evaluation contains
all
 the
 NFPA
 recommended
 components.
 (The
 preemployment/preplacement
examination does not include complete blood count, cholesterol and/or triglycerides, or
a  chest  X-ray.  The  periodic  evaluation  does  not  include  complete  blood  count,
urinalysis, or stress EKG). In addition to screening for risk factors for CAD, NFPA 1582
recommends conducting EST on members at age 40, and at age 35 for those with one
or  more  CAD  risk  factors.21  These  recommendations  are  similar  to  those  of  the
American  College  of  Cardiology/American  Heart  Association.22  Although  not  required
by this FD, the victim did have an EST performed by his private physician. Although the
victim was asymptomatic and demonstrated adequate exercise capacity with a normal
blood pressure response, his EKG was positive for ischemia in the postero-lateral areas
of  the  heart.  The  fact  that  he  did  not  experience  chest  pain  or  other  symptoms  of
angina  is  not  uncommon  in  Type-2  diabetic  males.23   NFPA  1582  categorizes  fire
fighters’ medical conditions as Category A (precludes a person from performing as a fire
fighter)  and  Category  B  (could  preclude).  CAD,  including  history  of  myocardial
infarction,  coronary  artery  bypass  surgery,  or  coronary  angioplasty,  is  a  category  B
condition, but Appendix A contains additional guidelines. “Persons at mildly increased
risk  for  sudden  incapacitation  are  acceptable  for  fire  fighting.  Mildly  increased  risk  is
defined  by  the  presence  of  each  of  the  following:  Based  on  this  fire  fighter’s  June  7,
2001 EST and his prior cardiac catheterization, he did not meet the criteria for items #3
and  #5.  According  to  NFPA  1582  guidelines,  this  fire  fighter  should  not  have  been
cleared to return to full active duty fire suppression.  The following recommendations
address  health  and  safety  generally.  It  is  unclear  if  any  of  these  recommendations
could  have  prevented  the  sudden  cardiac  arrest  and  subsequent  death  of  this  fire
fighter. This list includes some preventive measures that have been recommended by
other agencies to reduce the risk of on-the-job heart attacks and sudden cardiac arrest
among fire fighters. These recommendations have not been evaluated by NIOSH, but
represent published research or consensus votes of technical committees of the NFPA
or  fire  service  labor/management  groups.  Recommendation  #1:  Provide  mandatory
annual medical evaluations to ALL fire fighters consistent with NFPA 1582 to determine
their medical ability to perform duties without presenting a significant risk to the safety
and health of themselves or others. Guidance regarding the content and frequency of
periodic  medical  evaluations  and  examinations  for  fire  fighters  can  be  found  in  NFPA
1582,  Standard  on  Medical  Requirements  for  Fire  Fighters  and  Information  for  Fire
Department  Physicians,21  and  in  the  report  of  the  International  Association  of  Fire
Fighters/International Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFF/IAFC) wellness/fitness initiative.24
The Department is not legally required to follow any of these standards. Nonetheless,
we  recommend  the  City  and  Union  work  together  to  establish  the  content  and
frequency  in  order  to  be  consistent  with  the  above  guidelines.  The  FD  currently
provides annual medical evaluations, however, the evaluations are not consistent with
NFPA  1582.  In  addition  to  providing  guidance  on  the  frequency  and  content  of  the
medical evaluation, NFPA 1582 provides guidance on medical requirements for persons
performing  fire  fighting  tasks.  NFPA  1582  should  be  applied  in  a  confidential,
nondiscriminatory  manner.  Appendix  D  of  NFPA  1582  provides  guidance  for  Fire
Department  Administrators  regarding  legal  considerations  in  applying  the  standard.
Applying  NFPA  1582  also  involves  economic  issues.  These  economic  concerns  go
beyond the costs of administering the medical program; they involve the personal and
economic costs of dealing with the medical evaluation results. NFPA 1500, Standard on
Fire  Department  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Program,  addresses  these  issues  in
Chapter 8-7.1 and 8-7.2.25 The success of medical programs hinges on protecting the
affected  fire  fighter.  The  Department  must  (1)  keep  the  medical  records  confidential,
(2) provide alternate duty positions for fire fighters in rehabilitation programs, and (3) if
the fire fighter is not medically qualified to return to active fire fighting duties, provide
permanent  alternate  duty  positions  or  other  supportive  and/or  compensated
alternatives.   Recommendation  #2:  Fire  Fighters  should  be  cleared  for  duty  by  a
physician  knowledgeable  about  the  physical  demands  of  fire  fighting  and  the  various
components of NFPA 1582. Physicians providing input regarding medical clearance for
fire fighting duties should be knowledgeable about the physical demands of fire fighting
and  familiar  with  the  consensus  guidelines  published  by  NFPA  1582,  Standard  on
Medical Requirements for Fire Fighters and Information for Fire Department Physicians.
To  ensure  private  physicians  are  aware  of  these  guidelines,  we  recommend  that  the
Fire Department provide the private physicians with a copy of NFPA 1582. In addition,
we  recommend  the  Fire  Department  not  automatically  accept  the  opinion  of  the
employee’s  private  physician  regarding  return  to  work.  This  decision  requires
knowledge not only of the employee’s medical condition, but also the employee’s job
duties. Frequently, private physicians are not familiar with an employee’s job duties, or
guidance documents, such as NFPA 1582. Lastly, we recommend that all return-to-work
clearances be reviewed by the Fire Department physician/contracted physician. Thus,
the  final  decision  regarding  medical  clearance  for  return  to  work  lies  with  the  Fire
Department with input from many sources including the employee’s private physician. 
Recommendation  #3:  Incorporate  exercise  stress  tests  into  the  Fire  Department’s
medical  evaluation  program.  NFPA  1582  and  the  IAFF/IAFC  wellness/fitness  initiative
both  recommend  at  least  biannual  EST  for  fire  fighters.21,24  They  recommend  that
these  tests  begin  at  age  35  for  those  with  CAD  risk  factors  and  at  age  40  for  those
without  CAD  risk  factors.  The  EST  could  be  conducted  by  the  fire  fighter’s  personal
physician, the City physician, or the Department’s contract physician. If the fire fighter’s
personal physician or the contracted physician conducts the test, the results must be
communicated to the City physician, who should be responsible for decisions regarding
medical  clearance  for  fire  fighting  duties.   Recommendation  #4:  Provide  fire  fighters
with  medical  evaluations  and  clearance  to  wear  SCBA.  OSHA’s  Revised  Respiratory
Protection Standard requires employers to provide medical evaluations and clearance
for employees using respiratory protection.26 These clearance evaluations are required
for
 private
 industry
 employees
 and
 public
 employees
 in
 States
 operating
OSHA-approved State plans. Alabama is not a State-plan State; therefore, public sector
employers are not required to comply with OSHA standards. However, we recommend
following this standard, and a copy of the OSHA medical checklist has been provided to
the Fire Department. Given the current periodic medical evaluation required by the Fire
Department,  this  clearance  should  not  involve  any  additional  expense  for  the  Fire
Department.   Recommendation  #5:  Provide  exercise  equipment  in  all  fire  stations.
Currently,  24  of  the  30  fire  stations  have  strength  and  aerobic  exercise  equipment.
Also,  fire  fighters  have  access  to  the  City  Health  and  Fitness  Center.  NFPA  1583
recommends providing exercise equipment through the contracted use of a public gym
or other facility, or placing the equipment directly in the fire stations.27 Contracting the
use of a facility requires a company (engine, ladder, etc.) of fire fighters to exercise at
the same time daily at a location separate from their fire station. The gym should be
centrally  located,  but  due  to  emergency  responses  and  daily  work  duties,  the  facility
may not be convenient and thus, underutilized. The fire companies may also have to be
taken  out  of  service  during  the  time  of  exercise,  depending  on  the  location  of  the
facility. Even though this Fire Department has a mandatory wellness/fitness program,
fire companies are not taken out of service (due to staffing levels) to participate in the
program. To locate the equipment in the fire stations allows the fire fighters to exercise
within  the  constraints  of  their  daily  work  schedules  and  emergency  responses  while
remaining  more  readily  available  for  response.   Recommendation  #6:  Ensure  that  all
members  participate  in  the  FD’s  mandatory  wellness/fitness  program.  Physical
inactivity is the most prevalent modifiable risk factor for CAD in the United States.13
Additionally, physical inactivity, or lack of exercise, is associated with other risk factors,
namely  obesity  and  diabetes.28  The  Fire  Department  has  a  written,  mandatory
wellness/fitness  program.  However,  compliance  with  the  policy  is  not  ensured.  NFPA
1500, Standard on Fire Department Occupational Safety and Health Program, requires a
wellness  program  that  provides  health  promotion  activities  for  preventing  health
problems and enhancing overall well-being.25 In 1997, the International Association of
Fire Fighters (IAFF) and the International Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC) published a
comprehensive  Fire  Service  Joint  Labor  Management  Wellness/Fitness  Initiative  to
improve fire fighter quality of life and maintain physical and mental capabilities of fire
fighters.  Ten  fire  departments  across  the  United  States  joined  this  effort  to  pool
information about their physical fitness programs and to create a practical fire service
program. They produced a manual and a video detailing elements of such a program.24
The Fire Department and the Union should review these materials to identify applicable
elements  for  their  Department.  Other  large-city  negotiated  programs  can  also  be
reviewed as potential models.  1. Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Isselbacher KJ, et al. [1998].
Harrison’s principles of internal medicine. 14th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 222-225.
2.  American  Heart  Association  (AHA)  [1998].  AHA  scientific  position,  risk  factors  for
coronary  artery  disease.  Dallas,  TX.  3.  Jackson  E,  Skerrett  PJ,  Ridker  PM  [2001].
Epidemiology of arterial thrombosis. In: Coleman RW, Hirsh J, Marder VIJ, et al., eds. 4th
ed. Homeostasis and thrombosis: basic principles and clinical practice. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins. 4. Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Isselbacher KJ, et al. [1998].
Harrison’s principles of internal medicine. 14th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 1348. 5.
Shah  PK  [1997].  Plaque  disruption  and  coronary  thrombosis:  new  insight  into
pathogenesis and prevention. Clin Cardiol 20(11 Suppl2):II-38-44. 6. Fuster V, Badimon
JJ,  Badimon  JH  [1992].  The  pathogenesis  of  coronary  artery  disease  and  the  acute
coronary  syndromes.  N  Eng  J  Med  326:242-250.  7.  Kondo  NI,  Muller  JE  [1995].
Triggering  of  acute  myocardial  infarction.  J  Cardiovasc  Risk  2(6):499-504.  8.  Opie  LH
[1995]. New concepts regarding events that lead to myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc
Drug Ther 9 Suppl 3:479-487. 9. Gledhill N, Jamnik, VK [1992]. Characterization of the
physical demands of firefighting. Can J Spt Sci 17(3):207-213. 10. Barnard RJ, Duncan
HW [1975]. Heart rate and ECG responses of fire fighters. J Occup Med 17:247-250. 11.
Manning JE, Griggs TR [1983]. Heart rate in fire fighters using light and heavy breathing
equipment:  simulated  near  maximal  exertion  in  response  to  multiple  work  load
conditions. J Occup Med 25:215-218. 12. Lemon PW, Hermiston RT [1977]. The human
energy  cost  of  fire  fighting.  J  Occup  Med  19:558-562.  13.  Smith  DL,  Petruzzello  SJ,
Kramer  JM,  et  al.  [1995].  Selected  physiological  and  psychobiological  responses  to
physical
 activity
 in
 different
 configurations
 of
 firefighting
 gear.
 Ergonomics
38(10):2065-2077.  14.  Smith  DL,  Manning  TS,  and  Petruzzello  SJ  [2001].  Effect  of
strenuous  live-fire  drills  on  cardiovascular  and  psychological  responses  of  recruit
firefighters. Ergonomics 44(3):244-254. 15. Willich SN, Lewis M, Lowel H, et al. [1993].
Physical  exertion  as  a  trigger  of  acute  myocardial  infarction.  N  Eng  J  Med
329:1684-1690.  16.  Mittleman  MA,  Maclure  M,  Tofler  GH,  et  al.  [1993].  Triggering  of
acute  myocardial  infarction  by  heavy  physical  exertion.  N  Eng  J  Med  329:1677-1683.
17.  Siscovick  DS,  Weiss  NS,  Fletcher  RH,  Lasky  T  [1984].  The  incidence  of  primary
cardiac arrest during vigorous exercise. N Eng J Med 311:874-877. 18. Tofler GH, Muller
JE, Stone PH, et al. [1992]. Modifiers of timing and possible triggers of acute myocardial
infarction in the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction Phase II (TIMI II) Study Group. J
Am  Coll  Cardiol  20:1049-1055.  19.  American  Industrial  Hygiene  Association  Journal
[1971].  Ergonomics  guide  to  assessment  of  metabolic  and  cardiac  costs  of  physical
work.  Am  Ind  Hyg  Assoc  J  560-564.  20.  O’Connell  ER,  Thomas  PC,  Cady  LD,  et  al.
[1986]. Energy costs of simulated stair climbing as a job-related task in fire fighting. J
Occ  Med  28(4):282-284.  21.  National  Fire  Protection  Association  [2000].  NFPA  1582,
standard on medical requirements for fire fighters and information for fire department
physicians. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association. 22. Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ,
Beasley JW, Bricker JT, Duvernoy WFC, Froelicher VF, Mark DB, Marwick TH, McCallister
BD, Thompson PD, Winters WL Jr, Yanowitz FG [1997]. ACC/AHA guidelines for exercise
testing: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force  on  Practice  Guidelines  (Committee  on  Exercise  Testing).  J  Am  Coll  Cardiol.
30:260-315.  23.  Janand-Delenne  B,  Savin  B,  Savin  B,  et.  al.  [1999].  Silent  myocardial
ischemia  in  patients  with  diabetes.  Diabetes  Care  22:1396-1400.  24.  International
Association  of  Fire  Fighters,  International  Association  of  Fire  Chiefs  [2000].  The  fire
service joint labor management wellness/fitness initiative. Washington: IAFF, IAFC. 25.
National  Fire  Protection  Association  [1997].  NFPA  1500,  standard  on  fire  department
occupational  safety  and  health  program.  Quincy,  MA:  National  Fire  Protection
Association.  26.  29  CFR  1910.134.  Code  of  Federal  Regulations.  Occupational  Safety
and  Health  Administration:  Respiratory  Protection.  Washington,  DC:  National  Archives
and Records Administration, Office of the Federal Register. 27. National Fire Protection
Association  [2000].  NFPA  1583,  standard  on  health-related  fitness  programs  for  fire
fighters. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association. 28. Plowman SA and Smith DL
[1997]. Exercise physiology: for health, fitness and performance. Boston, MA: Allyn and
Bacon.   This  investigation  was  conducted  by  and  the  report  written  by  Tommy  N.
Baldwin, MS, Safety and Occupational Health Specialist. Mr. Baldwin is with the NIOSH
Fire  Fighter  Fatality  Investigation  and  Prevention  Program,  Cardiovascular  Disease
Component, located in Cincinnati, OH. This page was last updated on 1/9/02 Enter your
email address to receive new reports/products.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/fire/reports/face200125.html
