Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. F2007-15 Date Released: January 30, 2008  On April 25, 2007,
a  56-year-old  male  career  Captain  was  participating  in  the  Fire  Department’s  annual
“Fit Check” (physical fitness) evaluation. The Captain successfully completed the bench
press,  sit-ups,  and  sit-and-reach  portions  of  the  evaluation  within  the  allotted  time.
During the aerobic capacity (3-mile walk) portion of the evaluation, he completed 6 of
12 laps around the ¼-mile track, when he suddenly collapsed. Crew members on the
scene  responded  and  found  him  unresponsive,  not  breathing,  and  with  a  weak  pulse
that
 stopped
 shortly
 thereafter.
 Approximately
 29
 minutes
 later,
 despite
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and advanced life support administered on-scene
and at the hospital, the Captain died. The death certificate and the autopsy, completed
by the County Medical Examiner, listed “complications of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease”  as  the  immediate  cause  of  death  with  “cardiomegaly”  as  a  significant
condition. NIOSH investigators offer the following recommendations to address general
safety and health issues. However, it is unclear if any of these recommendations would
have prevented the Captain’s sudden cardiac death. On April 25, 2007, a 56-year-old
male  Captain  lost  consciousness  while  participating  in  the  Fire  Department  annual
physical  fitness  evaluation.  Despite  CPR  and  advanced  life  support  administered  by
crew  members,  the  Fire  Department  ambulance  crew,  and  in  the  emergency
department, the Captain died. NIOSH was notified of this fatality on April 26, 2007, by
the United States Fire Administration. On May 9, 2007, NIOSH contacted the affected
Fire  Department  to  gather  additional  information  and  on  June  6,  2007  to  initiate  the
investigation. On June 25, 2007, a Safety and Occupational Health Specialist from the
NIOSH  Fire  Fighter  Fatality  Investigation  Team  traveled  to  Alabama  to  conduct  an
on-site  investigation  of  the  incident.  During  the  investigation,  NIOSH  personnel
interviewed the following people: NIOSH personnel reviewed the following documents:
On April 25, 2007, the Captain reported for duty at his fire station (Station 16) at 0800
hours.  During  the  morning  hours,  the  Captain  performed  station  duties  including
paperwork  and  responding  to  a  medical  call  for  patient  transport  (1119  hours).  The
Captain,  who  was  assigned  to  Rescue  16,  provided  basic  medical  care  during  the
transport. After the call, Rescue 16 returned to their fire station and the crew ate lunch.
Due  to  the  scheduled  “Fit  Check”  evaluation  that  afternoon,  the  Captain  drank  more
fluids  than  usual.  Engine  2,  Engine  9,  Engine  31,  Truck  2,  and  Rescue  16  were
scheduled to perform their annual “Fit Check” at 1330 hours. A total of 22 fire fighters
participated  in  the  evaluation,  and  9  monitoring  personnel  (exercise  physiologists,
paramedics, and the Fire Department’s Safety Officer) were available for medical and
rehabilitation  (water,  etc.)  support.  Participants  wore  gym  shorts,  T-shirt,  and  gym
shoes. The first part of the “Fit Check”, conducted at the City Fitness Center, included:
Points  were  awarded  based  on  tasks  accomplished  and  the  participant’s  age.  The
Captain scored 50 points on body composition (poor), 75 points on upper body strength
(average),  75  points  on  abdomen  strength  (average),  and  80  points  on  flexibility
(average).  During  the  first  portion  of  the  evaluation,  the  Captain  did  not  report  any
symptoms or show any signs of heart problems. The “Fit Check” participants drove to
the  track  for  the  aerobic  portion  of  the  evaluation.  The  aerobic  portion  consisted  of
either a 1½-mile run or a 3-mile walk on an oval paved track (1 lap equaled ¼-mile).
The  Captain  selected  the  3-mile  walk  (12  laps)  which  must  be  completed  within  47
minutes for a passing score. Roll call was performed, and participants were asked by
the  Safety  Officer  if  anyone  felt  they  should  not,  or  could  not,  participate  in  the
walk/run; no one declined. The Safety Officer briefed participants that cold water was
available and that two paramedics (Rescue 27) were available with medical equipment
if needed. The weather conditions at this time included a temperature of about 79° F,
with 44% relative humidity.1 Table 1 shows the Captain’s lap times. The Captain was
given a cup of water on lap 5 and was sweating a moderate amount. A monitor asked
the Captain if he was okay, to which the Captain nodded and said “yes.” The Captain
chatted with other crew members and did not show any unusual signs of distress. As
the Captain was three-fourths of the way through Lap 7, he struggled to breathe, and
then  suddenly  collapsed  (1438  hours).  Crew  members  responded  immediately  and
found  him  unresponsive,  not  breathing,  and  with  a  weak  pulse  that  stopped  shortly
thereafter.  Fire  Alarm  was  notified.  CPR  (assisted  ventilations  provided  with  a
bag-valve-mask)  was  begun  as  a  cardiac  monitor  was  attached,  revealing  ventricular
fibrillation  (a  heart  rhythm  incompatible  with  life).  The  Captain  was  defibrillated
(shocked)  once;  his  heart  rhythm  reverted  to  asystole  (no  heart  beat).  Chest
compressions  were  begun,  an  intravenous  line  was  placed,  and  intravenous
medications  consistent  with  advanced  life  support  were  administered.  Intubation
(breathing tube inserted into the trachea) was attempted without success. The Captain
was  placed  onto  a  stretcher  and  into  Rescue  27,  which  departed  the  scene  at  1442
hours. During the transfer, the intravenous line pulled out. A second intubation attempt
in Rescue 27 was successful, and cardiac resuscitation medications were administered
via  the  endotracheal  tube.  En  route,  advanced  life  support  procedures  and  CPR
continued.  Rescue  27  arrived  at  the  hospital  at  1446  hours.  Inside  the  Emergency
Department,  CPR  and  advanced  life  support  measures  continued  until  1507  hours,
when the Captain was pronounced dead by the attending physician. Medical Findings.
The death certificate and autopsy, completed by the County Medical Examiner on April
26,  2007,  listed  “complications  of  atherosclerotic  cardiovascular  disease”  as  the
immediate  cause  of  death  with  “cardiomegaly”  as  a  significant  condition.  Pertinent
findings  from  the  autopsy  included:  The  Captain  was  73  inches  tall  and  weighed  241
pounds,  giving  him  a  body  mass  index  (BMI)  of  31.79.  A  BMI  >30.0  kilograms  per
meters  squared  (kg/m2)  is  considered  obese.3  The  Captain  had  a  history  of
hypertension  and  was  prescribed  an  antihypertensive  medication.  Although  his  blood
cholesterol  level  was  normal,  his  cholesterol/HDL  ratio  had  been  high  (>  5.77)  since
1998. In 2002, the Captain was referred to a cardiologist due to chest discomfort and
shortness  of  breath  on  exertion.  An  imaging  stress  test  (cardiolite  single  photon
emission  computed  tomography  [SPECT]  study)  was  conducted  using  the  Bruce
protocol.4 The Captain exercised for 10 minutes, 12 seconds (10 metabolic equivalents
[METS]) reaching a peak heart rate of 156 beats per minute (92% of his maximum). No
ischemic ST-T wave changes were seen during exercise, nor were any perfusion defects
identified (e.g., no evidence of ischemia or scar formation). Doppler echocardiography
revealed  normal  heart  valves,  normal  left  ventricular  ejection  fraction  (60%),  and
borderline/mild left ventricular hypertrophy. The cardiologist diagnosed the Captain as
having Stage I hypertension, currently without antihypertensive therapy, and mild left
ventricular  hypertrophy.  According  to  his  family  and  crew  members,  since  2002  the
Captain had no complaints of chest pains, unusual shortness of breath on exertion, or
any  other  heart-related  illness.  At  the  time  of  the  NIOSH  investigation,  the  Fire
Department consisted of 647 uniformed personnel and served a population of 242,000
residents  in  a  geographic  area  of  165  square  miles.  There  are  31  fire  stations.  Fire
fighters  work  the  following  schedule:  24-hours  on-duty,  48-hours  off-duty,  from  0800
hours to 0800 hours. In 2006, the Fire Department responded to 51,690 calls: 31,959
advanced  life  support  calls,  10,544  basic  life  support  calls,  9,134  fire  calls,  and  53
fire/medical calls. The day prior to the incident, the Captain ran errands and worked at
a charity golf event. Employment and Training. The Fire Department requires all new
fire fighter applicants to pass a written test, a Job Task evaluation (described below), an
interview,  a  physical  examination,  and  a  drug  screen  prior  to  being  hired.  New  fire
fighter applicants are also given a fitness evaluation. Newly hired fire fighters are then
sent  to  the  18-week  fire  fighter  training  course  at  the  City  Fire  Academy  to  become
certified  as  a  Fire  Fighter  I  and  II,  emergency  medical  technician  (EMT)  and  to  the
Hazardous  Materials  (HazMat)  operations  level.  Recruits  must  complete  monthly
training  modules  for  one  year.  The  recruit  training  program  is  based  on  the  State
minimum  requirement  for  fire  fighter  certification.  Recurrent  training  occurs  daily  on
each  shift.  There  is  no  State  requirement  for  fire  fighter  re-certification.  Annual
re-certification  is  required  for  Hazardous  Materials,  while  biannual  re-certification  is
required  for  Apparatus/Operator  and  EMT/Paramedics.  The  Captain  was  certified  as  a
Fire Fighter II, Fire Officer II, Fire Service Instructor I, Driver/Operator, EMT-Paramedic,
and  HazMat  Technician.  He  had  23  years  of  firefighting  experience.  Pre-placement
Medical Evaluations. The Fire Department requires a pre-placement medical evaluation
for all new hires, regardless of age. Components of this evaluation include the following:
  These  evaluations  are  performed  by  a  physician  contracted  by  the  City.  Once  this
evaluation  is  complete,  the  contracted  physician  makes  a  determination  regarding
medical  clearance  for  firefighting  duties  and  forwards  this  decision  to  the  City’s
personnel director. Periodic Medical Evaluations. Periodic (annual) medical evaluations
are not required by the Fire Department for all fire fighters, only for fire fighters with
City health insurance. For fire fighters with City health insurance, the annual medical
evaluation  can  be  performed  by  the  fire  fighter’s  personal  physician  or  the  City’s
contract  physician.  The  components  of  this  evaluation  depends  on  who  conducts  the
evaluation:  Good  Health  Program  Regardless  of  which  physician  performs  the
evaluation, the Fire Department does not require a medical clearance for full duty.  “Fit
Check” Evaluation. A “Fit Check” evaluation is performed prior to the annual Job Task
evaluation. Components of the “Fit Check” include: A member who cannot perform the
“Fit  Check”,  fails  to  complete  any  component,  does  not  achieve  an  average  score  of
75%  on  the  first  four  components,  or  does  not  achieve  75%  on  the  cardiovascular
component  (walk/run)  is  rescheduled  for  another  “Fit  Check”  evaluation  in  about  2
weeks.  If  a  fire  fighter  fails  to  achieve  an  average  score  of  75%  on  the  follow-up
evaluation, the City Fitness Director and the Fire Department Training/Safety Division
will  develop  a  program  for  the  fire  fighter  that  will  strengthen  areas  of  physical
deficiency.  These  members  are  re-evaluated  every  month  until  an  average  score  of
75%  is  achieved.  An  evaluation  by  the  Medical  Services  Unit  may  be  required  for
members who fail to make improvement. Members who fail to pass on their targeted
date or fail to make expected improvements in meeting their goals are scheduled for a
hearing with the Occupational Health and Safety Committee. Members with a systolic
blood pressure of 150 mmHg and above, or a diastolic blood pressure of 100 mmHg and
above,  are  not  allowed  to  participate  in  the  “Fit  Check”  or  engage  in  emergency
operations and are placed on sick leave. The Training/Safety Division provides the fire
fighter  with  a  medical  release  form  to  be  completed  by  the  member’s  personal
physician, stating the member is capable of performing firefighting duties. The medical
release form must be submitted to the Safety Division prior to returning to full duty. As
recommended  by  the  Fire  Department  Safety  Officer,  an  evaluation  by  the  Medical
Services  Unit  may  be  required.  Job  Task  Evaluation.  The  Job  Task  evaluation  is
completed  with  the  participant  wearing  full  bunker  gear.  The  Job  Task  evaluation
consists of: If an employee is injured at work, they are placed on Injured With Pay (IWP)
and under the care of the City Physician. If an employee is ill or has an injury that is not
job  related  and  off  work  for  more  than  one  24-hour  shift  (or  more  than  three
occurrences  within  12  months),  the  employee  must  be  evaluated  by  his/her  personal
physician.  Fire  fighters  assigned  to  operations  who  are  returning  from  an  extended
leave of 30 days or more may be required to be evaluated by the Medical Services Unit,
and successfully complete a Job Task evaluation and/or Fit Check prior to returning to
regular duties. An employee may be required to provide a proof of illness form if sick
leave  abuse  is  suspected.  Light  duty  positions  are  available  for  employees  who  have
been ill or injured and obtain a medical release from their personal physician. If the fire
fighter  is  incapable  of  returning  to  firefighting  duties,  he/she  is  re-assigned  to  a
non-emergency  position  within  the  City  system  (contingent  on  availability).  Exercise
(strength and aerobic) equipment is located in 24 of the 30 fire stations. Fire fighters
also have access to the City Health and Fitness Center. The Fire Department maintains
a  mandatory,  on-duty  wellness/fitness  program,  however,  participation  is  less  than
100%. Health maintenance programs are also available from the City.  The Captain’s
sudden cardiac death is probably related to one or more of the following conditions: In
the United States, atherosclerotic CAD is the most common risk factor for cardiac arrest
and sudden cardiac death.5 Risk factors for its development include age over 45, male
gender,  family  history  of  CAD,  high  blood  pressure,  high  blood  cholesterol,  obesity,
physical inactivity, and diabetes.6-7 The Captain had four of these risk factors (age over
45,  male  gender,  hypertension,  and  mild  obesity).  The  narrowing  of  the  coronary
arteries  by  atherosclerotic  plaques  occurs  over  many  years,  typically  decades.8
However,  the  growth  of  these  plaques  probably  occurs  in  a  nonlinear,  often  abrupt
fashion.9  Heart  attacks  typically  occur  with  the  sudden  development  of  complete
blockage  (occlusion)  in  one  or  more  coronary  arteries  that  have  not  developed  a
collateral  blood  supply.10  This  sudden  blockage  is  primarily  due  to  blood  clots
(thromboses) forming on the top of atherosclerotic plaques. Establishing the occurrence
of  a  heart  attack  requires  any  of  the  following:  characteristic  EKG  changes,  elevated
cardiac enzymes, or coronary artery thrombus. In the Captain’s case, he never regained
a heart rhythm on which an EKG could reveal characteristic changes, cardiac enzyme
testing was not performed (but the enzymes do not become positive for at least 4 hours
post-heart  attack),11  and  no  thrombus  was  found  at  autopsy.  However,  not  all  heart
attacks  have  an  associated  coronary  artery  thrombus.  Given  the  autopsy  findings  of
severe focal CAD and a posterior wall scar consistent with a remote (old) heart attack, it
is  possible  the  Captain  suffered  another  “silent”  heart  attack.  The  lack  of  chest  pain
does not rule out a heart attack because in up to 20% of individuals, the first evidence
of CAD may be myocardial infarction or sudden death.8,12 Epidemiologic studies have
found that heavy physical exertion sometimes immediately precedes and triggers the
onset  of  acute  heart  attacks.13-16  The  Captain  had  completed  the  Fitness  Center
portion of the “Fit Check” and half of the 3-mile walk. This activity expended about 4-6
METs,  which  is  considered  moderate  physical  activity.17-19  Given  the  Captain’s
underlying CAD, the physical stress of performing the “Fit Check” evaluation could have
triggered a heart attack, causing his subsequent cardiac arrest and death. Myocardial
Bridging.  Myocardial  bridging  is  defined  as  occurring  when  a  portion  of  a  coronary
artery  tunnels  into  the  myocardium,  creating  a  muscle-bridge  overlap.  Myocardial
bridging is very common. It has been reported in 0.5% to 16% of angiographic studies,
and  15%  to  85%  of  autopsies.20  Compression  of  the  coronary  artery  due  to  the
muscular band occurs during systole, and sometimes extends into diastole. Myocardial
bridging  has  been  associated  with  sudden  cardiac  death,21-24  ischemia,25-27
myocardial  infarction,28-32  arrhythmia,33-35  and  coronary  artery  spasm.36  Because
myocardial bridging is a relatively common finding at autopsy, its role in triggering the
Captain’s  sudden  cardiac  death  is  unclear.  Left  Ventricular  Hypertrophy  and
Cardiomegaly. On autopsy, the Captain had an enlarged heart. This enlargement was
probably due to his mild left ventricular hypertrophy diagnosed by echocardiogram in
2002. The echocardiogram described his left ventricular hypertrophy as “concentric;” a
finding  consistent  with  his  long  standing  high  blood  pressure.  Left  ventricular
hypertrophy  and  cardiomegaly  are  both  associated  with  an  increased  risk  of  sudden
cardiac death.2, 37-39 Occupational Medical Standards for Structural Fire Fighters. To
reduce the risk of heart attacks and sudden cardiac arrest among fire fighters, the NFPA
has  developed  guidelines  entitled  “Standard  on  Comprehensive  Occupational  Medical
Program for Fire Departments,” otherwise known as NFPA 1582.40 NFPA recommends
annual medical evaluations to include an EKG. Had an EKG been conducted as part of a
Fire  Department  annual  medical  evaluation  over  the  past  five  years,  perhaps  the
Captain’s left ventricular hypertrophy would have been detected. This may have led to
further  medical  evaluation  and  treatment.  In  addition  to  screening  for  risk  factors  for
CAD, NFPA 1582 recommends conducting stress tests on members over the age of 45
with  two  or  more  CAD  risk  factors  (hypercholesterolemia,  hypertension,  smoking,
diabetes mellitus, or family history or premature CAD).40 These recommendations are
similar  to  those  of  the  American  College  of  Cardiology  (ACC)/American  Heart
Association  (AHA).41  The  Captain  had  one  current  “NFPA”  risk  factor  for  CAD
(hypertension) but had previously smoked, quitting in 2002. Therefore, he would have
met the criteria prior to 2002, and regular stress testing would have been appropriate.
Although stress tests are not required by this Fire Department, the Captain did have an
imaging stress test performed by his private physician in 2002, which was reported as
“unremarkable  for  reversible  ischemia.”   NIOSH  investigators  offer  the  following
recommendations to address general safety and health issues. However, it is unclear if
any  of  these  recommendations  would  have  prevented  the  Captain’s  sudden  cardiac
death. Recommendation #1: Provide mandatory annual medical evaluations to all fire
fighters to ensure their medical ability to perform fire fighting duties without presenting
a significant risk to the safety and health of themselves or others.  NFPA 1582 requires
fire departments to conduct pre-placement and annual medical evaluations to ensure
fire  fighters  are  medically  capable  of  fire  fighting  duties.  Guidance  regarding  the
content and frequency of these evaluations can be found in NFPA 158240 and in the
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF)/International Association of Fire Chiefs
(IAFC) Fire Service Joint Labor Management Wellness/Fitness Initiative.42 However, the
Fire  Department  is  not  legally  required  to  follow  this  standard  or  this  initiative.
Nonetheless, we recommend the City and Union work together to establish the content
in order to be consistent with the above guidelines. Chapters 8-7.1 and 8-7.243 of NFPA
1500, Standard on Fire Department Occupational Safety and Health Program, address
the  economic  issues.  To  overcome  the  financial  obstacle,  the  Fire  Department  could
urge current members to get annual medical clearances from their private physicians.
This clearance would then be reviewed by the City physician, who would make the final
determination of medical clearance. Recommendation #2: Incorporate exercise stress
tests into the Fire Department’s medical evaluation program.  NFPA 1582, the IAFF/IAFC
Fire  Service  Joint  Labor  Management  Wellness/Fitness  Initiative,  and  the  ACC/AHA
recommend  an  exercise  stress  test  for  fire  fighters  with  two  or  more  CAD  risk
factors.40-42 The exercise stress test could be conducted by the fire fighter’s personal
physician or the City contract physician. If the fire fighter’s personal physician conducts
the  test,  the  results  must  be  communicated  to  the  City  physician,  who  should  be
responsible  for  decisions  regarding  medical  clearance  for  firefighting  duties.   Had  a
symptom-limiting  exercise  stress  test  been  performed  and  the  Captain’s  underlying
cardiac  disease  been  identified,  further  evaluated,  and  treated,  perhaps  his  sudden
cardiac  death  could  have  been  prevented  at  this  time.  Recommendation  #3:  Provide
fire  fighters  with  medical  evaluations  and  clearance  to  wear  self-contained  breathing
apparatus (SCBA). The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)’s Revised
Respiratory Protection Standard requires employers to provide medical evaluations and
clearance  for  employees  using  respiratory  protection.44  These  clearance  evaluations
are required for private industry employees and public employees in States operating
OSHA-approved State plans. Alabama is not a State-plan State; therefore, public sector
employers are not required to comply with OSHA standards. However, we recommend
following this standard for safety reasons, and a copy of the OSHA medical checklist has
been provided to the Fire Department. This clearance should not involve any additional
expense for the Fire Department. Recommendation #4: Provide exercise equipment in
all  fire  stations.  Currently,  24  of  the  fire  stations  have  strength  and  aerobic  exercise
equipment.  Also,  fire  fighters  have  access  to  the  City  Health  and  Fitness  Center.  We
applaud the City for these facilities. However, NFPA 1583, Standard on Health-Related
Fitness Programs for Fire Fighters, recommends providing exercise equipment through
the contracted use of a public gym or other facility, or placing the equipment directly in
all fire stations.45 Contracting the use of a facility requires a company (engine, ladder,
etc.) of fire fighters to exercise at the same time daily at a location separate from their
fire station. The gym should be centrally located, but due to emergency responses and
daily work duties, the facility may not be convenient and thus, underutilized. The fire
companies  may  also  have  to  be  taken  out  of  service  during  the  time  of  exercise,
depending  on  the  location  of  the  facility.  Even  though  this  Fire  Department  has  a
mandatory wellness/fitness program, fire companies are not taken out of service (due
to  staffing  levels)  to  participate  in  the  program.  Locating  the  equipment  in  the  fire
stations  allows  the  fire  fighters  to  exercise  within  the  constraints  of  their  daily  work
schedules  and  emergency  responses,  while  remaining  more  readily  available  for
response.  Recommendation  #5:  Ensure  that  all  members  participate  in  the  Fire
Department’s  mandatory  wellness/fitness  program.  Physical  inactivity  is  the  most
prevalent modifiable risk factor for CAD in the United States. Physical inactivity, or lack
of exercise, is associated with other risk factors, including obesity and diabetes.46 We
applaud  the  Fire  Department  for  developing  a  written,  mandatory  wellness/fitness
program. However, compliance with the policy is not universally applied. Guidance for
implementation  and  components  of  a  wellness/fitness  program  are  found  in  NFPA
1583,45  in  the  IAFF/IAFC’s  Fire  Service  Joint  Labor  Management  Wellness/Fitness
Initiative,42  and  NFPA  1500.43  Wellness  programs  have  been  shown  to  be  cost
effective,  typically  by  reducing  the  number  of  work-related  injuries  and  lost  work
days.47-49 Health promotion programs in the fire service have been shown to reduce
CAD  risk  factors  and  improve  fitness  levels,  with  mandatory  programs  showing  the
most  benefit.50-52  One  mandatory  program  was  able  to  show  a  cost  savings  of
$68,741 due to reduced absenteeism.53 A similar cost savings has been reported by
the  wellness  program  at  the  Phoenix  Fire  Department,  where  a  12-year  commitment
has  resulted  in  a  significant  reduction  in  their  disability  pension  costs.54  This
investigation was conducted by and the report written by: Tommy N. Baldwin, MS
Safety  and  Occupational  Health  Specialist  Mr.  Baldwin,  a  National  Association  of  Fire
Investigators  (NAFI)  Certified  Fire  and  Explosion  Investigator,  an  International  Fire
Service Accreditation Congress (IFSAC) Certified Fire Officer I, a Kentucky Certified Fire
Fighter and Emergency Medical Technician (EMT), and a former Fire Chief, is with the
NIOSH  Fire  Fighter  Fatality  Investigation  and  Prevention  Program,  Cardiovascular
Disease  Component  located  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  This  page  was  last  updated  on
04/25/2008. Enter your email address to receive new reports/products.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/fire/reports/face200715.html
