Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. A fit test is a test protocol conducted to verify that a respirator
is both comfortable and provides the wearer with the expected protection. Fit testing
uses a test agent, either qualitatively detected by the wearer’s sense of taste, smell, or
involuntary  cough  (irritant  smoke)  or  quantitatively  measured  by  an  instrument,  to
verify  the respirator’s  fit.  For more information,  view  the OSHA Respirator Fit Testing
video and NIOSH fact sheet, Filtering out Confusion: Frequently Asked Questions about
Respiratory  Protection,  Fit  Testing.  Yes.  The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health
Administration (OSHA) (29 CFR 1910.134) requires respirator users to be fit tested to
confirm the fit of any respirator that forms a tight seal on your face before using it in
the  workplace.  Fit  testing  is  important  to  ensure  the  expected  level  of  protection  is
provided  by  minimizing  the  total  amount  of  contaminant  leakage  into  the  facepiece
through  the  face  seal.  Tight-fitting  respirators  used  within  a  workplace  respiratory
protection  program  are  required  to  be  fit  tested  prior  to  use.  Tight-fitting  respirators
include  filtering  facepiece  respirators,  elastomeric  half  and  full  facepiece  respirators,
tight-fitting powered-air purifying respirators, self-contained breathing apparatus, etc..
For  more  information,  see  the  NIOSH  fact  sheet,  Filtering  out  Confusion:  Frequently
Asked Questions about Respiratory Protection, Fit Testing. You should be fit tested at
least  annually  to  ensure  your  respirator  continues  to  fit  you  properly.  Because  each
brand, model, and size of respirators will fit slightly different, you should be fit tested
every  time  you  wear  a  new  model,  manufacturer  type/brand,  or  size.  Also,  if  your
weight  changes  or  facial/dental  alterations  occur,  a  fit  test  should  be  done  again  to
ensure  your  respirator  remains  effective.  For  more  information,  see  the  NIOSH
infographic, Why are annual fit tests required? No. A fit test only qualifies you to use the
specific  brand/make/model/size  of  respirator  for  which  you  successfully  passed  a  fit
test.  Respirator  sizing  varies  across  different  manufacturer  brands  and  models.
Therefore, you should only wear the specific brand, model, and size respirator that you
wore  during  a  successful  fit  test.  A  qualitative  fit  test  (QLFT)  relies  on  the  respirator
wearer’s  senses  to  determine  if  there  is  a  gap  in  the  seal  of  the  respirator  to  the
wearer’s  face.  The  OSHA-accepted  fit  test  protocols  provide  complete  instructions  for
conducting  QLFTs  with  the  accepted  test  agents.  Note:  NIOSH  does  not  endorse  or
recommend  the  use  of  the  irritant  smoke  fit  test.  To  learn  more  about  preparing
solutions for qualitative fit testing, view the NIOSH webpage. For more information, see
the  NIOSH  fact  sheet,  Filtering  out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions  about
Respiratory Protection, Fit Testing. A quantitative fit test uses a fit testing instrument(s)
to provide quantitative, or numerical, measurements of the amount of face seal leakage
present when a user wears a respirator. Quantitative fit testing requires a hole punched
in  the  respirator  to  perform  the  test.  Therefore,  the  fit  tester  must  dispose  of  the
respirator after the test. For more information, see the NIOSH fact sheet, Filtering out
Confusion: Frequently Asked Questions about Respiratory Protection, Fit Testing. There
are  companies  and  organizations  that  provide  training  on  performing  a  fit  test.  The
ANSI/AIHA/ASSE  Z88.10-2010  Respirator  Fit  Testing  Methods  standard  consists  of
recommendations  for  qualifications  of  individuals  who  conduct  respirator  fit  testing.
Contact OSHA for additional guidance as they are the agency that regulates fit testing.
A user seal check is a quick procedure you conduct every time you wear a respirator to
make  sure  you  donned  the  respirator  properly.  The  user  seal  check  can  be  either  a
positive pressure or negative pressure check. The appropriate type of user seal check
depends  on  the  respirator.  How  often  do  I  need  to  perform  a  user  seal  check?  
According  to  the  OSHA  respiratory  protection  standard,  appendix  B-1,  once   you
successfully pass a fit test, you should complete a user seal check every time you put
on  the  respirator  to  ensure  you  achieve  an  adequate  seal.  According  to  the  OSHA
respiratory  protection  standard,  appendix  B-1,  once   you  successfully  pass  a  fit  test,
you should complete a user seal check every time you put on the respirator to ensure
you achieve an adequate seal. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions to perform a user
seal check on the specific model you are wearing. This information is available on the
box or individual respirator packaging. There are positive and negative pressure user
seal checks, and not every respirator can be checked using both. Please refer to our
fact  sheet,  Filtering  out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions  about  Respiratory
Protection,  User  Seal  Check,  for  additional  information.  A  medical  evaluation
determines your ability to wear a respirator. You must complete a medical evaluation
before  you  are  fit  tested  and  before  using  a  respirator  in  a  workplace.  Yes.  The
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  standard  (29  CFR  1910.134)
requires  a  medical  evaluation  as  an  element  of  the  written  respiratory  protection
program. View the OSHA Medical Evaluations for Workers Who Use Respirators video. A
medical evaluation is required once, prior to initial fit testing and use in your workplace.
However,  you  may  need  an  additional  medical  evaluation  if  you,  your  supervisor,  or
your  respiratory  program  administrator  recognize  signs  or  symptoms  that  may  affect
your  ability  to  use  the  assigned  respirator.  Additionally,  a  licensed  healthcare
professional may determine that you have a condition that causes you to need another
medical  evaluation.  View  the  OSHA  Medical  Evaluations  for  Workers  Who  Use
Respirators video. To Beard or not to Beard? That’s a good Question! (2017) New NIOSH
Study  Supports  the  OSHA  Annual  Fit  Testing  Requirements  for  Filtering  Facepiece
Respirators  (2016)  Summary  of  Respirator  Fit  Test  Requirements  (2015)  Why  are
Annual Fit Tests Required? (2016) Facial Hairstyles and Filtering Facepiece Respirators
(2017)  Filtering  out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions  about  Respiratory
Protection, Fit Testing (2018) Filtering out Confusion: Frequently Asked Questions about
Respiratory Protection, User Seal Check (2018) Respiratory Fit Testing (2012)
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/topics/respirators/disp_part/respsource3fittest.html
