Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Español (Spanish) Food allergies are a growing food safety and
public  health  concern  that  affect  an  estimated  8%  of  children  in  the  United  States.1
That’s 1 in 13 children, or about 2 students per classroom. A food allergy occurs when
the  body  has  a  specific  and  reproducible  immune  response  to  certain  foods.2  The
body’s  immune  response  can  be  severe  and  life  threatening,  such  as  anaphylaxis.
Although the immune system normally protects people from germs, in people with food
allergies, the immune system mistakenly responds to food as if it were harmful. There
is  no  cure  for  food  allergies.  Strict  avoidance  of  the  food  allergen  is  the  only  way  to
prevent a reaction. However, because it is not always easy or possible to avoid certain
foods, staff in schools, out-of-school time, and early care and education programs (ECE)
should  develop  plans  for  preventing  an  allergic  reaction  and  responding  to  a  food
allergy  emergency,  including  anaphylaxis.  Early  and  quick  recognition  and  treatment
can prevent serious health problems or death. Eight foods or food groups account for
most  serious  allergic  reactions  in  the  United  States:  milk,  eggs,  fish,  crustacean
shellfish, wheat, soy, peanuts, and tree nuts.2 The symptoms and severity of allergic
reactions to food can be different between individuals and can also be different for one
person over time. Anaphylaxis is a sudden and severe allergic reaction that may cause
death.3 Not all allergic reactions will develop into anaphylaxis and more than 40% (2 in
5)  of  children  with  food  allergies  in  the  United  States  have  been  treated  in  the
emergency department.1 Voluntary Guidelines for Managing Food Allergies In Schools
and  Early  Care  and  Education  Programs  [PDF  –  4  MB]  Food  Allergy  Guidelines  FAQS
[PDF – 105 KB]  Resources
  References
  Healthy Youth To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthyschools/foodallergies/index.htm
