Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Food service guidelines are standards for healthier food and
beverages  and  food  service  operations  in  worksite  and  community  settings.  Food
service  guidelines  may:  Food  service  guidelines  should  align  with  the  most  current
version  of  the  Dietary  Guidelines  for  Americans  [PDF-30.6MB].   If  you  have  already
developed  food  service  guidelines  that  are  in  line  with  the  Dietary  Guidelines  for
Americans, feel free to keep using them for your food service work.  However, if you are
just  starting  this  work,  we  recommend  that  you  use  the  Food  Service  Guidelines  for
Federal  Facilities  [PDF-3.34MB]  rather  than  reinventing  the  wheel.  The  Food  Service
Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities  is  one  the  most  comprehensive  set  of  guidelines
available.  It includes standards for food and nutrition, facility efficiency, environmental
support,  community  development,  food  safety,  and  behavioral  design.   Written  to
improve access to healthier foods and beverages at federal facilities, this model set of
guidelines  can  be  readily  used  in  public  and  private  settings  within  your  state  or
community. See Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities: A Model for Your State or
Community for additional details. In settings such as: In venues such as: The 2019 Food
Service Guidelines Local Action Institute brought together diverse teams to develop a
plan that makes healthier food service and procurement practices a reality. Read about
the  positive  impact  in  New  York,  Oregon,  and  Pennsylvania.  The  Food  Service
Guidelines Implementation Toolkit helps explain how to build a foundation; strategize
and  act;  monitor  and  evaluate;  and  expand  initiatives.  Food  Service  Guidelines:  Easy
Access  to  Healthy  Food  [PDF-2.5MB]  is  a  two-page  infographic  that  explains  food
service guidelines. Share the link or download the PDF to show decision-makers in your
community or institution. The Food Service Guidelines (FSG) policy [PDF-290KB] helps
to create a healthier food environment at CDC and supports the health and well-being
of  its  employees.  The  organizational  policy  provides  direction  and  requirements  to
ensure that all new and renegotiated food service contracts and permits at CDC meet
the standards outlined in the current Food Service Guidelines (FSG) for Federal Facilities
[PDF-3.34MB]. Smart Food Choices: How to Implement Food Service Guidelines in Public
Facilities  [PDF-3.47MB]  includes  action  steps  to  help  you  implement  food  service
guidelines  in  your  government  work  site  or  other  public  facility  to  increase  the
availability  of  healthier  food  and  beverage  options  at  food  service  venues,  including
cafeterias,  concession  stands,  snack  bars,  and  vending  machines.  Tips  For  Offering
Healthier Options and Physical Activity at Workplace Meetings and Events [PDF-665KB]
includes pointers and resources for increasing healthier food and beverage options at
worksite  meetings,  parties,  conferences,  and  events  and  for  offering  physical  activity
opportunities  for  employees  throughout  the  work  day.  Sodium  Reduction  Guides  and
Strategies for Health Professionals has resources to support sodium reduction in local
and  community  settings.  To  receive  email  updates  about  this  topic,  enter  your  email
address.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/food-service-guidelines/index.html
