Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Every day, millions of Americans get their food from worksites
or  public  facilities.  Implementing  food  service  guidelines  in  these  settings  can  set  a
positive example for employees, visitors, members of the community, and employers
from other institutions. Changes in the type of food and beverages available in these
settings  can  improve  the  diets  of  people  who  eat  there  and  can  contribute  to  their
health and wellness. You can use the Building Blocks of Food Service Guidelines to help
you  get  started.  See  the  figure  below.  You  can  click  on  a  category  or  bullet  point  to
learn  more  information.  Food  service  guidelines  should  align  with  the  most  current
version  of  the  Dietary  Guidelines  for  Americans.  If  you  have  already  developed  food
service guidelines that are in line with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, feel free to
keep  using  them  for  your  food  service  work.  If  you  are  just  starting  this  work,  we
recommend that you use the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities rather than
reinventing the wheel. The comprehensive Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities
includes  standards  for  food  and  nutrition  as  well  as  facility  efficiency,  environmental
support, community development, food safety, and behavioral design. Although written
to improve access to healthier foods and beverages at federal facilities, this document
is  a  model  set  of  guidelines  for  many  other  settings  and  can  be  readily  used  in  your
community. To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/food-service-guidelines/implementation-toolkit.html
