Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. One of the most comprehensive sets of food service guidelines
available is the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities [PDF-3.34MB]. Written to
improve access to healthier foods and beverages at federal facilities, this model set of
guidelines   can  be  readily  used  in  public  and  private  settings  within  your   state  or
community. The Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities is a set of voluntary best
business practices to increase healthy and safe food options for employees and visitors.
When the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities are written into contracts, they
become organizational policy. The standards in the Food Service Guidelines for Federal
Facilities  are  designed  to  ensure  that:  More  than  60  scientists  and  food  service
operators  from  nine  federal  agencies  and  departments  collaborated  to  develop  the
Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities. The Food Service Guidelines for Federal
Facilities is not limited to federal facilities. Use the Food Service Guidelines in settings
such  as  hospitals  and  healthcare  facilities,  colleges  and  universities,  parks,  private
worksites,  and  state  and  local  agencies.  Within  these  settings,  the  guidelines  can  be
used  in  all  food  service  venues  such  as  cafeterias  and  cafes,  grills,  snack  bars,
concession stands, micro markets, and vending machines. Food service guidelines can
be adapted for use in settings where food is served or distributed, such as correctional
institutions, eldercare facilities, faith-based organizations, and food banks or pantries.
The  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities  [PDF-3.34MB]  is  a  set  of  voluntary
best practices that can be used to increase healthy and safe food options for employees
and  to  ensure  that  environmentally  responsible  practices  are  conducted.  An  Ancillary
Report of the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities [PDF-1.15MB] provides the
methodology for how the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities was developed
and provides rationales for each of the standards. Food Service Guidelines: Easy Access
to Healthy Food is a two-page infographic that explains food service guidelines. Share
the link or download the PDF to show decision-makers in your community or institution.
USDA’s  Food  Loss  and  Waste,  FDA’s  Food  Loss  and  Waste,  and  EPA’s  Sustainable
Management of Food websites provide information on reducing food waste. To receive
email updates about this topic, enter your email address.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/food-service-guidelines/federal-facilities.html
