Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
ORIGINAL  RESEARCH  —  Volume  16  —  October  17,  2019  Suggested  citation  for
this article: McGuirt JT, Huebner G, Ward R, Jilcott Pitts SB. Food and Beverage Options
at  Highway  Rest  Areas  in  North  Carolina:  A  Mixed-Methods  Audit  and  Geospatial
Approach.
 Prev
 Chronic
 Dis
 2019;16:190129.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd16.190129.  PEER  REVIEWED  What  is  already  known  on
this topic? Millions of people purchase food and beverages at highway rest areas. These
sites  receive  little  attention  in  food  environment  research,  despite  their  potential  for
health  promotion,  particularly  among  long-distance  truck  drivers,  who  have  a
disproportionate  burden  of  chronic  disease.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  We  found
that most food and beverages at highway rest areas in North Carolina were unhealthful
and that the healthfulness of items varied across sites. What are the implications for
public  health  practice?  Policy  changes  are  needed  to  increase  healthful  food  options
and  presentation  at  highway  rest  areas,  which  would  provide  travelers  with  more
healthful options conveniently located along their travel route. Introduction Each year,
millions of people purchase food at highway rest areas. Rest areas are potential sites
for  health  promotion  because  they  are  operated  by  the  public  sector;  they  are
frequently visited by professional truck drivers, who have a disproportionate burden of
chronic  disease;  and  they  are  easily  accessible.  To  our  knowledge,  no  research  has
systematically examined the healthfulness of food offerings at rest areas. The objective
of  this  study  was  to  determine  the  accessibility  and  healthfulness  of  food  and
beverages offered at highway rest areas in North Carolina using a mixed-methods audit
and  geospatial  approach.  Methods  We  conducted  a  cross-sectional  audit  of  all  rest
areas  offering  foods  and  beverages  in  North  Carolina  (N  =  30)  in  summer  2018.  We
used  the  Nutrition  Environment  Measures  Survey–Vending  (NEMS–V)  to  record  the  1)
type, price, and size of all foods and beverages and 2) healthfulness of items offered
(based  on  NEMS–V  categorization).  Two  researchers  independently  double  coded
NEMS–V data. We used geospatial analysis to examine proximity of rest areas to food
stores. We analyzed data by using univariate and bivariate analysis. Results The mean
number  of  vending  machines  per  site  was  8.0  (range,  2–12,  standard  deviation,  2.8).
The  healthfulness  of  offerings  varied  across  sites.  Most  food  items  (88.1%;  2,922  of
3,315) and beverage items (63.7%; 1,567 of 2,459) were classified as least healthful.
Cold  beverage  machines  had  a  greater  percentage  of  healthful  items  (38.2%;  778  of
2,036) than snack machines (11.4%; 374 of 3,270) (P < .001), mainly because of water
and diet soda in beverage machines. Conclusion Policy changes are needed to increase
the  number  and  presentation  of  healthful  food  options  at  highway  rest  areas.  Policy
changes could provide travelers with more healthful options conveniently located along
their  travel  route.  Top  Consumers  going  about  activities  of  daily  life  increasingly
prioritize convenience and accessibility when choosing ready-to-eat food products (1,2).
In 2012, 86% of Americans reported regularly eating or drinking in the car, often as a
result  of  time constraints  and  mobile lifestyles  (3).  The longer on  the road,  the more
likely drivers are to want a quick and easy stop for food (4). Thus, drivers, particularly
long-distance truck drivers, who have a disproportionate burden of chronic disease, are
a  strategic  target  for  encouraging  healthful  food  consumption  (5,6).  One  commonly
used source of convenient food purchases, particularly among truckers, is highway rest
areas. The United States has more than 1,800 rest areas (7). These sites receive little
attention in food environment research, even though each year millions of people in the
United States purchase snacks and beverages at these rest areas (24 million people per
year  in  North  Carolina  alone)  (8).  Rest  areas  are  potentially  useful  sites  for  health
promotion because they are owned and operated by the public sector (typically state
departments  of  transportation);  they  are  frequently  visited;  and  they  are  easily
accessible to truckers and long-distance travelers, including families looking for snacks
and  beverages  for  their  children.  Rest  areas  are  often  isolated,  because  private
businesses, such as fast food restaurants, cannot locate in the immediate proximity of
rest areas (9). Because they are located directly off exits and drivers do not need to
navigate through intersections, rest areas are easier to access than other highway food
sources.  To  our  knowledge,  no  research  has  systematically  examined  the  food
environment at highway rest areas. The objective of this study was to determine the
accessibility  and  healthfulness  of  food  and  beverages  offered  at  rest  areas  in  North
Carolina by using a mixed-methods audit and geospatial analysis. Top We conducted a
cross-sectional audit of all toll-free vending-only highway rest areas offering foods and
beverages in North Carolina in June and July 2018. Research staff members identified all
rest  areas  in  the  state  by  using  the  North  Carolina  Department  of  Transportation
website (10) and filtered data to identify locations offering food and beverages for sale.
Most  (69.8%,  30  of  43)  rest  areas  had  food  and  beverages  for  sale.  Research  staff
members then traveled to each rest area offering food and beverages to conduct a food
environment assessment. The research team used the Nutrition Environment Measures
Survey–Vending  (NEMS–V)  to  record  the  availability  of  food  choices  in  vending
machines. The team recorded the following: vending machine location (site of rest area
and location of machine within site); the type, price, and size (in ounces) of foods and
beverages;  NEMS–V  defined  type  of  vending  machine  (cold  beverage,  hot  beverage,
snack,  combination  [refrigerated  and  nonrefrigerated  beverage  and  snack],  and  ice
cream); item location within the machine; and healthfulness of items offered (11). The
team  also  rated  the  cleanliness  of  each  vending  machine  as  acceptable  or  not
acceptable and noted whether advertising of any item was posted. The research team
rated the healthfulness of each food and beverage item and the overall healthfulness of
vending machines by using the NEMS–V food coding summary (11). The NEMS–V uses
nutrition criteria of the Health and Sustainability Guidelines for Federal Concessions and
Vending  Operations  (12).  These  standards  are  based  on  multiple  factors,  including
calories,  sodium  content,  and  percentage  of  calories  from  fat.  We  labeled  each  food
(excluding  gums  and  mints,  because  they  have  negligible  nutritional  value)  and
beverage  item  as  green  (healthiest  choice),  yellow  (healthy  choice),  or  red  (not  as
healthy of a choice) and then summed the total number of each color in each machine.
We  classified  each  machine  into  the  following  NEMS–V  “medal”  categories  of
healthfulness (11): no medal (<30% of food items and <55% of beverage items were
yellow or green), bronze (at least 30% of food items or 55% of beverage items were
yellow  or  green),  silver  (at  least  40%  of  food  items  or  65%  of  beverage  items  were
yellow or green), or gold (at least 50% of food items or 75% of beverage items were
yellow or green). Two researchers independently completed all NEMS–V assessments.
After completion of the audits, the research team met, reached consensus on all items,
and developed a final data set for analysis. To examine the spatial context of rest area
sites  and  the  potential  influence  of  contextual  characteristics  (eg,  competition  from
nearby food stores, rural vs urban location) on the healthfulness of items offered, the
research  team  used  ArcGIS  version  10.4.1  (Esri).  We  identified  limited-service
restaurants  (North  American  Industry  Classification  System  [NAICS]-722513)  and
convenience  stores  (NAICS-445120)  by  accessing  the  Reference  USA  commercial
business database (7). Limited-service restaurants are primarily establishments where
patrons typically order or select items and pay before eating; food and beverages may
be consumed onsite, taken out, or delivered. We batch-coded the location of rest areas,
limited-service  restaurants,  and  convenience  stores  to  the  highest  level  of  accuracy
with the Google Maps application programming interface through the BatchGeo website
(13). Using Esri’s ArcGIS Spatial Analyst, we generated buffer service areas along road
networks from the rest area sites and joined these to food venue point layers to obtain
the number of limited-service restaurants and convenience stores within defined areas.
To  account  for  differences  in  travel  patterns  based  on  these  various  highway
configurations, we created 0.5-mile, 1-mile, 2-mile, and 5-mile road network buffers for
rest areas on traditional grid highways (not limited access, at-grade intersections [ie,
where roads connect at a common elevation]), and 2-mile, 5-mile, 10-mile, and 20-mile
road network buffers for rest areas only on limited-access highways (with interchanges
and  ramps).  We  determined  whether  rest  areas  were  located  in  rural  areas  or  urban
areas  by  using  US  Census  Bureau  urbanized  area  shapefiles  (14).  We  generated
univariate  statistics  for  frequencies  or  percentages  of  vending  machine  types  overall
and  by  site;  the  average  number  of  items  per  machine  overall  and  by  site;  the  most
common foods and beverages; the average, range, and variability of package sizes and
prices  across  items;  the  frequency  and  percentage  of  each  healthfulness  color  code
overall and by site; and the frequency and percentage of vending machine medal level
overall  and  by  site.  We  also  generated  frequencies  for  the  number  of  limited-service
restaurants and convenience stores within various distances of the rest areas. At the
vending  machine  level,  we  used  the  Fisher  exact  test  to  measure  differences  in
frequency of each healthfulness color code by machine type. At the site level, we used
χ2 tests to examine 1) the number of machines that received a medal (bronze, silver,
gold) and the number that did not and 2) the overall number of green or yellow items
and the overall number of red items. We conducted the χ2 analysis by whether the rest
area was located in a rural or urban area and whether it was located on an interstate or
not. We used R Studio version 3.43 (RStudio: Integrated Development for RStudio, Inc)
for analysis. Top All machines were working at almost all sites (28 of 30) (Table 1). We
found  24  rural  rest  areas  and  6  urban  rest  areas;  most  sites  were  located  along
interstate highways (23 of 30), and the remaining sites were located on primary state
highways (7 of 30) (Figure). Of the 7 primary state highways, 1 was a limited-access
highway, 3 were traditional grid highways, and 3 had characteristics of both. Nearly half
of the rest areas (14 of 30) had no limited-service restaurants within 5 miles, and 9 of
30  rest  areas  had  no  convenience  stores  within  5  miles.  The  mean  number  of  stores
within  a  5-mile  buffer  of  a  limited-access  highway  was  8.7  for  limited-service
restaurants and 7.0 for convenience stores (Table 2).
 
Figure.
Map of highway rest area locations serving food and/or beverages in vending machines,
North  Carolina  (N  =  30).  Each  location  was  categorized  as  bronze,  silver,  gold,  or  no
award,  on  the  basis  of  criteria  established  by  the  Nutrition  Environment  Measures
Survey–Vending  (11).  US  Census  Bureau–designated  urban  areas  and  the  US  freeway
road  network  are  also  indicated.  [A  text  version  of  this  figure  is  also  available.]  The
mean number of machines per site was 8.0 (range, 2–11; standard deviation [SD], 2.8).
Cold  beverage  machines  were  the  most  common  machines  across  the  sites,  with  a
mean of 4.1 (SD, 1.5) machines per location, followed by snack machines (mean, 2.9;
SD, 1.2), hot beverage (mean, 0.6; SD, 0.5), combination (mean, 0.2; SD, 0.3), and ice
cream  (mean,  0.1;  SD,  0.4)  (Table  1).  For  healthfulness  awards,  12  sites  had  no
machines with an award, 10 sites had a machine with a bronze award, 3 sites had a
machine with a silver award, and 11 sites had a machine with a gold award. Six sites
had more than 1 machine that received a medal. The highest proportion of machines
that received a medal at any site was 1 of 2 machines. In the comparison of urban and
rural  locations,  we  found  no  significant  difference  between  the  number  of  green  or
yellow items and the number of red items (χ2 = 0.6; P = .43) or between the number of
machines with no medal and the number of machines with a medal (χ2 = 1.1; P = .30).
In  the  comparison  of  interstate  locations  and  noninterstate  locations,  we  found  no
significant  difference  between  the  number  of  green  or  yellow  and  the  number  of  red
items (χ2 = 0.8; P = .37) or between the number of machines with no medals and the
number of machines with medals (χ2 = 0.2; P = .63) (Table 1). We found 241 vending
machines  across  all  sites  (Table  3);  nearly  all  (n  =  239)  were  in  working  order.  We
found no instances of advertising of healthful or unhealthful food or beverage items. All
vending machines were considered acceptably clean. We found a mean 24.0 (SD, 14.3)
items per machine. Most items (61.8%; 1,258 of 2,036) in cold beverage machines were
categorized as red; 38.2% (778 of 2,036) were categorized as yellow or green. Of 125
cold beverage machines, most (82.4%; n = 103) received no award; 8.0% (n = 10) were
categorized  as  gold,  7.2%  (n  =  9)  as  bronze,  and  2.4%  (n  =  3)  as  silver.  Among  88
snack machines, 88.6% (2,896 of 3,270) of items were categorized as red; 11.4% (374
of  3,270)  were  categorized  yellow  or  green.  Most  (98.9%;  n  =  87)  snack  machines
received no award. Among the 5 combination machines, 55.6% (30 of 54) of items were
categorized as red and 44.4% (24 of 54) as yellow or green. Among 19 hot beverage
machines, 70.2% (255 of 363) of items were categorized as red (primarily because of
coffee drinks with both added sugars and creamers), and 29.8% (108 of 363) of items
were  categorized  as  yellow  or  green  (primarily  because  of  plain  coffee,  sugar  or
creamer added [but not both], and hot water). Among the 4 ice cream machines, 98.0%
(50  of  51)  of  items  were  categorized  as  red  and  none  as  green.  Cold  beverage
machines were significantly more likely than snack machines to receive a bronze, silver,
or gold medal (P < .001), but we found no significant differences when comparing cold
beverage machines with hot beverage machines (P = .21), combination machines (P =
.23), or ice cream machines (P = .58). We found 5,744 items across all sites: 3,315 food
items  and  2,459  beverage  items.  The  mean  portion  size  of  food  items  was  1.9  oz
(range, 0.5–15.0 oz; SD, 1.1 oz), and the mean price was $1.19 (range, $0.45–$3.50;
SD, $0.39). Mean beverage portion size was 17.2 oz (range, 1.93 oz [energy drink] to
24.0  oz;  SD,  4.0  oz),  and  mean  price  was  $1.63  (range,  $0.75–$3.25;  SD,  $0.51).
Overall, most (88.1%; n = 2,922) food items were categorized as red; 9.0% (n = 300)
were  categorized  as  yellow  and  2.8%  (n  =  93)  as  green.  Most  63.7%  (n  =  1,567)
beverages were categorized as red; 21.3% (n = 523) were categorized as yellow; and
15.0% (n = 369) as green. The most common “green” beverage was plain bottled water
(92.7%; 342 of 369), and the most common “yellow” beverage was Diet Pepsi (15.7%;
82 of 523). The most common “green” food was salted peanuts (n = 39), followed by
trail mix (n = 30, all brands) and Goldfish crackers (n = 25). The 5 most common “red”
foods  were  Skittles  (n  =  129;  all  flavors),  Lays  potato  chips  (n  =  109;  all  flavors),
Doritos (n = 81; all flavors), Snickers (n = 74), and Peanut M&Ms (n = 61). Top To our
knowledge, this is the first study to describe the healthfulness of food and beverages
offered  at  highway  rest  areas.  Our  findings  confirm  reports  that  public  area  vending
machines offer few healthful options (15,16). Although most items and machines were
classified  as  less  healthful,  we  found  generally  healthful  options,  such  as  water  and
nuts, at every site. More healthful options could be promoted to travelers to encourage
their selection, including product placement for greater visibility, promotional signage,
and price discounts. We also found that machines often had either mostly less healthful
options  or  mostly  healthful  options.  Further  research  is  needed  to  understand  which
would  result  in  better  choices:  combining  unhealthful  and  healthful  items  or  isolating
healthful items in their own machines. One study found that the most intrusive vending
machine intervention (highest restriction on energy-dense options) led to lower-calorie
choices  than  did  less  intrusive  interventions,  such  as  calorie  labeling,  increasing
low-calorie  choices,  and  increasing  the  price  of  high-calorie  choices  (17).  That  study,
however,  was  conducted  in  a  research  laboratory  and  not  a  real-world  setting,  and
previous research found intrusive interventions are less likely to be widely accepted by
the public (18,19). We found some variability across sites of the healthfulness of items
but no significant differences in the healthfulness of items by urban–rural designation or
proximity to the interstate. Factors driving the variability in the healthfulness of items
offered are unclear, particularly given that rest areas in North Carolina are operated by
a single public entity and serviced by vending contracts with the state department of
transportation.  Future  research  should  examine  these  influential  factors.  Previous
vending trade reports suggest spatial variability in the success of certain products (20).
Items  that  could  be  deemed  as  more  nutrient-dense  alternatives  may  have  been
categorized as unhealthful in our study. For example, we categorized vegetable chips
and  straws  as  red  items  because  of  their  percentage  of  saturated  fat.  Thus,  the
perceived  accessibility  to  more  healthful  options  could  be  deflated  by  the  strict
categorization used in NEMS–V scoring. Small changes from less nutrient-dense items
to more nutrient-dense items, even if not a leap in healthfulness, can be meaningful in
achieving  a  better  nutritional  status  and  could  be  a  useful  strategy  to  promote  more
healthful purchases. Making more healthful options more available or highlighting more
healthful items could be an effective state-level policy to improve health behavior. More
refrigerated  machines  with  fresh  produce  and  other  more  healthful  foods  may  be
needed to improve the healthfulness of vending items. Although increasing availability
of  bottled  water  could  create  more  healthful  vending  options,  the  promotion,
enhancement,  or  installation  of  hydration  stations  (ie,  water  bottle  refilling  stations)
could  be  a  better  approach  because  of  the  negative  environmental  impact  of  plastic
bottles. Another approach to increase the availability of more healthful foods could be
direct-to-consumer  operations,  such  as  produce  stands  and  farmers  markets  run  by
local farmers. This approach was adopted in some areas to promote local agriculture
(21).  More  healthful  options  could  also  be  promoted  in  the  same  way  other
non-diet–related health behavior initiatives have been promoted at highway rest areas.
Several US states have established “safe phone zones” in rest areas, where travelers
are offered a safe place to use their cell phones (22). Such interventions could target
both commuting and long-distance motorists. Although research on rest area usage is
limited,  a  report  in  New  England  found  that  vending  machines  are  a  top  amenity  for
truck drivers (23), who are more likely than other motorists to use rest areas as a food
source  because  the  size  of  their  vehicle  limits  their  choices  (24).  It  is  important  for
truckers to have safe areas to rest and opportunities to eat more nutritious foods; these
factors may help truckers to be alert on the road and prevent accidents. In 2017, 12%
of traffic fatalities involved a large truck or bus (25). The National Academy of Sciences,
Engineering,  and  Medicine  suggested  the  need  to  further  examine  causes  of
commercial driver fatigue, some which could be diet-related (26). Truckers are a key
part of our national economy and keeping them healthy and strong is of national public
health  and  economic  interest.  Policies  were  recently  enacted  or  proposed  to  improve
the  offering  of  more  healthful  foods  in  vending  machines  to  combat  the  obesity
epidemic  (27).  Glendale,  California,  voted  to  replace  all  chips  and  sodas  with  fruits,
vegetables, and nuts in vending machines on city property (28). Maryland tried, albeit
unsuccessfully,  to  require  that  at  least  75%  of  packaged  food  and  beverage  options
offered  in  a  food  and  beverage  vending  machine  located  on  property  owned  or
managed  by  the  state  to  be  healthful  options  (29).  In  addition,  3  federal  agencies
released regulations or recommendations on healthful vending. The US Department of
Agriculture’s Smart Snacks in School regulation requires that foods served in vending
machines at schools meet nutrition standards (30). The US Department of Health and
Human  Services  developed  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities,  which  sets
goals  to  ensure  that  healthful  foods  and  beverages  are  encouraged  at  all  federal
facilities (31). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention developed a guidebook,
Healthy Vending Machine Initiatives in State Facilities (32). Each policy is an example of
a  large-scale  public  policy  to  inform  future  initiatives  to  increase  healthful  options  in
rest  area  vending  machines.  This  study  has  limitations.  We  collected  data  in  only  1
state, and the data may not be representative of items offered in rest areas elsewhere
in the United States. Future research should examine the healthfulness of items offered
in a larger geographic area. North Carolina offers vending options only along toll-free
highways, whereas some states have extensive toll road systems with commercialized
areas that have multiple options for dining. Thus, future research should examine the
food offerings in those locations. Because of some machine displays and challenges in
determining product characteristics, we could not collect information on the pricing of
some  items  (508  of  5,815;  8.7%)  or  portion  size  (290  of  5,815;  5.0%),  although  we
believe that this absence of data was circumstantial and not systematic. The study was
cross-sectional, and thus we could not track changes in availability, prices, and portion
sizes  over  time.  We  also  do  not  have  access  to  sales  or  purchase  data,  which  could
have clarified purchasing behaviors. Future work should collect data on customers and
examine availability and purchases longitudinally. This research provides novel findings
on the availability of food items at highway rest areas in a southern US state using a
valid  and  reliable  audit  tool  and  geospatial  analysis.  We  found  mostly  less-healthful
foods being offered, though healthful options were available. Our findings support the
need  for  policy  changes  to  increase  the  number  and  presentation  of  healthful  food
options at highway rest areas, which could position rest areas as a healthful alternative
to  less-healthful  options  for  travelers.  Top  This  work  was  supported  using  internal
funding from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. No copyrighted material,
surveys, instruments, or tools were used in this article. Top Corresponding Author: Jared
T McGuirt, PhD, MPH, The University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 319 College Ave,
318  Stone  Building,  Greensboro,  NC  27412.  Telephone:  336-256-0322.  Email:
jtmcguir@uncg.edu.  Author  Affiliations:  1Department  of  Nutrition,  University  of  North
Carolina  at  Greensboro,  Greensboro,  North  Carolina.  2Department  of  Community  and
Behavioral  Health,  College  of  Public  Health,  East  Tennessee  State  University,  Johnson
City,  Tennessee.  3Department  of  Public  Health,  East  Carolina  University,  Greenville,
North Carolina. Top Top  
a Data source: North Carolina Department of Transportation (10). Of 43 highway rest
areas in the state, 30 offered foods and beverages for sale in vending machines in June
and July 2018.
b  Items  were  coded  according  to  healthfulness  of  items.  The  NEMS–V  uses  nutrition
criteria of the Health and Sustainability Guidelines for Federal Concessions and Vending
Operations  (12).  These  standards  are  based  on  multiple  factors,  including  calories,
sodium content, and percentage of calories from fat. Green, healthiest choice; yellow,
healthy choice; red, not as healthy a choice. 
c Award categories: no medal, <30% of food and <55% of beverage items were yellow
or green; bronze medal, at least 30% of food or 55% of beverage items were yellow or
green;  silver  medal,  at  least  40%  of  food  or  65%  of  beverage  items  were  yellow  or
green; gold medal, at least 50% food or 75% beverage items were yellow or green.
  
a Data source: North Carolina Department of Transportation (10). Of 43 highway rest
areas in the state, 30 offered foods and beverages for sale in vending machines in June
and July 2018.
b Buffer area generated on and following road networks.
c Characterized by interchanges and exit ramps.
d Not measured because measure not appropriate for highway type.
  
a Data source: North Carolina Department of Transportation (10). Of 43 highway rest
areas in the state, 30 offered foods and beverages for sale in vending machines in June
and July 2018.
b Refrigerated and nonrefrigerated beverage and snack.
c  Items  were  coded  according  to  healthfulness  of  items.  The  NEMS–V  uses  nutrition
criteria of the Health and Sustainability Guidelines for Federal Concessions and Vending
Operations  (12).  These  standards  are  based  on  multiple  factors,  including  calories,
sodium content, and percentage of calories from fat. Green, healthiest choice; yellow,
healthy choice; red, not as healthy a choice.
d Award categories: no medal, <30% of food and <55% of beverage items were yellow
or green; bronze medal, at least 30% of food or 55% of beverage items were yellow or
green;  silver  medal,  at  least  40%  of  food  or  65%  of  beverage  items  were  yellow  or
green; gold medal, at least 50% food or 75% beverage items were yellow or green. Top
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect
the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health
Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the  authors’  affiliated
institutions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2019/19_0129.htm
