A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 One  of  the  most  comprehensive  sets  of  food  service  guidelines  is  the  Food  Service
Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities.  Written  to  improve  access  to  healthier  foods  and
beverages at federal facilities, this model set of guidelines can be used in public and
private  settings  within  states  and  communities.    The  Food  Service  Guidelines  for
Federal Facilities is a set of voluntary best business practices to increase healthy and
safe food options for employees and visitors. When this set of guidelines is written into
contracts,  it  becomes  organizational  policy.  The  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal
Facilities is designed to ensure that: The Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities is
not  limited  to  use  in  federal  facilities.  You  can  use  this  set  of  guidelines  in  many
settings, such as: Within these settings, the guidelines can be used in all food service
venues, such as: The Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities can be adapted for
use  in  settings  where  food  is  served,  such  as  correctional  institutions,  eldercare
facilities, and faith-based organizations.  The food and nutrition standards recommend
that specific healthier foods and beverages be available for purchase. In alignment with
the current Dietary Guidelines for Americans, the Food Service Guidelines for Federal
Facilities  includes  food  and  nutrition  standards  that  support  offering:  Standards  for
using  behavioral  design  practices  are  included  to  facilitate  the  selection  of  healthier
foods. The selection of healthier foods and beverages is influenced by how products are
prepared,  placed,  presented,  promoted,  and  priced.   The  Food  Service  Guidelines  for
Federal Facilities contains standards for accurate forecasting practices for ordering and
purchasing bulk-serve condiments.  This document also contains standards promoting
the  use  of  reusable  plates,  utensils,  and  beverage  containers,  among  other  similar
standards.  The Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities supports environmentally
beneficial  practices  such  as:  The  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities
recommends  offering  a  specific  percentage  of  foods  and  beverages  that  are  "locally
sourced, certified organic, produced with another certified community-development or
environmentally  beneficial  practice,  or  any  combination  thereof."  The  Food  Service
Guidelines for Federal Facilities reminds food service operators to follow the Food and
Drug  Administration's  Food  Code  to  prevent  foodborne  illness.  It  also  suggests  going
beyond  what  is  described  in  the  Food  Code.   For  example,  implementing
evidence-based  managerial  practices,  employee  training,  and  food  preparation
techniques may further reduce the risk of foodborne illness. To learn details for how to
put food service guidelines into practice, visit: Food Service Guidelines Micro-Learning
ModulesShort  videos  describing  effective  food  service  guidelines  policies  and  how  to
put  them  into  practice  in  your  community.  This  series  was  created  by  the  National
Association  of  County  and  City  Health  Officials  (NACCHO)  and  CDC's  Division  of
Nutrition,  Physical  Activity,  and  Obesity.   The  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal
Facilities [PDF – 3.3 MB] is a set of voluntary best practices that can be used to increase
healthy  and  safe  food  options  for  employees  and  to  ensure  that  environmentally
responsible practices are conducted.  An Ancillary Report of the Food Service Guidelines
for  Federal  Facilities  [PDF  –  1183  KB]  provides  the  methodology  for  how  the  Food
Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities was developed and provides rationales for each
of the standards.  Food Service Guidelines: Easy Access to Healthy Food [PDF – 1483
KB]  is  a  two-page  infographic  that  explains  food  service  guidelines.  Share  the  link  or
print  the  PDF  to  show  decision-makers  in  your  community  or  institution.   2019  Food
Service Guidelines  Local  Action  Institute [PDF –  690 KB]  describes  three communities
that  used  food  service  guidelines  practices  to  create  positive  change.   USDA’s  Food
Loss  and  Waste,  FDA’s  Food  Loss  and  Waste,  and  EPA’s  Sustainable  Management  of
Food websites provide information on reducing food waste. Good nutrition is essential
for health across the lifespan. See strategies, data, and resources to improve nutrition
in  states  and  communities.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/php/food-service-guidelines/food-service-guidelines-federal-facilities.html
