A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Laundry and bedding guidelines from the
Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities (2003). Laundry
in a health-care facility may include bed sheets and blankets, towels, personal clothing,
patient apparel, uniforms, scrub suits, gowns, and drapes for surgical procedures.1245
Although contaminated textiles and fabrics in health-care facilities can be a source of
substantial  numbers  of  pathogenic  microorganisms,  reports  of  health-care  associated
diseases  linked  to  contaminated  fabrics  are  so  few  in  number  that  the  overall  risk  of
disease transmission during the laundry process likely is negligible. When the incidence
of  such  events  are  evaluated  in  the  context  of  the  volume  of  items  laundered  in
health-care  settings  (estimated  to  be  5  billion  pounds  annually  in  the  United
States),1246  existing  control  measures  (e.g.,  standard  precautions)  are  effective  in
reducing the risk of disease transmission to patients and staff. Therefore, use of current
control  measures  should  be  continued  to  minimize  the  contribution  of  contaminated
laundry  to  the  incidence  of  health-care  associated  infections.  The  control  measures
described in this section of the guideline are based on principles of hygiene, common
sense, and consensus guidance; they pertain to laundry services utilized by health-care
facilities,  either  inhouse  or  contract,  rather  than  to  laundry  done  in  the  home.
Contaminated textiles and fabrics often contain high numbers of microorganisms from
body  substances,  including  blood,  skin,  stool,  urine,  vomitus,  and  other  body  tissues
and  fluids.  When  textiles  are  heavily  contaminated  with  potentially  infective  body
substances, they can contain bacterial loads of 106 –108 CFU/100 cm2 of fabric.1247
Disease  transmission  attributed  to  health-care  laundry  has  involved  contaminated
fabrics  that  were  handled  inappropriately  (i.e.,  the  shaking  of  soiled  linens).  Bacteria
(Salmonella spp., Bacillus cereus), viruses (hepatitis B virus [HBV]), fungi (Microsporum
canis),  and  ectoparasites  (scabies)  presumably  have  been  transmitted  from
contaminated  textiles  and  fabrics  to  workers  via  In  these  events,  however,
investigations could not rule out the possibility that some of these reported infections
were  acquired  from  community  sources.  Through  a  combination  of  soil  removal,
pathogen removal, and pathogen inactivation, contaminated laundry can be rendered
hygienically  clean.  Hygienically  clean  laundry  carries  negligible  risk  to  health-care
workers  and  patients,  provided  that  the  clean  textiles,  fabric,  and  clothing  are  not
inadvertently  contaminated  before  use.   Top  of  Page  OSHA  defines  contaminated
laundry  as  "laundry  which  has  been  soiled  with  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious
materials  or  may  contain  sharps."967  The  purpose  of  the  laundry  portion  of  the
standard  is  to  protect  the  worker  from  exposure  to  potentially  infectious  materials
during  collection,  handling,  and  sorting  of  contaminated  textiles  through  the  use  of
personal  protective  equipment,  proper  work  practices,  containment,  labeling,  hazard
communication,  and  ergonomics.  Experts  are  divided  regarding  the  practice  of
transporting  clothes  worn  at  the  workplace  to  the  healthcare  worker's  home  for
laundering.  Although  OSHA  regulations  prohibit  home  laundering  of  items  that  are
considered  personal  protective  apparel  or  equipment  (e.g.,  laboratory  coats),967
experts disagree about whether this regulation extends to uniforms and scrub suits that
are  not  contaminated  with  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious  material.  Health-care
facility policies on this matter vary and may be inconsistent with recommendations of
professional  organizations.1253,  1254  Uniforms  without  blood  or  body  substance
contamination presumably do not differ appreciably from street clothes in the degree
and  microbial  nature  of  soilage.  Home  laundering  would  be  expected  to  remove  this
level of soil adequately. However, if health-care facilities require the use of uniforms,
they  should  either  make  provisions  to  launder  them  or  provide  information  to  the
employee regarding infection control and cleaning guidelines for the item based on the
tasks being performed at the facility. Health-care facilities should address the need to
provide this service and should determine the frequency for laundering these items. In
a recent study examining the microbial contamination of medical students' white coats,
the students perceived the coats as "clean" as long as the garments were not visibly
contaminated  with  body  substances,  even  after  wearing  the  coats  for  several
weeks.1255 The heaviest bacterial load was found on the sleeves and the pockets of
these garments; the organisms most frequently isolated were Staphylococcus aureus,
diphtheroids,  and  Acinetobacter  spp.1255  Presumably,  the  sleeves  of  the  coat  may
make  contact  with  a  patient  and  potentially  serve  to  transfer  environmentally  stable
microorganisms among patients. In this study, however, surveillance was not conducted
among  patients  to  detect  new  infections  or  colonizations.  The  students  did,  however,
report that they would likely replace their coats more frequently and regularly if clean
coats  were  provided.1255  Apart  from  this  study,  which  documents  the  presence  of
pathogenic bacteria on health-care facility clothing, reports of infections attributed to
either  the  contact  with  such  apparel  or  with  home  laundering  have  been  rare.  1256,
1257  Laundry  services  for  health-care  facilities  are  provided  either  in-house  (i.e.,
on-premise laundry [OPL]), co-operatives (i.e., those entities owned and operated by a
group of facilities), or by off-site commercial laundries. In the latter, the textiles may be
owned  by  the  health-care  facility,  in  which  case  the  processor  is  paid  for  laundering
only. Alternatively, the textiles may be owned by the processor who is paid for every
piece laundered on a "rental" fee. The laundry facility in a health-care setting should be
designed for efficiency in providing hygienically clean textiles, fabrics, and apparel for
patients  and  staff.  Guidelines  for  laundry  construction  and  operation  for  health-care
facilities,  including  nursing  facilities,  have  been  published.120,  1258  The  design  and
engineering standards for existing facilities are those cited in the AIA edition in effect
during the time of the facility's construction.120 A laundry facility is usually partitioned
into two separate areas – a "dirty" area for receiving and handling the soiled laundry
and a "clean" area for processing the washed items.1259 To minimize the potential for
recontaminating  cleaned  laundry  with  aerosolized  contaminated  lint,  areas  receiving
contaminated  textiles  should  be  at  negative  air  pressure  relative  to  the  clean
areas.1260–1262 Laundry areas should have handwashing facilities readily available to
workers. Laundry workers should wear appropriate personal protective equipment (e.g.,
gloves  and  protective  garments)  while  sorting  soiled  fabrics  and  textiles.967  Laundry
equipment should be used and maintained according to the manufacturer's instructions
to prevent microbial contamination of the system.1250, 1263 Damp textiles should not
be left in machines overnight.1250 The laundry process starts with the removal of used
or  contaminated  textiles,  fabrics,  and/or  clothing  from  the  areas  where  such
contamination occurred, including but not limited to patients' rooms, surgical/operating
areas,  and  laboratories.  Handling  contaminated  laundry  with  a  minimum  of  agitation
can  help  prevent  the  generation  of  potentially  contaminated  lint  aerosols  in
patient-care  areas.967,  1259  Sorting  or  rinsing  contaminated  laundry  at  the  location
where  contamination  occurred  is  prohibited  by  OSHA.967  Contaminated  textiles  and
fabrics  are  placed  into  bags  or  other  appropriate  containment  in  this  location;  these
bags are then securely tied or otherwise closed to prevent leakage.967 Single bags of
sufficient  tensile  strength  are  adequate  for  containing  laundry,  but  leak-resistant
containment  is  needed  if  the  laundry  is  wet  and  capable  of  soaking  through  a  cloth
bag.1264 Bags containing contaminated laundry must be clearly identified with labels,
color-coding, or other methods so that health-care workers handle these items safely,
regardless  of  whether  the  laundry  is  transported  within  the  facility  or  destined  for
transport to an off-site laundry service.967 Typically, contaminated laundry originating
in  isolation  areas  of  the  hospital  is  segregated  and  handled  with  special  practices;
however, few, if any, cases of health-care associated infection have been linked to this
source.1265  Single-blinded  studies  have  demonstrated  that  laundry  from  isolation
areas  is  no  more  heavily  contaminated  with  microorganisms  than  laundry  from
elsewhere  in  the  hospital.1266  Therefore,  adherence  to  standard  precautions  when
handling  contaminated  laundry  in  isolation  areas  and  minimizing  agitation  of  the
contaminated  items  are  considered  sufficient  to  prevent  the  dispersal  of  potentially
infectious aerosols.6 Contaminated textiles and fabrics in bags can be transported by
cart or chute.1258, 1262 Laundry chutes require proper design, maintenance, and use,
because  the  piston-like  action  of  a  laundry  bag  traveling  in  the  chute  can  propel
airborne  microbial  contaminants  throughout  the  facility.1267–1269  Laundry  chutes
should  be  maintained  under  negative  air  pressure  to  prevent  the  spread  of
microorganisms from floor to floor. Loose, contaminated pieces of laundry should not be
tossed into chutes, and laundry bags should be closed or otherwise secured to prevent
the contents from falling out into the chute.1270 Health-care facilities should determine
the point in the laundry process at which textiles and fabrics should be sorted. Sorting
after washing minimizes the exposure of laundry workers to infective material in soiled
fabrics,  reduces  airborne  microbial  contamination  in  the  laundry  area,  and  helps  to
prevent  potential  percutaneous  injuries  to  personnel.1271  Sorting  laundry  before
washing  protects  both  the  machinery  and  fabrics  from  hard  objects  (e.g.,  needles,
syringes, and patients' property) and reduces the potential for recontamination of clean
textiles.1272  Sorting  laundry  before  washing  also  allows  for  customization  of  laundry
formulas based on the mix of products in the system and types of soils encountered.
Additionally,  if  work  flow  allows,  increasing  the  amount  of  segregation  by  specific
product  types  will  usually  yield  the  greatest  amount  of  work  efficiency  during
inspection,  folding,  and  pack-making  operations.1253  Protective  apparel  for  the
workers  and  appropriate  ventilation  can  minimize  these  exposures.  967,  1258–1260
Gloves used for the task of sorting laundry should be of sufficient thickness to minimize
sharps  injuries.967  Employee  safety  personnel  and  industrial  hygienists  can  help  to
determine  the  appropriate  glove  choice.  Fabrics,  textiles,  and  clothing  used  in
health-care  settings  are  disinfected  during  laundering  and  generally  rendered  free  of
vegetative pathogens (i.e., hygienically clean), but they are not sterile.1273 Laundering
cycles  consist  of  flush,  main  wash,  bleaching,  rinsing,  and  souring.1274  Cleaned  wet
textiles,  fabrics,  and  clothing  are  then  dried,  pressed  as  needed,  and  prepared  (e.g.,
folded and packaged) for distribution back to the facility. Clean linens provided by an
off-site  laundry  must  be  packaged  prior  to  transport  to  prevent  inadvertent
contamination  from  dust  and  dirt  during  loading,  delivery,  and  unloading.  Functional
packaging  of  laundry  can  be  achieved  in  several  ways,  including  The  antimicrobial
action  of  the  laundering  process  results  from  a  combination  of  mechanical,  thermal,
and  chemical  factors.1271,  1275,  1276  Dilution  and  agitation  in  water  remove
substantial  quantities  of  microorganisms.  Soaps  and  detergents  function  to  suspend
soils  and  also  exhibit  some  microbiocidal  properties.  Hot  water  provides  an  effective
means of destroying microorganisms.1277 A temperature of at least 160°F (71°C) for a
minimum of 25 minutes is commonly recommended for hot-water washing.2 Water of
this temperature can be provided by steam jet or separate booster heater.120 The use
of  chlorine  bleach  assures  an  extra  margin  of  safety.1278,  1279  A  total  available
chlorine  residual  of  50–150  ppm  is  usually  achieved  during  the  bleach  cycle.1277
Chlorine
 bleach
 becomes
 activated
 at
 water
 temperatures
 of
 135°F–145°F
(57.2°C–62.7°C). The last of the series of rinse cycles is the addition of a mild acid (i.e.,
sour) to neutralize any alkalinity in the water supply, soap, or detergent. The rapid shift
in  pH  from  approximately  12  to  5  is  an  effective  means  to  inactivate  some
microorganisms.1247  Effective  removal  of  residual  alkali  from  fabrics  is  an  important
measure in reducing the risk for skin reactions among patients. Chlorine bleach is an
economical, broad-spectrum chemical germicide that enhances the effectiveness of the
laundering process. Chlorine bleach is not, however, an appropriate laundry additive for
all fabrics. Traditionally, bleach was not recommended for laundering flame-retardant
fabrics, linens, and clothing because its use diminished the flame-retardant properties
of the treated fabric.1273 However, some modern-day flame retardant fabrics can now
tolerate chlorine bleach. Flame-retardant fabrics, whether topically treated or inherently
flame retardant, should be thoroughly rinsed during the rinse cycles, because detergent
residues  are  capable  of  supporting  combustion.  Chlorine  alternatives  (e.g.,  activated
oxygen-based laundry detergents) provide added benefits for fabric and color safety in
addition  to  antimicrobial  activity.  Studies  comparing  the  antimicrobial  potencies  of
chlorine  bleach  and  oxygen-based  bleach  are  needed.  Oxygen-based  bleach  and
detergents used in health-care settings should be registered by EPA to ensure adequate
disinfection  of  laundry.  Health-care  workers  should  note  the  cleaning  instructions  of
textiles,  fabrics,  drapes,  and  clothing  to  identify  special  laundering  requirements  and
appropriate hygienic cleaning options.1278 Although hot-water washing is an effective
laundry  disinfection  method,  the  cost  can  be  substantial.  Laundries  are  typically  the
largest  users  of  hot  water  in  hospitals.  They  consume  50%–75%  of  the  total  hot
water,1280  representing  an  average  of  10%–15%  of  the  energy  used  by  a  hospital.
Several  studies  have  demonstrated  that  lower  water  temperatures  of  71°F–77°F
(22°C–25°C) can reduce microbial contamination when the cycling of the washer, the
wash  detergent,  and  the  amount  of  laundry  additive  are  carefully  monitored  and
controlled.1247,  1281–1285  Low-temperature  laundry  cycles  rely  heavily  on  the
presence  of  chlorine-  or  oxygen-activated  bleach  to  reduce  the  levels  of  microbial
contamination. The selection of hot- or cold-water laundry cycles may be dictated by
state  health-care  facility  licensing  standards  or  by  other  regulation.  Regardless  of
whether hot or cold water is used for washing, the temperatures reached in drying and
especially during ironing provide additional significant microbiocidal action.1247 Dryer
temperatures and cycle times are dictated by the materials in the fabrics. Man-made
fibers  (i.e.,  polyester  and  polyester  blends)  require  shorter  times  and  lower
temperatures.  After  washing,  cleaned  and  dried  textiles,  fabrics,  and  clothing  are
pressed, folded, and packaged for transport, distribution, and storage by methods that
ensure their cleanliness until use.2 State regulations and/or accrediting standards may
dictate the procedures for this activity. Clean/sterile and contaminated textiles should
be transported from the laundry to the health-care facility in vehicles (e.g., trucks, vans,
and  carts)  that  allow  for  separation  of  clean/sterile  and  contaminated  items.
Clean/sterile  textiles  and  contaminated  textiles  may  be  transported  in  the  same
vehicle,  provided  that  the  use  of  physical  barriers  and/or  space  separation  can  be
verified to be effective in protecting the clean/sterile items from contamination. Clean,
uncovered/unwrapped textiles stored in a clean location for short periods of time (e.g.,
uncovered and used within a few hours) have not been demonstrated to contribute to
increased  levels  of  health-care  acquired  infection.  Such  textiles  can  be  stored  in
convenient places for use during the provision of care, provided that the textiles can be
maintained dry and free from soil and body-substance contamination. In the absence of
microbiologic  standards  for  laundered  textiles,  no  rationale  exists  for  routine
microbiologic sampling of cleaned health-care textiles and fabrics.1286 Sampling may
be  used  as  part  of  an  outbreak  investigation  if  epidemiologic  evidence  suggests  that
textiles, fabrics, or clothing are a suspected vehicle for disease transmission. Sampling
techniques  include  aseptically  macerating  the  fabric  into  pieces  and  adding  these  to
broth media or using contact plates (RODAC plates) for direct surface sampling.1271,
1286 When evaluating the disinfecting properties of the laundering process specifically,
placing  pieces  of  fabric  between  two  membrane  filters  may  help  to  minimize  the
contribution  of  the  physical  removal  of  microorganisms.1287  Washing  machines  and
dryers in residential-care settings are more likely to be consumer items rather than the
commercial,  heavy-duty,  large  volume  units  typically  found  in  hospitals  and  other
institutional  health-care  settings.  Although  all  washing  machines  and  dryers  in
health-care  settings  must  be  properly  maintained  for  performance  according  to  the
manufacturer's  instructions,  questions  have  been  raised  about  the  need  to  disinfect
washers and dryers in residential-care settings. Disinfection of the tubs and tumblers of
these  machines  is  unnecessary  when  proper  laundry  procedures  are  followed;  these
procedures  involve  Infection  has  not  been  linked  to  laundry  procedures  in
residential-care  facilities,  even  when  consumer  versions  of  detergents  and  laundry
additives are used. Some textile items (e.g., surgical drapes and reusable gowns) must
be  sterilized  before  use  and  therefore  require  steam  autoclaving  after  laundering.7
Although  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  in  previous  guidelines  recommended
autoclaving for linens in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs), studies on the microbial
quality  of  routinely  cleaned  NICU  linen  have  not  identified  any  increased  risk  for
infection  among  the  neonates  receiving  care.1288  Consequently,  hygienically  clean
linens are suitable for use in this setting.997 The use of sterile linens in burn therapy
units  remains  unresolved.  Coated  or  laminated  fabrics  are  often  used  in  the
manufacture of PPE. When these items become contaminated with blood or other body
substances, the manufacturer's instructions for decontamination and cleaning take into
account  the  compatibility  of  the  rubber  backing  with  the  chemical  germicides  or
detergents used in the process. The directions for decontaminating these items should
be  followed  as  indicated;  the  item  should  be  discarded  when  the  backing  develops
surface  cracks.  Dry  cleaning,  a  cleaning  process  that  utilizes  organic  solvents  (e.g.,
perchloroethylene)  for  soil  removal,  is  an  alternative  means  of  cleaning  fabrics  that
might be damaged in conventional laundering and detergent washing. Several studies,
however,  have  shown  that  dry  cleaning  alone  is  relatively  ineffective  in  reducing  the
numbers  of  bacteria  and  viruses  on  contaminated  linens;1289,  1290  microbial
populations are significantly reduced only when dry-cleaned articles are heat pressed.
Dry cleaning should therefore not be considered a routine option for health-care facility
laundry  and  should  be  reserved  for  those  circumstances  in  which  fabrics  can  not  be
safely cleaned with water and detergent.1291 An issue of recent concern involves the
use of disposable (i.e., single use) versus reusable (i.e., multiple use) surgical attire and
fabrics  in  health-care  settings.1292  Regardless  of  the  material  used  to  manufacture
gowns and drapes, these items must be resistant to liquid and microbial penetration.7,
1293–  1297  Surgical  gowns  and  drapes  must  be  registered  with  FDA  to  demonstrate
their safety and effectiveness. Repellency and pore size of the fabric contribute to gown
performance,  but  performance  capability  can  be  influenced  by  the  item's  design  and
construction.1298,  1299  Reinforced  gowns  (i.e.,  gowns  with  double-layered  fabric)
generally are more resistant to liquid strike-through.1300, 1301 Reinforced gowns may,
however, be less comfortable. Guidelines for selection and use of barrier materials for
surgical gowns and drapes have been published.1302 When selecting a barrier product,
repellency  level  and  type  of  barrier  should  be  compatible  for  the  exposure
expected.967  However,  data  are  limited  regarding  the  association  between  gown  or
drape  characteristics  and  risk  for  surgical  site  infections.7,  1303  Health-care  facilities
must ensure optimal protection of patients and health-care workers. Not all fabric items
in health care lend themselves to single-use. Facilities exploring options for gowns and
drapes should consider the expense of disposable items and the impact on the facility's
waste-management  costs  once  these  items  are  discarded.  Costs  associated  with  the
use of durable goods involve the fabric or textile items; staff expenses to collect, sort,
clean, and package the laundry; and energy costs to operate the laundry if on-site or
the costs to contract with an outside service.1304, 1305 Manufacturers are increasingly
incorporating  antibacterial  or  antimicrobial  chemicals  into  consumer  and  health-care
items.  Some  consumer  products  bearing  labels  that  indicate  treatment  with
antimicrobial chemicals have included pens, cutting boards, toys, household cleaners,
hand  lotions,  cat  litter,  soaps,  cotton  swabs,  toothbrushes,  and  cosmetics.  The
"antibacterial" label on household cleaning products, in particular, gives consumers the
impression  that  the  products  perform  "better"  than  comparable  products  without  this
labeling,  when  in  fact  all  household  cleaners  have  antibacterial  properties.  In  the
health-care setting, treated items may include children's pajamas, mattresses, and bed
linens  with  label  claims  of  antimicrobial  properties.  These  claims  require  careful
evaluation to determine whether they pertain to the use of antimicrobial chemicals as
preservatives  for  the  fabric  or  other  components  or  whether  they  imply  a  health
claim.1306,  1307  No  evidence  is  available  to  suggest  that  use  of  these  products  will
make consumers and patients healthier or prevent disease. No data support the use of
these items as part of a sound infection-control strategy, and therefore, the additional
expense  of  replacing  a  facility's  bedding  and  sheets  with  these  treated  products  is
unwarranted.  EPA  has  reaffirmed  its  position  that  manufacturers  who  make  public
health claims for articles containing antimicrobial chemicals must provide evidence to
support those claims as part of the registration process.1308 Current EPA regulations
outlined  in  the  Treated  Articles  Exemption  of  the  Federal  Insecticide,  Fungicide,  and
Rodenticide  Act  (FIFRA)  require  manufacturers  to  register  both  the  antimicrobial
chemical  used  in  or  on  the  product  and  the  finished  product  itself  if  a  public  health
claim  is  maintained  for  the  item.  The  exemption  applies  to  the  use  of  antimicrobial
chemicals for the purpose of preserving the integrity of the product's raw material(s).
The  U.S.  Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC)  is  evaluating  manufacturer  advertising  of
products with antimicrobial claims.1309 Standard mattresses and pillows can become
contaminated with body substances during patient care if the integrity of the covers of
these items is compromised. The practice of sticking needles into the mattress should
be avoided. A mattress cover is generally a fitted, protective material, the purpose of
which  is  to  prevent  the  mattress  from  becoming  contaminated  with  body  fluids  and
substances. A linen sheet placed on the mattress is not considered a mattress cover.
Patches for tears and holes in mattress covers do not provide an impermeable surface
over the mattress. Mattress covers should be replaced when torn; the mattress should
be replaced if it is visibly stained. Wet mattresses, in particular, can be a substantial
environmental  source  of  microorganisms.  Infections  and  colonizations  caused  by
Acinetobacter  spp.,  MRSA,  and  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  have  been  described,
especially  among  burn  patients.1310–1315  In  these  reports,  the  removal  of  wet
mattresses  was  an  effective  infection-control  measure.  Efforts  were  made  to  ensure
that pads and covers were cleaned and disinfected between patients using disinfectant
products  compatible  with  mattress-cover  materials  to  ensure  that  these  covers
remained  impermeable  to  fluids.1310–1314  Pillows  and  their  covers  should  be  easily
cleanable,  preferably  in  a  hot  water  laundry  cycle.1315  These  should  be  laundered
between patients or if contaminated with body substances. Air-fluidized beds are used
for the care of patients immobilized for extended periods of time because of therapy or
injury (e.g., pain, decubitus ulcers, and burns).1316 These specialized beds consist of a
base unit filled with microsphere beads fluidized by warm, dry air flowing upward from
a diffuser located at the bottom of the unit. A porous, polyester filter sheet separates
the patient from direct contact with the beads but allows body fluids to pass through to
the beads. Moist beads aggregate into clumps which settle to the bottom where they
are  removed  as  part  of  routine  bed  maintenance.  Because  the  beads  become
contaminated with the patient's body substances, concerns have been raised about the
potential  for  these  beds  to  serve  as  an  environmental  source  of  pathogens.  Certain
pathogens (e.g., Enterococcus spp., Serratia marcescens, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Streptococcus fecalis) have been recovered either from the microsphere beads or the
polyester  sheet  after  cleaning.1317,  1318  Reports  of  cross-contamination  of  patients,
however,  are  few.1318  Nevertheless,  routine  maintenance  and  between-patient
decontamination procedures can minimize potential risks to patients. Regular removal
of  bead  clumps,  coupled  with  the  warm,  dry  air  of  the  bed,  can  help  to  minimize
bacterial growth in the unit.1319–1321 Beads are decontaminated between patients by
high heat (113°F–194°F [45°C–90°C], depending on the manufacturer's specifications)
for  at  least  1  hour;  this  procedure  is  particularly  important  for  the  inactivation  of
Enterococcus spp. which are relatively resistant to heat.1322, 1323 The polyester filter
sheet  requires  regular  changing  and  thorough  cleaning  and  disinfection,  especially
between patients.1317, 1318, 1322, 1323 Microbial contamination of the air space in
the immediate vicinity of a properly maintained air-fluidized bed is similar to that found
in air around conventional bedding, despite the air flow out of the base unit and around
the  patient.1320,  1324,  1325  An  operational  air-fluidized  bed  can,  however,  interfere
with  proper  pressure  differentials,  especially  in  negative-pressure  rooms;1326  the
effect varies with the location of the bed relative to the room's configuration and supply
and  exhaust  vent  locations.  Use  of  an  air-fluidized  bed  in  a  negative-pressure  room
requires consultation with a facility engineer to determine appropriate placement of the
bed. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the
risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/laundry-bedding.html
