A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Giardia can spread easily from one person
to another or through water, food, surfaces, or objects.  Giardia germs are in poop of
people or animals who are infected, so anything that gets contaminated by human or
animal poop can potentially spread the germs. Wash your hands with soap and water at
key times when you are more likely to get or spread germs.  Key times include: Giardia
germs can be in soil, so wash your hands after activities like gardening, landscaping, or
field  work.   Wash  your  hands  even  if  you  were  wearing  gloves.  If  your  child  has
diarrhea,  keep  them  home  from  early  care  and  education  (for  example,  childcare  or
preschool) until their diarrhea has stopped. Waiting to have vaginal, anal, and oral sex
until several weeks after you or your partner stop having diarrhea can help you avoid
getting or spreading Giardia. Giardia germs can still be in poop for several weeks after
you stop having diarrhea. If you do have sex, reduce your contact with poop by: Clean
and disinfect to remove Giardia germs from a space where a person or pet recently had
diarrhea.  Surfaces  include  floors,  tables,  furniture,  trash  cans,  and  pet  crates.  After
cleaning, use a disinfection product appropriate for the surface. Follow the instructions
on the label of the product. You can disinfect dishwasher-safe toys, pet bowls, and other
items in a dishwasher by using the dry cycle or final rinse cycle.  You can also disinfect
dishwasher-safe items by fully covering them in boiling water for at least 1 minute. At
elevations  above  6,500  feet,  keep  the  item  in  boiling  water  for  3  minutes.    Wash
laundry in a washing machine. Then, dry it for 30 minutes in a dryer set to the highest
heat setting. If a clothes dryer is not available, allow laundry to fully air dry under direct
sunlight.  Laundry items may include clothes, sheets, towels, cloth toys, or pet bedding.
When traveling, avoid drinking water or eating food that might be contaminated with
Giardia.  Drink bottled water or treat water if you are not sure if the water you are using
has been treated to remove germs. Water and ice straight from lakes, rivers, springs,
ponds, streams, or shallow wells is generally not safe to drink or use.  If you need to
drink  or  use  water  from  springs,  lakes,  or  rivers—for  example,  while  hiking  or
camping—first make the water safe. Boiling the water for 1 minute (or 3 minutes above
6,500 feet) is the best way to kill Giardia and other germs. Another option is to filter
and  disinfect  water.  Use  a  filter  certified  for  “cyst”  and  “oocyst”  reduction,  or  NSF
Standards  53  or  58.  These  filters  are  designed  to  remove  Giardia.  Then,  disinfect
filtered  water  to  kill  bacteria  and  viruses.  Many  filters  that  remove  Giardia  and  other
parasites  do  not  remove  bacteria  or  viruses.  If  possible,  eat  only  cooked  food  when
traveling in areas where the food supply might be unsafe.  Giardia is a parasite (germ)
that  causes  diarrhea.  Giardia  spreads  easily  from  one  person  to  another  or  through
water,  food,  surfaces,  or  objects.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/giardia/prevention/index.html
