A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. CDC's Global AR Lab & Response Network
supports  partners  in  detecting  and  responding  to  antimicrobial  resistance  across  the
One Health spectrum.    Every country has varying levels of resources and might face
different  AR  threats.  For  example,  some  countries  have  limited  capacity  to  diagnose
and  track  antimicrobial-resistant  germs  in  healthcare  facilities,  which  adds  to  the
difficulty of implementing effective treatment and prevention programs. The Global AR
Lab & Response Network improves the detection of existing and emerging AR threats
and  identifies  risk  factors  that  drive  the  emergence  and  spread  of  resistance  across
healthcare,  community,  and  environmental  settings.  These  settings  are  impacted  by
many types of pathogens, including healthcare-associated, sexually transmitted, fungal,
enteric,  and  invasive  bacterial  and  respiratory.  This  global  network  also  supports
response  to  AR  threats  and  informs  global  prevention  strategies.  This  work:  Since  its
launch,  more  than  20  organizations  have  implemented  collaboration  in  nearly  50
countries as part of the Global AR Lab & Response Network, tackling threats including:
CDC's  antimicrobial  resistance  investments,  collectively  known  as  the  Antimicrobial
Resistance Solutions Initiative (AR Solutions Initiative), support the AR Lab Network. The
AR  Solutions  Initiative  combats  antimicrobial  resistance  by  investing  in  national
infrastructure  to  detect,  respond,  contain  and  prevent  resistant  infections  across
healthcare  settings,  communities,  the  food  supply  and  the  environment  (water,  soil).
The  Antibiotic  Resistance  in  Communities  and  Hospitals  (ARCH)  research  consortium
aims to better understand the burden, molecular epidemiology, and drivers of resistant
bacteria  in  humans  in  multiple  low-  and  middle-income  countries  by  tracking
colonization (carrying and potentially spreading harmful pathogens without infection) in
communities and healthcare settings. Researchers are using whole genome sequencing
to  explore  isolate  relatedness,  transmission  (spread)  dynamics,  and  patterns  of
resistance across the community and hospital environments. The data from the studies
will improve our understanding of the source of new resistance threats, how prevalent
or widespread the threat is, and how we can tailor prevention strategies to mitigate the
impact.  Additional  collaborative  work  is  happening  through  CDC's  Global  Action  in
Healthcare Network to address emerging threats in healthcare settings through rapid
detection and response. Bangladesh  icddr,b is the principal investigator for the project
in  Bangladesh  working  to  carry  out  study  activities  in  Dhaka.  This  work  is  also
supported  by  the  CDC-Bangladesh  Country  Office.  Chile   UDD  is  the  principal
investigator for the project in Chile, carrying out study activities in multiple sites across
the  country.  This  work  is  also  supported  by  the  CDC-South  America  Regional  Office.
Botswana   The  University  of  Pennsylvania  is  the  principal  investigator  for  the  ARCH
project  in  Botswana.  They  work  with  the  University  of  Botswana  to  carry  out  project
activities  in  Gaborone  and  Francistown.  This  work  is  also  supported  by  the
CDC-Botswana Country Office. Kenya and Guatemala  WSU is the principal investigator
for projects in Kenya and Guatemala. In Kenya, the team works with the University of
Nairobi to carry out ARCH activities in informal settlements in Nairobi. This work is also
supported by the CDC-Kenya Country Office. In Guatemala, the WSU team works with
Universidad del Valle de Guatemala to carry out activities in Quetzaltenango, a city in
the  western  highlands.  This  work  is  also  supported  by  the  CDC-Central  America
Regional  Office.  Strengthening  global  and  national  surveillance  systems  of  Neisseria
gonorrhoeae through the Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme
(EGASP)   Experts  are  expanding  the  Enhanced  Gonococcal  Antimicrobial  Surveillance
Programme  (EGASP),  a  CDC  and  WHO  initiative  monitoring  trends  in  antimicrobial
susceptibility  of  Neisseria  gonorrhoeae.  Gonorrhea  is  a  sexually  transmitted  disease
that  can  spread  easily  and  has  progressively  developed  resistance  to  the  antibiotics
used  to  treat  it.  Data  from  EGASP  sites  will  strengthen  understanding  of  how
drug-resistant  gonorrhea  spreads  in  geographically  diverse  areas  and  inform  national
and  international  clinical  treatment  guidelines.  Strengthening  a  national  surveillance
system for antimicrobial-resistant Candida in Brazil  Experts are expanding the Brazilian
Antimicrobial  Resistance  Surveillance  System  (BR-GLASS)  to  improve  monitoring  of
antimicrobial-resistant  Candida  speciesin  Brazil.  This  work  enhances  infection
prevention  and  control  strategies,  improves  patient  outcomes  and  protects  the
healthcare  workforce.  Building  capacity  for  sentinel  fungal  disease  surveillance  at
hospitals  in  Bangladesh   Experts  are  building  capacity  for  sentinel  fungal  disease
surveillance  at  hospitals  in  Bangladesh  through  improved  laboratory  and  clinical
capacity  to  identify  and  treat  priority  fungal  diseases,  including  antifungal-resistant
germs.  Experts  are  also  assessing  infection  prevention  and  control  (IPC)  baseline
capacity and providing trainings tailored to existing resources and capacity, as well as
trainings on best practices for IPC measures pertaining to Candida auris. Building and
improving  laboratory  capacity  to  identify  Candida  species  in  Colombia   Experts  are
strengthening national fungal reference laboratory capacity to identify invasive fungal
bloodstream  infections  caused  by  Candida  species  in  Colombia.  This  will  enhance
surveillance
 for
 emerging
 drug-resistant
 Candida
 species.
 Surveillance
 of
antimicrobial-resistant  Candida  auris  in  a  Pakistan  healthcare  system   Experts  are
building local capacity to detect, track, and report antimicrobial-resistant Candida auris
and  other  antimicrobial-resistant  Candida  species  at  Aga  Khan  University  Hospital  in
Pakistan with an emphasis on a description of molecular mechanisms of antimicrobial
resistance. This work will inform the response when threats are detected and put into
place the mechanisms for molecular detection of outbreaks. Strengthening laboratory
capacity to detect Candida species in Georgia Experts are helping Georgia's Richard M.
Lugar Center for Public Health Research expand national and regional capacity to test
and detect resistance to antifungals at sentinel laboratories and hospitals. This project
focuses  on  the  detection  of  Candida  infections.  Georgia  NCDC  will  assess  its  current
ability  to  test  for  antifungal  resistance.  Then  they  will  create  a  national  plan  to  track
candidemia,  which  is  a  bloodstream  infection  with  Candida.  The  national  plan  will
integrate  candidemia  surveillance  into  existing  antimicrobial  resistance  surveillance
systems. Georgia NCDC will also increase laboratory capacity to identify Candida and
perform  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing.  To  better  protect  patients  in  healthcare
settings,  experts  will  create  materials  to  support  infection  prevention  and  control
practices  of  Candida  auris.  These  activities  will  guide  national  efforts  against
antimicrobial resistance and reporting through the Global Antimicrobial Resistance and
Use  Surveillance  System (GLASS),  an  initiative  led  by  the  World  Health  Organization.
Monitoring and preventing antimicrobial-resistant Candida auris in Pakistan  Experts are
improving the capacity to detect, monitor, and control emerging antimicrobial-resistant
Candida  auris  in  Pakistan  healthcare  settings.  This  work  will  enhance  infection
prevention  and  control  strategies,  improving  patient  outcomes,  and  protecting  the
healthcare workforce. Monitoring and preventing antimicrobial-resistant Candida auris
in Kenya (MAP-AMR Kenya)  Experts are improving the capacity to detect, monitor, and
control  emerging  antimicrobial-resistant  Candida  auris  in  Kenya's  healthcare  settings.
This  work  will  enhance  infection  prevention  and  control  strategies,  improving  patient
outcomes  and  protecting  the  healthcare  workforce.  Building  regional  surveillance
capacity for antifungal-resistant germs in Southern Africa Experts are building regional
surveillance  capacity  for  antifungal-resistant  germs,  with  priority  on  Candida  species
and Cryptococcus species. Experts are also building capacity for fungal bioinformatics
and  whole  genome  sequencing  in  South  Africa,  with  plans  to  incorporate  data  from
South  Africa  and  regional  country  partner  labs  into  FungiNet  Global.  Improving
detection of enteric (gut) pathogens including those that are resistant to antimicrobials
across PulseNet Asia Pacific  There is limited information in the Asia Pacific region on
the occurrence and severity of enteric disease outbreaks and associated antimicrobial
susceptibility  patterns.  APHL  works  with  PulseNet  International  across  Australia,
Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines,
Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam to increase enteric disease data and facilitate data sharing
between countries. Experts are also working on expanding whole genome sequencing
(WGS). WGS is a laboratory test used to identify an organism's unique DNA. This will
help scientists and public health professionals in these countries better understand the
spread of enteric bacterial disease and antimicrobial resistance to stop the spread of
disease and better protect communities. Improving detection of enteric (gut) pathogens
including those that are resistant to antimicrobials across PulseNet Middle East There is
little information available on the occurrence and severity of enteric disease outbreaks
in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  (MENA)  region.  Specifically,  more  information  is
needed  about  extensively  drug-resistant  (XDR)  Salmonella  Typhi  and  resistant  Vibrio
cholera. CRDF Global is working with PulseNet International to increase data collection
and  sharing  between  countries  in  the  region.  Experts  are  also  working  on  expanding
whole  genome  sequencing  (WGS).  WGS  is  a  laboratory  test  used  to  identify  an
organism's unique DNA. This will help scientists and public health professionals in these
countries  better  understand  the  spread  of  enteric  bacterial  disease  and  antimicrobial
resistance to stop the spread of disease and better protect communities.   Improving
water,  sanitation,  and  hygiene  and  environmental  monitoring  in  Kenya  to  address
drug-resistant  enteric  pathogen  transmission   Water,  sanitation  and  hygiene  (WASH)
systems are critical to human health, survival, and development, yet poorly functioning
systems may be spreading antimicrobial-resistant enteric pathogens and their genes. In
countries challenged in providing adequate sanitation for their entire populations, the
role  of  the  environment  may  be  significant  in  contributing  to  exposure  to
antimicrobial-resistant enteric pathogens. In Kenya, APHL, FHI360, and WSU work with
local  laboratories  to  improve  environmental  monitoring  of  antimicrobial-resistant
enteric pathogens—for example in water and wastewater systems—and work to assess
risk  factors  for  exposure  to  those  pathogens  to  understand  and  improve  prevention
measures.  Improving  prevention  and  response  efforts  for  drug-resistant  typhoid  in
Pakistan  Experts  are  improving  ongoing  prevention  and  response  efforts  for
drug-resistant typhoid in Pakistan by assessing risk factors such as current typhoid case
management  practices  by  healthcare  providers  (i.e.,  prescribing  practices),  typhoid
conjugate vaccine (TCV) hesitancy and access, as well as water, sanitation, and hygiene
practices. Experts are also developing and implementing training materials for typhoid
surveillance  and  outbreak  response  for  the  Pakistan  Field  Epidemiology  Training
Program.  Extensively  drug-resistant  (XDR)  typhoid  emergence  in  Pakistan  has  limited
treatment  options  and  vaccination  strategies  using  TCV  can  help  prevent  the  further
spread of antimicrobial resistant strains and reduce the risk of development of a strain
resistant to all available oral antibiotics, which could result in high typhoid-associated
mortality in low- and middle-income countries. Continuing to monitor typhoid cases to
inform  targeted  efforts,  including  TCV  vaccination,  can  help  to  prevent  the  spread  of
XDR typhoid within Pakistan and globally. Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE)
and  Extended  Spectrum  Cephalosporin-resistant  Enterobacterales  (ESCrE)  bacteria
(germs) can resist many antibiotics. This makes it difficult to treat the infections they
cause,  leading  to  negative  health  outcomes.  Spending  time  in  healthcare  settings  or
taking antibiotics both increase the risk of CRE and ESCrE. Washington State University
is  working  with  Universidad  del  Valle  de  Guatemala  and  CDC  to  learn  how  bacteria
spread,  especially  within  the  community.  The  project  focuses  on  One  Health,  which
recognizes the connection between the health of people, animals, and the environment.
Experts will look at individuals who carry these bacteria on or in their bodies but show
no symptoms. As part of the project, they will interview people about their interactions
with animals, farming, and water treatment practices. They'll also test livestock, pets,
milk,  and  drinking  water  for  CRE  and  ESCrE.  The  results  of  this  project  will  help
understand  if  the  risk  of  CRE  and  ESCrE  colonization  is  related  to  interactions  with
animals or sanitation and hygiene practices contribute to the spread of these bacteria.
This  information  will  help  experts  to  recommend  effective  One  Health  prevention
strategies.   Developing a framework for wastewater and environmental surveillance in
low-  and  middle-income  countries  Water  Environment  Foundation,  along  with  their
implementing  partners,  is  leveraging  existing  work  and  knowledge,  including
experience gained from hosting U.S. National Wastewater Surveillance System (NWSS)
Communities  of  Practice  (CoPs),  to  develop  a  strategic  framework  for  the  design  and
implementation of wastewater and environmental surveillance (WES) CoPs in low- and
middle-income  countries  (LMICs).  LMICs,  where  non-sewered  sanitation  is  often
common, face unique challenges for implementing WES and CoPs may be a useful tool
to facilitate peer-to-peer learning and resource sharing. This work includes collaborating
to  develop  a  guidance  document  for  global  WES  CoPs  that  will  encompass  who  to
involve;  appropriate  missions,  visions,  and  goals;  suggested  platforms  for  data  and
resource  sharing;  pros  and  cons  of  various  CoP  structures  (e.g.,  by  country,  region,
subject matter, language, state of program development), and critical gaps in research.
This document will provide strategies and best practices from which funders, Ministries
of Health, and non-government organizations can draw upon to establish and expand
WES  in  their  countries.  Partners  will  conduct  a  small-scale  CoP  utilizing  the  strategic
framework and feedback will be gathered to improve or expand upon this work. WES
will allow countries to monitor for emerging public health threats such as antimicrobial
resistance  and  other  disease  targets  in  communities  and  to  respond  to  such  threats.
Enhancing  global  laboratory  capacity  in  Mexico  and  Brazil  to  detect,  assess,  and
respond  to  emerging  antimicrobial  resistance  in  Bordetella  pertussis   Experts  are
strengthening laboratory system data reporting and improving antimicrobial resistance
detection  and  response  for  Bordetella  pertussis  in  Mexico  and  Brazil.  These  activities
will  help  identify  emerging  resistance  for  this  pathogen  and  help  respond  when  and
where  outbreaks  occur.  A  vaccine-preventable  disease,  Bordetella  pertussis  was
recently  added  to  CDC's  antimicrobial-resistant  Watch  List  as  a  potential  growing
threat.    Improving  detection  and  response  to  antimicrobial-resistant  Meningococcal
disease  in  Burkina  Faso  and  Togo   Experts  are  reinforcing  surveillance  systems  for
antimicrobial-resistant Neisseria meningitidis in Burkina Faso and Togo. The data and
findings from this project will guide public health decision making and planning for how
to track and respond to the threat of meningitis outbreaks in partner countries and the
broader  region.  Improving  capacity  to  detect  and  monitor  emerging  antimicrobial
resistance  in  bacterial  respiratory  pathogens,  with  a  focus  on  Streptococcus
pneumoniae, in Indonesia  Experts are building on existing work with CDC to enhance
capacity of clinical laboratories at select secondary or tertiary hospitals in Indonesia for
identification  and  characterization  of  antimicrobial-resistant  respiratory  germs,  with  a
focus  on  Streptococcus  pneumoniae.  This  project  will  also  create  guidelines  and
opportunities for other regional facilities to replicate the laboratories' successes. Email
GARLRN@cdc.gov  for  more  information  about  the  Global  Antimicrobial  Resistance
Laboratory  and  Response  Network.  In  April  2023,  CDC  hosted  their  AMR  Exchange
webinar, highlighting some initiatives from some of our dedicated partners of the Global
Antimicrobial  Resistance  Laboratory  and  Response  Network.  These  partners  form  a
collaborative  network,  helping  CDC  transform  how  the  world  addresses  antimicrobial
resistance  threats  across  One  Health.  The  panel  included  experts  from  the  Federal
University  of  São  Paulo,  Association  of  Public  Health  Laboratories,  The  Ohio  State
University  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  CDC’s  Antimicrobial
Resistance  Laboratory  Networks  support  domestic  and  global  lab  testing  across  One
Health. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance-laboratory-networks/php/about/global.html
