Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  CDC  works  with  federal,  state,  and  local  partners  to  reduce
antibiotic  resistance  and  protect  the  public’s  health.  This  work  includes  investigating
outbreaks  caused  by  resistant  bacteria,  identifying  new  antibiotic  resistance  threats,
and recommending ways to help prevent illnesses and outbreaks caused by resistant
bacteria. The National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) assists in
outbreak investigations by testing bacteria from sick people, animals, and retail meats
for antibiotic resistance. When paired with information collected during interviews with
sick people about what they ate or were exposed to before becoming ill, resistance data
can  provide  investigators  with  clues  about  the  source  of  outbreaks.  This  glossary
defines  some  key  terms  related  to  antibiotic  resistance  that  CDC  uses  to  describe
multistate  outbreak  investigations.  Antibiotic:  A  drug  that  kills  or  stops  the  growth  of
bacteria.  Antibiotics  are  a  type  of  antimicrobial.  Penicillin  and  ciprofloxacin  are
examples  of  antibiotics.  Antibiotic  resistance:  Antimicrobial  resistance  of  bacteria.
Antibiotic  resistance  testing  (also  known  as  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing):
Laboratory testing performed on bacteria to find out if they are resistant to one or more
antibiotics.  Antimicrobial:  A  substance,  such  as  an  antibiotic,  that  kills  or  stops  the
growth  of  microbes,  including  bacteria,  fungi,  or  viruses.  Antimicrobials  are  grouped
according to the microbes they act against (antibiotics, antifungals, and antivirals). Also
referred to as drugs. Antimicrobial resistance: The ability of a microbe (germ) to resist
the effects of a drug. Antimicrobial-resistant germs are not killed by the drugs that are
typically  used  against  them  and  may  continue  to  multiply.  Antimicrobial  resistance
includes  antibacterial,  antifungal,  and  antiviral  resistance.  Learn  more  about
antimicrobial  resistance.  Antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  (AST):  Laboratory  testing
performed on microbes to find out if they are susceptible or resistant to one or more
drugs.  Results  of  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  show  if  bacteria  are  susceptible
(can be treated with the drug), intermediate (may be treatable with the drug, but may
require  adjusted  dosage),  or  resistant  (cannot  be  treated  with  drug).  AST  is  also
referred  to  as  antibiotic  susceptibility  testing  when  tests  are  being  performed  on
bacteria.  Bacteria:  Single-celled  organisms  that  live  in  and  around  us  with  a  distinct
structure  from  other  microbes.  Bacteria  can  be  helpful,  but  can  also  cause  illnesses
such  as  strep  throat,  ear  infections,  and  pneumonia.  Drug  class:  Antibiotics  are
categorized into classes of drugs. Each class is defined by the way it kills or stops the
growth of bacteria. NARMS uses the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute’s drug
classes   to  categorize  antibiotics.  Genes:  Genes,  which  are  made  up  of  DNA,  are  the
basic units that define the characteristics of every organism. Genes carry information
that  determine  traits,  such  as  eye  color  in  humans  and  resistance  to  antibiotics  in
bacteria.  Genome:  A  genome  is  an  organism’s  complete  set  of  genes  that  carry  the
genetic  instructions  for  building  and  maintaining  that  organism.  Isolates:  Bacteria
isolated  from  a  specimen  (e.g.,  stool,  blood,  food).  Microbes:  Living  organisms,  like
bacteria,  fungi,  or  viruses,  which  can  cause  infections  or  disease.  Also  referred  to  as
germs.  Multidrug-resistant  (MDR)  isolate:  CDC  typically  uses  this  term  to  refer  to  an
isolate  that  is  resistant  to  at  least  one  antibiotic  in  three  or  more  drug  classes.
Non-susceptible isolate: An isolate that is either resistant or not completely susceptible
to  one  or  more  antibiotics.  Organism:  any  living  thing,  including  humans,  animals,
plants,  and  microbes.  Panel:  A  set  of  antibiotics  used  to  determine  if  an  isolate  is
resistant to antibiotics and, if so, which ones. The set of antibiotics used differs by type
of  bacteria  being  tested.  Predicted  resistance  pattern:  The  antimicrobial  resistance
expected  based  on  analysis  of  an  organism’s  genome.  This  analysis  identifies
resistance genes and mutations. Resistant isolate: An isolate that is resistant to one or
more  antibiotics.  Resistance  determinant  (or  resistance  mechanism):  A  catch-all  term
that includes both resistance genes and resistance mutations that give a microbe the
ability to resist the effects of one or more drugs. Resistance gene: A gene that gives
microbes  the  ability  to  resist  the  effects  of  one  or  more  drugs.  The  gene  may  be
naturally  present  in  the  microbe,  or  it  may  be  transferred  from  other  microbes.
Resistance  mutation:  A  change  in  the  normal  genetic  code  that  gives  a  microbe  the
ability to resist the effects of one or more drugs. Resistance pattern: A description of
the antibiotic resistance testing results for an isolate. Resistance profile: A description
of the resistance patterns for all isolates in an investigation. A resistance profile differs
from  a  resistance  pattern,  which  refers  to  the  characteristics  of  a  single  isolate.
Specimen:  A  sample  collected  for  laboratory  testing.  During  outbreak  investigations,
samples  may  be  collected  from  the  blood,  stool,  or  another  location  of  a  human  or
animal, and from food and the environment. Susceptible isolate: An isolate that is not
resistant to any of the antibiotics tested. Whole genome sequencing: A technology that
determines the genetic code (genome) of an organism (for example, people, bacteria,
and viruses). Learn more about whole genome sequencing. NARMS Isolate Submission
Login
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/narms/resources/glossary.html
