A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Below  is  a  glossary  of  terms  used
throughout  the  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of
Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings (2007). Formerly, negative pressure isolation
room, an AIIR is a single-occupancy patient-care room used to isolate persons with a
suspected  or  confirmed  airborne  infectious  disease.  Environmental  factors  are
controlled  in  AIIRs  to  minimize  the  transmission  of  infectious  agents  that  are  usually
transmitted  from  person  to  person  by  droplet  nuclei  associated  with  coughing  or
aerosolization  of  contaminated  fluids.  AIIRs  should  providenegative  pressure  in  the
room (so that air flows under the door gap into the room); andan air flow rate of 6-12
ACH
 (6
 ACH
 for
 existing
 structures,
 12
 ACH
 for
 new
 construction
 or
renovation);anddirect  exhaust  of  air  from  the  room  to  the  outside  of  the  building  or
recirculation of air through a HEPA filter before retruning to circulation (MMWR 2003; 52
[RR-10]; MMWR 1994; 43 [RR-13]). A professional organization that develops standards
for  building  ventilation,  The  "2001Guidelines  for  Design  and  Construction  of  Hospital
and  Health  Care  Facilities",  the  development  of  which  was  supported  by  the  AIA,
Academy of Architecture for Health, Facilities Guideline Institute, with assistance from
the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  and  the  National  Institutes  of
Health, is the primary source of guidance for creating airborne infection isolation rooms
(AIIRs)  and  protective  environments  (American  Institute  of  Architects  –  Academy  of
Architecture  for  HealthExternal  [Current  version  of  this  document  may  differ  from
original.])  Facilities  that  provide  health  care  to  patients  who  do  not  remain  overnight
(e.g., hospital-based outpatient clinics, nonhospital-based clinics and physician offices,
urgent  care  centers,  surgicenters,  free-standing  dialysis  centers,  public  health  clinics,
imaging  centers,  ambulatory  behavioral  health  and  substance  abuse  clinics,  physical
therapy  and  rehabilitation  centers,  and  dental  practices.  An  airborne  dispersion  of
particles containing whole or parts of biological entities, such as bacteria, viruses, dust
mites,  fungal  hyphae,  or  fungal  spores.  Such  aerosols  usually  consist  of  a  mixture  of
mono-dispersed and aggregate cells, spores or viruses, carried by other materials, such
as  respiratory  secretions  and/or  inert  particles.  Infectious  bioaerosols  (i.e.,  those  that
contain  biological  agents  capable  of  causing  an  infectious  disease)  can  be  generated
from  human  sources  (e.g.,  expulsion  from  the  respiratory  tract  during  coughing,
sneezing, talking or singing; during suctioning or wound irrigation), wet environmental
sources  (e.g.,  HVAC  and  cooling  tower  water  with  Legionella)  or  dry  sources  (e.g.,
construction dust with spores produced by Aspergillus spp.). Bioaerosols include large
respiratory  droplets  and  small  droplet  nuclei  (Cole  EC.  AJIC  1998;26:  453-64).  All
persons who are not employees of an organization, are not paid, and provide or assist
in providing healthcare to a patient (e.g., family member, friend) and acquire technical
training as needed based on the tasks that must be performed. In the context of this
guideline,  this  term  applies  to  the  practice  of  grouping  patients  infected  or  colonized
with the same infectious agent together to confine their care to one area and prevent
contact  with  susceptible  patients  (cohorting  patients).  During  outbreaks,  healthcare
personnel  may  be  assigned  to  a  cohort  of  patients  to  further  limit  opportunities  for
transmission  (cohorting  staff).  Proliferation  of  microorganisms  on  or  within  body  sites
without detectable host immune response, cellular damage, or clinical expression. The
presence of a microorganism within a host may occur with varying duration, but may
become  a  source  of  potential  transmission.  In  many  instances,  colonization  and
carriage are synonymous. Microscopic particles < 5 µm in size that are the residue of
evaporated  droplets  and  are  produced  when  a  person  coughs,  sneezes,  shouts,  or
sings.  These  particles  can  remain  suspended  in  the  air  for  prolonged  periods  of  time
and can be carried on normal air currents in a room or beyond, to adjacent spaces or
areas  receiving  exhaust  air.  Removal  or  isolation  of  a  workplace  hazard  through
technology.  AIIRs,  a  Protective  Environment,  engineered  sharps  injury  prevention
devices and sharps containers are examples of engineering controls. Infectious agents
that have one or more of the following characteristics: Examples include Acinetobacter
sp.,
 Aspergillus
 sp.,
 Burkholderia
 cepacia,
 Clostridium
 difficile,
 Klebsiella
 or
Enterobacter  sp.,  Extended  spectrum  beta  lactamase  producing  gram  negative  bacilli
[ESBLs], methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA], Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
vancomycin-resistant  enterococci  [VRE],  methicillin  resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus
[MRSA], vancomycin resistant Staphylococcus aureus [VRSA]influenza virus, respiratory
syncytial  virus  [RSV],  rotavirus,  SARS-CoV,  noroviruses  and  the  hemorrhagic  fever
viruses).  A  general  term  that  applies  to  any  one  of  the  following:  An  infection  that
develops in a patient who is cared for in any setting where healthcare is delivered (e.g.,
acute care hospital, chronic care facility, ambulatory clinic, dialysis center, surgicenter,
home) and is related to receiving health care (i.e., was not incubating or present at the
time healthcare was provided). In ambulatory and home settings, HAI would apply to
any  infection  that  is  associated  with  a  medical  or  surgical  intervention.  Since  the
geographic  location  of  infection  acquisition  is  often  uncertain,  the  preferred  term  is
considered  to  be  healthcare-associated  rather  than  healthcare-acquired.  A  person
whose  primary  training  is  medical  (M.D.,  D.O.)  and/or  masters  or  doctorate-level
epidemiology who has received advanced training in healthcare epidemiology. Typically
these professionals direct or provide consultation to an infection control program in a
hospital, long term care facility (LTCF), or healthcare delivery system (also see infection
control  professional).  All  paid  and  unpaid  persons  who  work  in  a  healthcare  setting
(e.g., any person who has professional or technical training in a healthcare-related field
and provides patient care in a healthcare setting or any person who provides services
that  support  the  delivery  of  healthcare  such  as  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
maintenance  personnel).  Any  transplantation  of  blood-  or  bone  marrow-derived
hematopoietic stem cells, regardless of donor type (e.g., allogeneic or autologous) or
cell  source  (e.g.,  bone  marrow,  peripheral  blood,  or  placental/umbilical  cord  blood);
associated with periods of severe immunosuppression that vary with the source of the
cells,  the  intensity  of  chemotherapy  required,  and  the  presence  of  graft  versus  host
disease  (MMWR  2000;  49:  RR-10).  An  air  filter  that  removes  >99.97%  of  particles  ≥
0.3µm (the most penetrating particle size) at a specified flow rate of air. HEPA filters
may be integrated into the central air handling systems, installed at the point of use
above  the  ceiling  of  a  room,  or  used  as  portable  units  (MMWR  2003;  52:  RR-10).  A
wide-range of medical, nursing, rehabilitation, hospice and social services delivered to
patients in their place of residence (e.g., private residence, senior living center, assisted
living facility). Home health-care services include care provided by home health aides
and  skilled  nurses,  respiratory  therapists,  dieticians,  physicians,  chaplains,  and
volunteers;  provision  of  durable  medical  equipment;  home  infusion  therapy;  and
physical, speech, and occupational therapy. Those patients whose immune mechanisms
are  deficient  because  of  congenital  or  acquired  immunologic  disorders  (e.g.,  human
immunodeficiency  virus  [HIV]  infection,  congenital  immune  deficiency  syndromes),
chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cancer, emphysema, or cardiac failure, ICU
care,  malnutrition,  and  immunosuppressive  therapy  of  another  disease  process  [e.g.,
radiation,  cytotoxic  chemotherapy,  anti-graft-rejection  medication,  corticosteroids,
monoclonal antibodies directed against a specific component of the immune system]).
The  type  of  infections  for  which  an  immunocompromised  patient  has  increased
susceptibility  is  determined  by  the  severity  of  immunosuppression  and  the  specific
component(s)  of  the  immune  system  that  is  affected.  Patients  undergoing  allogeneic
HSCT  and  those  with  chronic  graft  versus  host  disease  are  considered  the  most
vulnerable to HAIs. Immunocompromised states also make it more difficult to diagnose
certain  infections  (e.g.,  tuberculosis)  and  are  associated  with  more  severe  clinical
disease states than persons with the same infection and a normal immune system. The
transmission  of  microorganisms  into  a  host  after  evading  or  overcoming  defense
mechanisms, resulting in the organism's proliferation and invasion within host tissue(s).
Host responses to infection may include clinical symptoms or may be subclinical, with
manifestations of disease mediated by direct organisms pathogenesis and/or a function
of cell-mediated or antibody responses that result in the destruction of host tissues. A
person whose primary training is in either nursing, medical technology, microbiology, or
epidemiology  and  who  has  acquired  specialized  training  in  infection  control.
Responsibilities  may  include  collection,  analysis,  and  feedback  of  infection  data  and
trends  to  healthcare  providers;  consultation  on  infection  risk  assessment,  prevention
and
 control
 strategies;
 performance
 of
 education
 and
 training
 activities;
implementation  of  evidence-based  infection  control  practices  or  those  mandated  by
regulatory  and  licensing  agencies;  application  of  epidemiologic  principles  to  improve
patient outcomes; participation in planning renovation and construction projects (e.g.,
to ensure appropriate containment of construction dust); evaluation of new products or
procedures  on  patient  outcomes;  oversight  of  employee  health  services  related  to
infection prevention; implementation of preparedness plans; communication within the
healthcare setting, with local and state health departments, and with the community at
large concerning infection control issues; and participation in research. Certification in
infection  control  (CIC)  is  available  through  the  Certification  Board  of  Infection  Control
and  Epidemiology.  A  multidisciplinary  program  that  includes  a  group  of  activities  to
ensure  that  recommended  practices  for  the  prevention  of  healthcare-associated
infections are implemented and followed by HCWs, making the healthcare setting safe
from  infection  for  patients  and  healthcare  personnel.  The  Joint  Commission  on
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO)  requires  the  following  five
components  of  an  infection  control  program  for  accreditation:  The  infection  control
program  staff  has  the  ultimate  authority  to  determine  infection  control  policies  for  a
healthcare  organization  with  the  approval  of  the  organization's  governing  body.  An
array  of  residential  and  outpatient  facilities  designed  to  meet  the  bio-psychosocial
needs  of  persons  with  sustained  self-care  deficits.  These  include  skilled  nursing
facilities, chronic disease hospitals, nursing homes, foster and group homes, institutions
for  the  developmentally  disabled,  residential  care  facilities,  assisted  living  facilities,
retirement homes, adult day health care facilities, rehabilitation centers, and long-term
psychiatric hospitals. A term that applies collectively to items used to cover the nose
and  mouth  and  includes  both  procedure  masks  and  surgical  masks  ([This  link  is  no
longer active: www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/guidance/094.html#4. Similar information may be
found  at  FDA:  Masks  and  N95  RespiratorsExternal,  accessed  May  2016.]).  In  general,
bacteria  (excluding  M.  tuberculosis)  that  are  resistant  to  one  or  more  classes  of
antimicrobial  agents  and  usually  are  resistant  to  all  but  one  or  two  commercially
available  antimicrobial  agents  (e.g.,  MRSA,  VRE,  extended  spectrum  beta-lactamase
[ESBL]-producing or intrinsically resistant gram-negative bacilli) 176. Derived from two
Greek words "nosos" (disease) and "komeion" (to take care of). Refers to any infection
that develops during or as a result of an admission to an acute care facility (hospital)
and was not incubating at the time of admission. A variety of barriers used alone or in
combination  to  protect  mucous  membranes,  skin,  and  clothing  from  contact  with
infectious  agents.  PPE  includes  gloves,  masks,  respirators,  goggles,  face  shields,  and
gowns. A covering for the nose and mouth that is intended for use in general patient
care situations. These masks generally attach to the face with ear loops rather than ties
or elastic. Unlike surgical masks, procedure masks are not regulated by the Food and
Drug Administration. See FDA's Masks and N95 Respirators. A specialized patient-care
area, usually in a hospital, with a positive air flow relative to the corridor (i.e., air flows
from  the  room  to  the  outside  adjacent  space).  The  combination  of  high-efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) filtration, high numbers (≥12) of air changes per hour (ACH), and
minimal  leakage  of  air  into  the  room  creates  an  environment  that  can  safely
accommodate patients with a severely compromised immune system (e.g., those who
have  received  allogeneic  hemopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  [HSCT])  and  decrease  the
risk of exposure to spores produced by environmental fungi. Other components include
use  of  scrubbable  surfaces  instead  of  materials  such  as  upholstery  or  carpeting,
cleaning to prevent dust accumulation, and prohibition of fresh flowers or potted plants.
Studies  to  evaluate  interventions  but  do  not  use  randomization  as  part  of  the  study
design.  These  studies  are  also  referred  to  as  nonrandomized,  pre-post-intervention
study designs. These studies aim to demonstrate causality between an intervention and
an outcome but cannot achieve the level of confidence concerning attributable benefit
obtained through a randomized, controlled trial. In hospitals and public health settings,
randomized  control  trials  often  cannot  be  implemented  due  to  ethical,  practical  and
urgency  reasons;  therefore,  quasi-experimental  design  studies  are  used  commonly.
However, even if an intervention appears to be effective statistically, the question can
be  raised  as  to  the  possibility  of  alternative  explanations  for  the  result.  Such  study
design  is  used  when  it  is  not  logistically  feasible  or  ethically  possible  to  conduct  a
randomized,  controlled  trial,  (e.g.,  during  outbreaks).  Within  the  classification  of
quasi-experimental  study  designs,  there  is  a  hierarchy  of  design  features  that  may
contribute  to  validity  of  results  (Harris  et  al.  CID  2004:38:  1586).  A  facility  in  which
people  live,  minimal  medical  care  is  delivered,  and  the  psychosocial  needs  of  the
residents are provided for. A personal protective device worn by healthcare personnel
over the nose and mouth to protect them from acquiring airborne infectious diseases
due to inhalation of infectious airborne particles that are < 5 μm in size. These include
infectious  droplet  nuclei  from  patients  with  M.  tuberculosis,  variola  virus  [smallpox],
SARS-CoV),  and  dust  particles  that  contain  infectious  particles,  such  as  spores  of
environmental fungi (e.g., Aspergillus sp.). The CDC's National Institute for Occupational
Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH)  certifies  respirators  used  in  healthcare  settings  (Personal
Protective Equipment for Healthcare Workers). [Current version of this document may
differ from original.]. The N95 disposable particulate, air purifying, respirator is the type
used most commonly by healthcare personnel. Other respirators used include N-99 and
N-100  particulate  respirators,  powered  air-purifying  respirators  (PAPRS)  with  high
efficiency  filters;  and  non-powered  full-facepiece  elastomeric  negative  pressure
respirators.  A  listing  of  NIOSH-approved  respirators  can  be  found  at  [This  link  is  no
longer
 active:
 www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/respirators/disp_part/particlist.html.
 Similar
information  may  be  found  at  NIOSH  Respirator  Trusted-Source  Information.].
Respirators  must  be  used  in  conjunction  with  a  complete  Respiratory  Protection
Program, as required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) that
includes  fit  testing,  training,  proper  selection  of  respirators,  medical  clearance  and
respirator  maintenance  A  combination  of  measures  designed  to  minimize  the
transmission  of  respiratory  pathogens  via  droplet  or  airborne  routes  in  healthcare
settings. The components of respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette are These measures
are  targeted  to  all  patients  with  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  and  their
accompanying  family  members  or  friends  beginning  at  the  point  of  initial  encounter
with a healthcare setting (e.g., reception/triage in emergency departments, ambulatory
clinics, healthcare provider offices) 126 (Srinivasin A ICHE 2004; 25: 1020; Respiratory
Hygiene/Cough Etiquette in Healthcare Settings [Current version of this document may
differ  from  original.])  Shared  perceptions  of  workers  and  management  regarding  the
level of safety in the work environment. A hospital safety climate includes the following
six organizational components: The process of containing an infectious agent either at
the portal of exit from the body or within a confined space. The term is applied most
frequently to containment of infectious agents transmitted by the respiratory route but
could apply to other routes of transmission, (e.g., a draining wound, vesicular or bullous
skin  lesions).  Respiratory  Hygiene/Cough  Etiquette  that  encourages  individuals  to
"cover  your  cough"  and/or  wear  a  mask  is  a  source  control  measure.  The  use  of
enclosing  devices  for  local  exhaust  ventilation  (e.g.,  booths  for  sputum  induction  or
administration of aerosolized medication) is another example of source control. A group
of infection prevention practices that apply to all patients, regardless of suspected or
confirmed  diagnosis  or  presumed  infection  status.  Standard  Precautions  is  a
combination and expansion of Universal Precautions 780 and Body Substance Isolation
1102.  Standard  Precautions  is  based  on  the  principle  that  all  blood,  body  fluids,
secretions,  excretions  except  sweat,  nonintact  skin,  and  mucous  membranes  may
contain  transmissible  infectious  agents.  Standard  Precautions  includes  hand  hygiene,
and depending on the anticipated exposure, use of gloves, gown, mask, eye protection,
or face shield. Also, equipment or items in the patient environment likely to have been
contaminated  with  infectious  fluids  must  be  handled  in  a  manner  to  prevent
transmission of infectious agents, (e.g., wear gloves for handling, contain heavily soiled
equipment, properly clean and disinfect or sterilize reusable equipment before use on
another patient). A device worn over the mouth and nose by operating room personnel
during  surgical  procedures  to  protect  both  surgical  patients  and  operating  room
personnel  from  transfer  of  microorganisms  and  body  fluids.  Surgical  masks  also  are
used to protect healthcare personnel from contact with large infectious droplets (>5 μm
in  size).  According  to  draft  guidance  issued  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  on
May 15, 2003, surgical masks are evaluated using standardized testing procedures for
fluid resistance, bacterial filtration efficiency, differential pressure (air exchange), and
flammability in order to mitigate the risks to health associated with the use of surgical
masks.  These  specifications  apply  to  any  masks  that  are  labeled  surgical,  laser,
isolation,
 or
 dental
 or
 medical
 procedure
 ([This
 link
 is
 no
 longer
 active:
www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/guidance/094.html#4. Similar information may be found at FDA:
Masks  and  N95  Respirators,  accessed  May  2016.]).  Surgical  masks  do  not  protect
against inhalation of small particles or droplet nuclei and should not be confused with
particulate respirators that are recommended for protection against selected airborne
infectious  agents,  (e.g.,  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis).  CDC  provides  information  on
infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/glossary.html
