Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Granuloma  inguinale  (donovanosis)  is  a  genital  ulcerative
disease  caused  by  the  intracellular  gram-negative  bacterium  Klebsiella  granulomatis
(formerly  known  as  Calymmatobacterium  granulomatis).  The  disease  occurs  rarely  in
the United States; however, sporadic cases have been described in India, South Africa,
and South America (526–535). Although granuloma inguinale was previously endemic in
Australia, it is now extremely rare (536,537). Clinically, the disease is characterized as
painless,  slowly  progressive  ulcerative  lesions  on  the  genitals  or  perineum  without
regional  lymphadenopathy;  subcutaneous  granulomas  (pseudobuboes)  also  might
occur.  The  lesions  are  highly  vascular  (i.e.,  beefy  red  appearance)  and  can  bleed.
Extragenital  infection  can  occur  with  infection  extension  to  the  pelvis,  or  it  can
disseminate  to  intra-abdominal  organs,  bones,  or  the  mouth.  The  lesions  also  can
develop secondary bacterial infection and can coexist with other sexually transmitted
pathogens.  The  causative  organism  of  granuloma  inguinale  is  difficult  to  culture,  and
diagnosis  requires  visualization  of  dark-staining  Donovan  bodies  on  tissue  crush
preparation or biopsy. Although no FDA-cleared molecular tests for the detection of K.
granulomatis DNA exist, molecular assays might be useful for identifying the causative
agent.  Multiple  antimicrobial  regimens  have  been  effective;  however,  only  a  limited
number of controlled trials have been published (538). Treatment has been reported to
halt  progression  of  lesions,  and  healing  typically  proceeds  inward  from  the  ulcer
margins.
 Prolonged
 therapy
 is
 usually
 required
 to
 permit
 granulation
 and
reepithelialization  of  the  ulcers.  Relapse  can  occur  6–18  months  after  apparently
effective therapy. Azithromycin 1 gm orally once weekly or 500 mg daily for > 3 weeks
and until all lesions have completely healed Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for
at least 3 weeks and until all lesions have completely healed
OR
Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 4 times/day for >3 weeks and until all lesions have
completely healed
OR
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  one  double-strength  (160  mg/800  mg)  tablet  orally  2
times/day for > 3 weeks and until all lesions have completely healed The addition of
another antibiotic to these regimens can be considered if improvement is not evident
within the first few days of therapy. Patients should be followed clinically until signs and
symptoms have resolved. All persons who receive a diagnosis of granuloma inguinale
should be tested for HIV. Patients should be followed clinically until signs and symptoms
resolve.  Persons  who  have  had  sexual  contact  with  a  patient  who  has  granuloma
inguinale  within  the  60  days  before  onset  of  the  patient’s  symptoms  should  be
examined and offered therapy. However, the value of empiric therapy in the absence of
clinical signs and symptoms has not been established. Use of doxycycline in pregnancy
might be associated with discoloration of teeth; however, the risk is not well defined.
Doxycycline  is  compatible  with  breastfeeding  (431).  Sulfonamides  can  be  associated
with  neonatal  kernicterus  among  those  with  glucose-6-phospate  dehydrogenase
deficiency  and  should  be  avoided  during  the  third  trimester  and  while  breastfeeding
(431).  For  these  reasons,  pregnant  and  lactating  women  with  granuloma  inguinale
should  be  treated  with  a  macrolide  regimen  (erythromycin  or  azithromycin).  Persons
with granuloma inguinale and HIV infection should receive the same regimens as those
who do not have HIV. Next
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/donovanosis.htm
