 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by 
      Ofelia C. Tablan, M.D.,1 
      Larry J. Anderson, M.D.,2 
      Richard Besser, M.D.,3 
      Carolyn Bridges, M.D.,2 
      Rana Hajjeh, M.D.,3
 1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases 
      2Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases 
      3Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases 
The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,
James  M.  Hughes,  M.D.,  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,  Denise  M.  Cardo,
M.D.,  Director,  and  the  Division  of  Bacterial  and  Mycotic  Diseases,  Mitchell  L.  Cohen,
M.D., Director.
Summary
This report updates, expands, and replaces the previously published CDC "Guideline for
Prevention of 
Nosocomial Pneumonia". The new guidelines are designed to reduce the incidence of
pneumonia  and  other  severe,  acute  lower  respiratory  tract  infections  in  acute-care
hospitals  and  in  other  health-care  settings  (e.g.,  ambulatory  and  long-term  care
institutions) and other facilities where health care is provided.
Among the changes in the recommendations to prevent bacterial pneumonia, especially
ventilator-associated  pneumonia,  are  the  preferential  use  of  oro-tracheal  rather  than
naso-tracheal tubes in patients who receive mechanically assisted ventilation, the use
of  noninvasive  ventilation  to  reduce  the  need  for  and  duration  of  endotracheal
intubation, changing the breathing circuits of ventilators when they malfunction or are
visibly contaminated, and (when 
feasible)  the  use  of  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  to  allow  drainage  of
respiratory secretions; no 
recommendations  were  made  about  the  use  of  sucralfate,  histamine-2  receptor
antagonists,
 or
 antacids
 for
 stress-bleeding
 prophylaxis.
 For
 prevention
 of
health-care--associated Legionnaires disease, the changes include maintaining potable
hot water 
at temperatures not suitable for amplification of 
Legionella spp., considering routine culturing of water samples from 
the potable water system of a facility's organ-transplant unit when it is done as part of
the facility's comprehensive 
program  to  prevent  and  control  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  and
initiating  an  investigation  for  the  source  of  Legionella  spp.  when  one  definite  or  one
possible  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  is
identified in an inpatient hemopoietic stem-cell transplant (HSCT) recipient or in two or
more 
HSCT recipients who had visited an outpatient HSCT unit during all or part of the 2--10
day  period  before  illness  onset.  In  the  section  on  aspergillosis,  the  revised
recommendations include the use of a room with high-efficiency particulate air filters
rather than laminar airflow as the protective environment for allogeneic HSCT recipients
and the use of high-efficiency respiratory-protection devices (e.g., N95 respirators) by
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 when
 they
 leave
 their
 rooms
 when
dust-generating activities are ongoing in the facility. In the respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV)  section,  the  new  recommendation  is  to  determine,  on  a  case-by-case  basis,
whether to administer monoclonal 
antibody (palivizumab) to certain infants and children aged <24 months who were born
prematurely and are at high risk for RSV infection. In the section on influenza, the new
recommendations include the addition of oseltamivir 
(to amantadine and rimantadine) for prophylaxis of all patients without influenza illness
and  oseltamivir  and  zanamivir  (to  amantadine  and  rimantadine)  as  treatment  for
patients  who  are  acutely  ill  with  influenza  in  a  unit  where  an  influenza  outbreak  is
recognized.
In  addition  to  the  revised  recommendations,  the  guideline  contains  new  sections  on
pertussis and lower 
respiratory tract infections caused by adenovirus and human parainfluenza viruses and
refers readers to the source of updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Introduction
Because  of  the  high  morbidity  and  mortality  associated  with  health-care--associated
pneumonia, several guidelines for its prevention and control have been published. The
first CDC Guideline for Prevention of Nosocomial Pneumonia 
was  published  in  1981  and  addressed  the  main  infection-control  problems  related  to
hospital-acquired pneumonia at the time: the use of large-volume nebulizers that were
attached  to  mechanical  ventilators  and  improper  reprocessing  (i.e.,  cleaning  and
disinfection or sterilization) of respiratory-care equipment. The document also covered
the prevention and control of hospital-acquired influenza and respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) infection.
In 1994, the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) (then
known as the 
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee) revised and expanded the CDC
Guideline for Prevention of Nosocomial Pneumonia to include Legionnaires disease and
pulmonary aspergillosis 
(1). HICPAC advises the secretary of Health 
and  Human  Services  and  the  directors  of  CDC  about  the  prevention  and  control  of
health-care--associated infections 
and  related  adverse  events.  The  1994  guideline  addressed  concerns  related  to
preventing  ventilator-associated  pneumonia  (VAP)  (e.g.,  the  role  of  stress-ulcer
prophylaxis in the causation of pneumonia and the contentious roles of selective 
gastrointestinal  decontamination  and  periodic  changes  of  ventilator  tubings  in  the
prevention  of  the  infection).  The  report  also  presented  major  changes  in  the
recommendations to prevent and control hospital-acquired pneumonia caused by 
Legionnella spp. and aspergilli.
In  recent  years,  demand  has  increased  for  guidance  on  preventing  and  controlling
pneumonia and other lower 
respiratory  tract  infections  in  health-care  settings  other  than  the  acute-care  hospital,
probably resulting in part from the progressive shift in the burden and focus of health
care in the United States away from inpatient care in the acute-care hospital and 
towards outpatient and long-term care in other health-care settings. In response to this
demand,  HICPAC  revised  the  guideline  to  cover  these  other  settings.  However,
infection-control  data  about  the  acute-care  hospital  setting  are  more  abundant  and
well-analyzed;  in  comparison,  data  are  limited  from  long-term  care,  ambulatory,  and
psychiatric facilities and other health-care settings.
This report consists of Parts II and III of a three-part document 
(2)  and  contains  the  consensus  HICPAC  recommendations  for  the  prevention  of  the
following  infections:  bacterial  pneumonia,  Legionnaires  disease,  pertussis,  invasive
pulmonary  aspergillosis  (IPA),  lower  respiratory  tract  infections  caused  by  RSV,
parainfluenza and 
adenoviruses, and influenza. Part III provides suggested performance 
indicators to assist infection-control personnel in monitoring 
the implementation of the guideline recommendations in their facilities.
Part I of the guideline provides the background for the recommendations and includes a
discussion  of  the  epidemiology,  diagnosis,  pathogenesis,  modes  of  transmission,  and
prevention  and  control  of  the  infections  (3).  Part  I  can  be  an  important  resource  for
educating health-care personnel. 
Because education of health-care personnel is the cornerstone of an 
effective  infection-control  program,  health-care  agencies  should  give  high  priority  to
continuing infection-control education programs for their staff members.
HICPAC  recommendations  address  such  issues  as  education  of  health-care  personnel
about the prevention and control 
of  health-care--associated  pneumonia  and  other  lower  respiratory  tract  infections,
surveillance and reporting of 
diagnosed  cases  of  infections,  prevention  of  person-to-person  transmission  of  each
disease, and reduction of host risk for infection. Lower respiratory tract infection caused
by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis  is  not  addressed  in  this  document;  however,  it  is  covered  in  a  separate
publication (3).
The  document  was  prepared  by  CDC;  reviewed  by  experts  in  infection  control,
intensive-care medicine, 
pulmonology,  respiratory  therapy,  anesthesiology,  internal  medicine,  and  pediatrics;
and approved by HICPAC. The recommendations are endorsed by the American College
of Chest Physicians, American Healthcare Association, Association for Professionals 
of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Infectious Diseases Society of America, Society
for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America, and Society of Critical Care Medicine.
Key Terms Used In the Guideline
Protective environment (PE) is a specialized patient-care area, usually in a hospital, with
a positive air flow relative to the corridor (i.e., air flows from the room to the outside
adjacent space). The combination of high-efficiency particulate 
air 
(HEPA)  filtration,  high  numbers  (>12)  of  air  changes  per  hour  (ACH),  and  minimal
leakage  of  air  into  the  room  creates  an  environment  that  can  safely  accommodate
patients  who  have  received  allogeneic  hemopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  (HSCT).
Immunocompromised  patients  are  those  patients  whose  immune  mechanisms  are
deficient because of 
immunologic disorders (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, congenital
immune deficiency syndrome, and 
chronic  diseases  [(diabetes  mellitus,  cancer,  emphysema,  or  cardiac  failure]),  or
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., 
radiation,
 cytotoxic
 chemotherapy,
 anti-rejection
 medication,
 and
 steroids).
Immunocompromised  patients  who  are  identified  as  patients  at  high  risk  have  the
greatest risk for infection and include persons with severe neutropenia (i.e., an absolute
neutrophil  count  [ANC]  of  <500  cells/mL)  for  prolonged  periods  of  time,  recipients  of
allogeneic HSCT, and those who receive the 
most  intensive  chemotherapy  (e.g.,  patients  with  childhood  acute  myelogenous
leukemia). 
Abbreviations Used In the Guideline
ACIP
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
ANC 
absolute neutrophil count 
COPD 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CSF 
cerebrospinal fluid 
DTAP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis 
DTP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis 
FDA 
Food and Drug Administration
GCSF
granulocyte colony stimulating factor 
HEPA
high-efficiency particulate air 
HICPAC
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
          Committee 
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus 
HME
heat-moisture exchanger 
HSCT
hemopoietic stem-cell transplant 
ICU
intensive-care unit 
IPA 
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
LAF
laminar airflow 
NIV
noninvasive ventilation 
NNIS 
National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance 
PE 
protective environment 
RSV 
respiratory syncytial virus 
SARS 
severe acute respiratory syndrome 
SDD 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract
SOP 
standing orders program 
VAP 
ventilator-associated pneumonia 
Categorization of Recommendations
In this document, each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing scientific
evidence, theoretical 
rationale,  applicability,  and  potential  economic  impact.  In  addition,  a  new  category
accommodates  recommendations  that  are  made  on  the  basis  of  existing  national  or
state  health  regulations.  The  following  categorization  scheme  is  applied  in  this
guideline: 
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by certain
clinical or epidemiologic studies and by strong theoretical rationale. 
        Category  IC.  Required  for  implementation,  as  mandated  by  federal  or  state
regulation or standard.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or by 
strong theoretical rationale.
No recommendation; unresolved issue. Practices for which insufficient evidence or no
consensus exists about efficacy. 
Prevention of Health-Care--Associated Bacterial Pneumonia
I. Staff Education and Involvement in Infection Prevention
 Educate  health-care  workers  about  the  epidemiology  of,  and  infection-control
procedures for, preventing 
health-care--associated bacterial pneumonia to ensure worker competency according to
the worker's level of responsibility in the health-care setting, and involve the workers in
the implementation of interventions to prevent 
health-care--associated pneumonia by using 
performance-improvement tools and techniques (IA) (4--11).
II. Infection and Microbiologic Surveillance
A.  Conduct  surveillance  for  bacterial  pneumonia  in  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  patients
who are at high risk for health-care--related bacterial pneumonia (e.g., patients 
with mechanically assisted ventilation or selected 
postoperative  patients)  to  determine  trends  and  help  identify  outbreaks  and  other
potential  infection-control  problems  (12,13).  The  use  of  the  new  National  Nosocomial
Infection  Surveillance  (NNIS)  system's  surveillance  definition  of  pneumonia  is
recommended (14). Include data on the causative 
microorganisms and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns 
(15). Express data as rates (e.g., number of infected patients or infections per 100 ICU
days  or  per  1,000  ventilator  days)  to  facilitate  intrahospital  comparisons  and  trend
determination (12,16,17). Link monitored rates and prevention efforts 
and return data to appropriate health-care personnel (IB) 
(18).
        B.In the absence of specific clinical, epidemiologic, or infection-control objectives,
do not routinely perform 
surveillance  cultures  of  patients  or  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for  respiratory
therapy, 
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia (II) 
(19--22).
 III. Prevention of Transmission of Microorganisms
A.Sterilization or Disinfection and Maintenance of Equipment and Devices
1.General measures
a.Thoroughly clean all equipment and devices to be sterilized or disinfected (IA) 
(23,24).
b.Whenever possible, use steam sterilization (by autoclaving) or high-level disinfection
by wet heat 
pasteurization  at  >158  F  (>70°C)  for  30  minutes  for  reprocessing  semicritical
equipment or devices (i.e., items that come into direct or indirect contact with mucous
membranes of the lower respiratory tract) that are not sensitive to 
heat and moisture (Box. Use low-temperature sterilization methods (as 
approved by the Office of Device Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiologic Health,
Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA])  for  equipment  or  devices  that  are  heat-  or
moisture-sensitive 
(24--28). After disinfection, proceed with appropriate 
rinsing, drying, and packaging, taking care not to contaminate the disinfected items in
the process (IA) (23,24).
c.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing 
reusable semicritical respiratory equipment and devices when 
rinsing  is  needed  after  they  have  been  chemically  disinfected.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
rinse the device with filtered water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water, and then rinse with isopropyl alcohol and dry 
with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) 
(24).
d.Adhere to provisions in FDA's enforcement document for single-use devices that are 
reprocessed by third parties (IC) (24,29).
2.Mechanical ventilators
 Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of mechanical ventilators
(II).
3.Breathing circuits, humidifiers, and heat-and-moisture exchangers (HMEs)
a.Breathing circuits with humidifiers
1)Do not change routinely, on the basis of duration of use, the breathing circuit (i.e.,
ventilator tubing 
and  exhalation  valve  and  the  attached  humidifier)  that  is  in  use  on  an  individual
patient. Change the 
circuit when it is visibly soiled or mechanically malfunctioning (IA) 
(30--35).
2)Breathing-circuit--tubing condensate
a)Periodically  drain  and  discard  any  condensate  that  collects  in  the  tubing  of  a
mechanical 
ventilator, taking precautions not to allow condensate to drain toward the patient (IB) 
(36).
b)Wear gloves to perform the previous procedure and/or when handling the fluid (IB) 
(37,38).
c) Decontaminate hands with soap and water (if hands are visibly soiled) or with an
alcohol-based 
hand rub after performing the procedure or handling the fluid (IA) 
(38,39).
3)No recommendation can be made for placing a filter or trap at the distal end of the
expiratory-phase 
tubing of the breathing circuit to collect condensate (Unresolved issue).
4)Humidifier fluids
a)Use sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) water to fill bubbling humidifiers (II) 
(36,40--43).
b)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  a  closed,
continuous-feed 
humidification system (Unresolved issue).
b.Ventilator breathing circuits with HMEs
1)No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of either HMEs or heated
humidifiers to 
prevent pneumonia in patients receiving mechanically assisted ventilation (Unresolved
issue) (IB) 
(44--49).
2)Changing HME
a)Change  an  HME  that  is  in  use  on  a  patient  when  it  malfunctions  mechanically  or
becomes 
visibly soiled (II).
b)Do not routinely change more frequently than every 48 hours an HME that is in use
on a patient 
(II) (50--52).
3)Do not change routinely (in the absence of gross contamination or malfunction) the
breathing 
circuit attached to an HME while it is in use on a patient (II) 
(53).
4.Oxygen humidifiers
a.Follow manufacturers' instructions for use of oxygen humidifiers (II,C) 
(29;54--56).
b.Change the humidifier-tubing (including any nasal prongs or mask) that is in use on
one patient when 
it malfunctions or becomes visibly contaminated (II).
5.Small-volume medication nebulizers: in-line and hand-held nebulizers
a.Between treatments on the same patient clean, disinfect, rinse with sterile water (if
rinsing is needed), and 
dry small-volume in-line or hand-held medication nebulizers (IB) 
(57--59).
b.Use  only  sterile  fluid  for  nebulization,  and  dispense  the  fluid  into  the  nebulizer
aseptically (IA) 
(40--42,58,60--62).
c.Whenever  possible,  use  aerosolized  medications  in  single-dose  vials.  If  multidose
medication vials are 
used,  follow  manufacturers'  instructions  for  handling,  storing,  and  dispensing  the
medications (IB) 
(60,62--67).
6.Mist tents
a.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  replace  mist  tents  and  their  nebulizers,
reservoirs, and tubings with those 
that have been subjected to sterilization or high-level disinfection (II) 
(68).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing
mist-tent nebulizers, 
reservoirs, and tubings while in use on one patient (Unresolved issue).
c.Subject  mist-tent  nebulizers,  reservoirs,  and  tubings  that  are  used  on  the  same
patient to daily 
low-level disinfection (e.g., with 2% acetic acid) or pasteurization followed by 
air-drying (II) (69).
7.Other devices used in association with respiratory therapy
a.Respirometer and ventilator thermometer: 
between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to 
high-level disinfection portable respirometers and ventilator thermometers (IB) 
(70--74).
b.Resuscitation bags
1)Between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to high-level disinfection
reusable 
hand-powered resuscitation bags (IB) 
(75--79).
2)No recommendation can be made about the frequency of changing hydrophobic 
filters placed on the connection port of resuscitation 
bags (Unresolved issue).
8.Anesthesia machines and breathing systems or patient circuits
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of anesthesia equipment
(IB) 
(80).
b.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  clean  reusable  components  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
(e.g., tracheal tube or face mask) inspiratory and expiratory breathing tubing, y-piece,
reservoir bag, humidifier, and 
tubing, and then sterilize or subject them to high-level liquid chemical disinfection or
pasteurization 
in accordance with the device manufacturers' instructions for their reprocessing (IB) 
(24,26).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  cleaning  and
disinfecting 
unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorber chambers (Unresolved issue) 
(81).
d.Follow
 published
 guidelines
 or
 manufacturers'
 instructions
 about
 in-use
maintenance, cleaning, 
and  disinfection  or  sterilization  of  other  components  or  attachments  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (IB) (82,83).
e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  placing  a  bacterial  filter  in  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (Unresolved issue) 
(4,84--89).
9.Pulmonary-function testing equipment
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the 
internal machinery of pulmonary-function testing machines 
between uses on different patients (II) 
(90,91).
b.Change  the  mouthpiece  of  a  peak  flow  meter  or  the  mouthpiece  and  filter  of  a
spirometer between uses 
on different patients (II) (24,92).
10. Room-air "humidifiers" and faucet aerators
a.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk,  and  thus  actually  are  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to 
high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(40,93,94).
b.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made about the removal of faucet aerators from areas
for 
immunocompetent patients (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part II, Section
I-C-1-d)  (Unresolved  issue).  2)If  Legionella  spp.  are  detected  in  the  water  of  a
transplant unit and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in the unit (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part 
II, Section I-C-1-d) (II) (95).
B. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission of Bacteria
1.Standard Precautions
a.Hand hygiene: Decontaminate hands by washing them with either antimicrobial soap
and water or 
with nonantimicrobial soap and water (if hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with
proteinaceous material or are soiled with blood or body fluids) or by using an 
alcohol-based waterless antiseptic agent (e.g., hand rub) 
if  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  after  contact  with  mucous  membranes,  respiratory
secretions, or 
objects  contaminated  with  respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.
Decontaminate hands as 
described previously before and after contact with a 
patient who has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place, 
and before and after contact with any respiratory device that is used on the patient,
whether or not gloves are 
worn (IA) (37,39).
b.Gloving
1)Wear  gloves  for  handling  respiratory  secretions  or  objects  contaminated  with
respiratory secretions of 
any patient (IB) (37).
2)Change gloves and decontaminate hands as described previously between contacts
with different patients; 
after handling respiratory secretions or objects contaminated with 
secretions  from  one  patient  and  before  contact  with  another  patient,  object,  or
environmental surface; and between contacts with a contaminated body site and the
respiratory tract of, or respiratory device on, the same patient (IA) 
(37,39,96--98).
c.When soiling with respiratory secretions from a patient is anticipated, wear a gown
and change it after 
soiling occurs and before providing care to another patient (IB) 
(37,97).
2.Care of patients with tracheostomy
a.Perform tracheostomy under aseptic conditions (II).
b.When  changing  a  tracheostomy  tube,  wear  a  gown,  use  aseptic  technique,  and
replace the tube with one 
that has undergone sterilization or high-level disinfection (IB) 
(23,24,37).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  daily  application  of  topical  antimicrobial
agent(s) at 
the tracheostoma (Unresolved issue) (99).
3.Suctioning of respiratory tract secretions
    (See also Section IV-B-1-d)
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential 
use of either the multiuse closed-system suction catheter 
or  the  single-use  open-system  suction  catheter  for  prevention  of  pneumonia
(Unresolved issue) (44,100-102).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  wearing  sterile  rather  than  clean  gloves
when 
performing endotracheal suctioning (Unresolved issue).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing  the
in-line suction catheter of 
a closed-suction system in use on one patient (Unresolved issue) 
(103).
d.If the open-system suction is employed, use a sterile, single-use catheter (II).
e.Use only sterile fluid to remove secretions from the suction catheter if the catheter is
to be used for 
re-entry into the patient's lower respiratory tract (II).
 IV. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Increasing Host Defense Against Infection: 
Administration of immune modulators
1.Pneumococcal vaccination. Vaccinate patients at high risk for severe pneumococcal
infections
a.Administer the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine to persons aged 
>65  years;  persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  chronic  cardiovascular  disease  (e.g.,
congestive heart failure or cardiomyopathy), chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or ermphysema, but not 
asthma),  diabetes  mellitus,  alcoholism,  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,  cirrhosis),  or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks; 
persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persons  aged
5--64
 years
 who
 are
 living
 in
 special
 environments
 or
 social
 settings;
immunocompromised persons aged 
>5 years with HIV infection, 
leukemia,  lymphoma,  Hodgkin's  disease,  multiple  myeloma,  generalized  malignancy,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  or  other  conditions  associated  with
immunosuppression (e.g., receipt of HSCT, 
solid-organ  transplant,  or  immunosuppressive  chemotherapy,  including  long-term
systemic corticosteroids); and persons in long-term--care facilities (IA) 
(104--109).
b.Administer the 7-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide protein-conjugate vaccine to
all children aged <2 
years and to children aged 24--59 months who are at increased risk for pneumococcal
disease (e.g., children 
with sickle-cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies, or children who are functionally or
anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; children who have chronic disease,
including chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease [except asthma], diabetes mellitus, or
CSF  leak;  and  children  with  immunocompromising  conditions  including  malignancies,
chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, receipt of 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy, including long-term corticosteroids, and receipt of
solid-organ  transplant).  Consider  administering  the  vaccine  to  children  aged  24--59
months,  with  priority  to  children  aged  24--35  months,  children  who  are  American
Indians/Alaska Natives or black, and children who attend group child care centers (IB)
(104).
c.In  nursing  homes  and  other  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  a  standing  order
program (SOP) for 
the administration of 23-valent vaccine to persons at high risk for acquiring 
severe pneumococcal infections, including pneumococcal pneumonia (IA) 
(105,110,111).
2.No recommendation can be made for the routine administration of preparations of 
granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor  (GCSF)  or  intravenous  gamma  globulin  for
prophylaxis against 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(112--117).
3.No recommendation can be made for the routine enteral administration of glutamine
for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(118,119).
B. Precautions for prevention of aspiration 
    As soon as the clinical indications for their use are resolved, remove devices such as
endotracheal, tracheostomy, and/or enteral (i.e.,
    oro- or nasogastric or 
jejunal) tubes from patients (IB) (120--125).
1.Prevention of aspiration associated with endotracheal intubation
a.Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) to reduce 
the need for and duration of endotracheal intubation
1)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation 
delivered continuously by face or nose mask, instead of performing 
endotracheal intubation in patients who are in respiratory failure and are not needing
immediate intubation (e.g., those who are in hypercapneic respiratory failure secondary
to acute exacerbation of COPD or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) (II) 
(126--9).
2)When  feasible  and  not  medically  contraindicated,  use  NIV  as  part  of  the  weaning
process 
(from  mechanically  assisted  ventilation)  to  shorten  the  period  of  endotracheal
intubation (II) (130).
b.As  much  as  possible,  avoid  repeat  endotracheal  intubation  in  patients  who  have
received 
mechanically assisted ventilation (II) (131).
c.Unless contraindicated by the patient's condition, 
perform orotracheal rather than nasotracheal intubation 
on patients (IB) (44,132,133).
d.If  feasible,  use  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  above  the  endotracheal
cuff to 
allow  drainage  (by  continuous  or  frequent  intermittent  suctioning)  of  tracheal
secretions that accumulate in the patient's subglottic area (II) (44,134--137).
e.Before deflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube in preparation for tube removal, or 
before moving the tube, ensure that secretions are cleared from above the tube cuff
(II).
2.Prevention of aspiration associated with enteral feeding
a.In the absence of medical contraindication(s), elevate at an angle of 30--45 degrees
of the head of the bed of 
a patient at high risk for aspiration (e.g., a person receiving mechanically 
assisted ventilation and/or who has an enteral tube in place) (II) 
(138--140).
b.Routinely verify appropriate placement of the feeding tube (IB) 
(141--143).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  small-bore  tubes  for
enteral feeding 
(Unresolved issue) (144).
d.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  preferentially  administering  enteral  feedings
continuously 
or intermittently (Unresolved issue) 
(145--148).
e.No recommendation can be made for preferentially placing the feeding tubes, (e.g.,
jejunal tubes) distal to 
the pylorus (Unresolved issue) (149--155).
3.Prevention or modulation of oropharyngeal colonization
a.Oropharyngeal cleaning and decontamination with an antiseptic agent: develop and
implement 
a  comprehensive  oral-hygiene  program  (that  might  include  the  use  of  an  antiseptic
agent) for patients in 
acute-care  settings  or  residents  in  long-term--care  facilities  who  are  at  high  risk  for
health-care--associated pneumonia (II) (156,157).
b.Chlorhexidine oral rinse
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of an oral chlorhexidine rinse
for the prevention 
of health-care--associated pneumonia in all postoperative or critically ill patients and/or
other patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) (II) 
(158).
2)Use an oral chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) rinse during the perioperative period on
adult patients 
who undergo cardiac survery (II) (158).
c.Oral decontamination with topical antimicrobial agents.
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of topical antimicrobial agents
for 
oral decontamination to prevent VAP (Unresolved issue) 
(159).
4.Prevention of gastric colonization
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of sucralfate, 
H2-antagonists,  and/or  antacids  for  stress-bleeding  prophylaxis  in  patients  receiving
mechanically 
assisted ventilation (Unresolved issue) 
(160--167).
b.No recommendation can be made for the routine selective decontamination of the
digestive tract (SDD) of 
all critically ill, mechanically ventilated, or ICU patients (Unresolved issue) 
(168--200).
c.No recommendation can be made for routinely acidifying gastric feeding (Unresolved
issue) 
(201,202).
C. Prevention of Postoperative Pneumonia
1.Instruct  preoperative  patients,  especially  those  at  high  risk  for  contracting
pneumonia, about taking deep 
breaths  and  ambulating  as  soon  as  medically  indicated  in  the  postoperative  period.
Patients  at  high  risk  include  those  who  will  have  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  repair,
thoracic surgery, or emergency surgery; those who will receive 
general  anesthesia;  those  who  are  aged  >60  years;  those  with  totally  dependent
functional  status;  those  who  have  had  a  weight  loss  >10%;  those  using  steroids  for
chronic conditions; those with recent history of alcohol use, history 
of  COPD,  or  smoking  during  the  preceding  year;  those  with  impaired  sensorium,  a
history of 
cerebrovascular  accident  with  residual  neurologic  deficit,  or  low  (<8mg/dL)  or  high
(>22 mg/dL) blood urea 
nitrogen level; and those who will have received >4 units of blood before surgery (IB) 
(203--206).
2.Encourage all postoperative patients to take deep breaths, move about the bed, and
ambulate unless 
medically contraindicated (IB) (205--207).
3.Use incentive spirometry on postoperative patients at high risk for pneumonia (IB) 
(205--207).
4.No recommendation can be made about the routine use of chest physiotherapy on
all postoperative patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(205--207).
D. Other Prophylactic Procedures for Pneumonia
1.Administration of antimicrobial agents other than in SDD
a.Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
            No recommendation can be made about the routine administration of systemic
antimicrobial agent(s) to 
prevent pneumonia in critically ill patients or in those receiving mechanically-assisted
ventilation (Unresolved issue) (200, 208).
b.Scheduled changes in the class of antimicrobial agents used for empiric therapy
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  scheduled  changes  in  the  class  of
antimicrobial agents used routinely 
for  empiric  treatment  of  suspected  infections  in  a  particular  group  of  patients
(Unresolved issue) 
(209,210).
2.Turning or rotational therapy
          No recommendation can be made for the routine use of turning or rotational
therapy, 
either by "kinetic" therapy or by continuous 
lateral rotational therapy (i.e., placing patients on beds that turn on their longitudinal 
axes intermittently or continuously) for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia in critically ill and immobilized patients (Unresolved
issue) (44,211--216).
  
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
 I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
A.Staff Education
1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
b.In
 facilities
 with
 hemopoietic
 stem-cell-
 and/or
 solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
1.Nebulizers and other devices
a.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing nebulization devices and other semicritical
respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
d.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue). 2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
2.Cooling towers
a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
3.Water-distribution system
a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
d.Provide HSCT patients with sterile water for tooth brushing or drinking or for flushing
nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
 II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT or
Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
 When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
a)If the heated water system is implicated:
i.
 Decontaminate
 the
 heated
 water
 system
 either
 by
 superheating
 or
 by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pertussis
 I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287). II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of the
last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
 III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
C. Patient Placement and Management
1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
2.Patients with suspected pertussis
a.Place  a  patient  with  suspected  pertussis  in  a  private  room.  After  pertussis  and  no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
3.Restrict  symptomatic  pertussis-infected  health-care  workers  from  work  during  the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
H. Other measures
1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pulmonary Aspergillosis
 I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
B. Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
2.Maintain surveillance for cases of health-care--associated pulmonary aspergillosis by
establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
3.Surveillance cultures
a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
4.In  facilities  with  PEs,  perform  surveillance  of  the  ventilation  status  of  these  areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
a.When  constructing  new  specialized-care  units  with  PE  for  HSCT  recipients,  ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
2)directed room airflow,
3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
4)well-sealed room, and 
5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
1.Placement of patients in PE
a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
7.Minimize  the  length  of  time  that  immunocompromised  patients  in  PEs  are  outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
8.Systematically  review  and  coordinate  infection-control  strategies  with  personnel  in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
10.  During  construction,  demolition,  or  renovation  activities,  construct  impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
11. Direct pedestrian traffic that come from construction areas away from patient-care
areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
a.Obtain  and  use  the  following  information  to  help  in  the  investigation:  background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local
 or
 state
 health
 department
 (IB).
 4.Use
 an
 antifungal
 biocide
 (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
 III. Chemoprophylaxis
A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
      
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus, Parainfluenza Virus, and Adenovirus Infections
 I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education and Monitoring
1.Staff education
a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
2.In acute-care facilities, establish mechanisms by which the infection-control staff can
monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
B. Surveillance
1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
a.Hand hygiene
1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
b.Gloving
1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
c.Gowning
1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
d.Masking and wearing eye protection
1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
1)Limit  to  essential  purposes  only  the  movement  or  transport  of  patients  from  their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
a.Staffing
1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB). b.Personnel cohorting
1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
1)No recommendation can be made for the use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal
antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Influenza
 I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
 II. Surveillance
A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
1.Determine the threshold incidence or prevalence of influenza or influenza-like illness
in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
 III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Vaccination
1.In acute-care settings (including acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, and walk-in
clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
a.Obtain  consent  for  influenza  vaccination  (if  such  is  required  by  local  or  state  law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
b.Routinely  vaccinate  all  residents,  except  those  with  medical  contraindication(s)  to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
3.Personnel
a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
b.Educate  health-care  personnel  about  the  benefits  of  vaccination  and  the  potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
c.Take measures to provide all health-care personnel convenient access to inactivated
influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
 IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
A.Droplet Precautions
1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
3.Wear  a  surgical  mask  upon  entering  the  patient's  room  or  when  working  within  3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
D. Standard Precautions
1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37).
E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
 V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
C. Antiviral Agent Administration
1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
e.No recommendation can be made about the prophylactic administration of zanamivir
to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel if
laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
          1.  Curtail or eliminate elective medical and surgical admissions (II) 
(416).
          2.  Restrict cardiovascular and pulmonary surgery to emergency cases only (II) 
(416).
          3.  Restrict persons with influenza or influenza-like illness from visiting patients in
the health-care facility (II) 
(416).
          4.  Restrict personnel with influenza or influenza-like illness from patient care (IB)
(416).
        
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 
Summary
 This report updates, expands, and replaces the previously published CDC "Guideline for
Prevention of 
Nosocomial Pneumonia". The new guidelines are designed to reduce the incidence of
pneumonia  and  other  severe,  acute  lower  respiratory  tract  infections  in  acute-care
hospitals  and  in  other  health-care  settings  (e.g.,  ambulatory  and  long-term  care
institutions) and other facilities where health care is provided.
 Among  the  changes  in  the  recommendations  to  prevent  bacterial  pneumonia,
especially 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia,  are  the  preferential  use  of  oro-tracheal  rather  than
naso-tracheal tubes in patients who receive mechanically assisted ventilation, the use
of  noninvasive  ventilation  to  reduce  the  need  for  and  duration  of  endotracheal
intubation, changing the breathing circuits of ventilators when they malfunction or are
visibly contaminated, and (when 
feasible)  the  use  of  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  to  allow  drainage  of
respiratory secretions; no 
recommendations  were  made  about  the  use  of  sucralfate,  histamine-2  receptor
antagonists,
 or
 antacids
 for
 stress-bleeding
 prophylaxis.
 For
 prevention
 of
health-care--associated Legionnaires disease, the changes include maintaining potable
hot water 
at temperatures not suitable for amplification of 
Legionella spp., considering routine culturing of water samples from 
the potable water system of a facility's organ-transplant unit when it is done as part of
the facility's comprehensive 
program  to  prevent  and  control  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  and
initiating  an  investigation  for  the  source  of  Legionella  spp.  when  one  definite  or  one
possible  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  is
identified in an inpatient hemopoietic stem-cell transplant (HSCT) recipient or in two or
more 
HSCT recipients who had visited an outpatient HSCT unit during all or part of the 2--10
day  period  before  illness  onset.  In  the  section  on  aspergillosis,  the  revised
recommendations include the use of a room with high-efficiency particulate air filters
rather than laminar airflow as the protective environment for allogeneic HSCT recipients
and the use of high-efficiency respiratory-protection devices (e.g., N95 respirators) by
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 when
 they
 leave
 their
 rooms
 when
dust-generating activities are ongoing in the facility. In the respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV)  section,  the  new  recommendation  is  to  determine,  on  a  case-by-case  basis,
whether to administer monoclonal 
antibody (palivizumab) to certain infants and children aged <24 months who were born
prematurely and are at high risk for RSV infection. In the section on influenza, the new
recommendations include the addition of oseltamivir 
(to amantadine and rimantadine) for prophylaxis of all patients without influenza illness
and  oseltamivir  and  zanamivir  (to  amantadine  and  rimantadine)  as  treatment  for
patients  who  are  acutely  ill  with  influenza  in  a  unit  where  an  influenza  outbreak  is
recognized.
 In  addition  to  the  revised  recommendations,  the  guideline  contains  new  sections  on
pertussis and lower 
respiratory tract infections caused by adenovirus and human parainfluenza viruses and
refers readers to the source of updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Introduction
Because  of  the  high  morbidity  and  mortality  associated  with  health-care--associated
pneumonia, several guidelines for its prevention and control have been published. The
first CDC Guideline for Prevention of Nosocomial Pneumonia 
was  published  in  1981  and  addressed  the  main  infection-control  problems  related  to
hospital-acquired pneumonia at the time: the use of large-volume nebulizers that were
attached  to  mechanical  ventilators  and  improper  reprocessing  (i.e.,  cleaning  and
disinfection or sterilization) of respiratory-care equipment. The document also covered
the prevention and control of hospital-acquired influenza and respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) infection.
In 1994, the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) (then
known as the 
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee) revised and expanded the CDC
Guideline for Prevention of Nosocomial Pneumonia to include Legionnaires disease and
pulmonary aspergillosis 
(1). HICPAC advises the secretary of Health 
and  Human  Services  and  the  directors  of  CDC  about  the  prevention  and  control  of
health-care--associated infections 
and  related  adverse  events.  The  1994  guideline  addressed  concerns  related  to
preventing  ventilator-associated  pneumonia  (VAP)  (e.g.,  the  role  of  stress-ulcer
prophylaxis in the causation of pneumonia and the contentious roles of selective 
gastrointestinal  decontamination  and  periodic  changes  of  ventilator  tubings  in  the
prevention  of  the  infection).  The  report  also  presented  major  changes  in  the
recommendations to prevent and control hospital-acquired pneumonia caused by 
Legionnella spp. and aspergilli.
In  recent  years,  demand  has  increased  for  guidance  on  preventing  and  controlling
pneumonia and other lower 
respiratory  tract  infections  in  health-care  settings  other  than  the  acute-care  hospital,
probably resulting in part from the progressive shift in the burden and focus of health
care in the United States away from inpatient care in the acute-care hospital and 
towards outpatient and long-term care in other health-care settings. In response to this
demand,  HICPAC  revised  the  guideline  to  cover  these  other  settings.  However,
infection-control  data  about  the  acute-care  hospital  setting  are  more  abundant  and
well-analyzed;  in  comparison,  data  are  limited  from  long-term  care,  ambulatory,  and
psychiatric facilities and other health-care settings.
This report consists of Parts II and III of a three-part document 
(2)  and  contains  the  consensus  HICPAC  recommendations  for  the  prevention  of  the
following  infections:  bacterial  pneumonia,  Legionnaires  disease,  pertussis,  invasive
pulmonary  aspergillosis  (IPA),  lower  respiratory  tract  infections  caused  by  RSV,
parainfluenza and 
adenoviruses, and influenza. Part III provides suggested performance 
indicators to assist infection-control personnel in monitoring 
the implementation of the guideline recommendations in their facilities.
Part I of the guideline provides the background for the recommendations and includes a
discussion  of  the  epidemiology,  diagnosis,  pathogenesis,  modes  of  transmission,  and
prevention  and  control  of  the  infections  (3).  Part  I  can  be  an  important  resource  for
educating health-care personnel. 
Because education of health-care personnel is the cornerstone of an 
effective  infection-control  program,  health-care  agencies  should  give  high  priority  to
continuing infection-control education programs for their staff members.
HICPAC  recommendations  address  such  issues  as  education  of  health-care  personnel
about the prevention and control 
of  health-care--associated  pneumonia  and  other  lower  respiratory  tract  infections,
surveillance and reporting of 
diagnosed  cases  of  infections,  prevention  of  person-to-person  transmission  of  each
disease, and reduction of host risk for infection. Lower respiratory tract infection caused
by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis  is  not  addressed  in  this  document;  however,  it  is  covered  in  a  separate
publication (3).
The  document  was  prepared  by  CDC;  reviewed  by  experts  in  infection  control,
intensive-care medicine, 
pulmonology,  respiratory  therapy,  anesthesiology,  internal  medicine,  and  pediatrics;
and approved by HICPAC. The recommendations are endorsed by the American College
of Chest Physicians, American Healthcare Association, Association for Professionals 
of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Infectious Diseases Society of America, Society
for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America, and Society of Critical Care Medicine.
Key Terms Used In the Guideline
Protective environment (PE) is a specialized patient-care area, usually in a hospital, with
a positive air flow relative to the corridor (i.e., air flows from the room to the outside
adjacent space). The combination of high-efficiency particulate 
air 
(HEPA)  filtration,  high  numbers  (>12)  of  air  changes  per  hour  (ACH),  and  minimal
leakage  of  air  into  the  room  creates  an  environment  that  can  safely  accommodate
patients  who  have  received  allogeneic  hemopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  (HSCT).
Immunocompromised  patients  are  those  patients  whose  immune  mechanisms  are
deficient because of 
immunologic disorders (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, congenital
immune deficiency syndrome, and 
chronic  diseases  [(diabetes  mellitus,  cancer,  emphysema,  or  cardiac  failure]),  or
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., 
radiation,
 cytotoxic
 chemotherapy,
 anti-rejection
 medication,
 and
 steroids).
Immunocompromised  patients  who  are  identified  as  patients  at  high  risk  have  the
greatest risk for infection and include persons with severe neutropenia (i.e., an absolute
neutrophil  count  [ANC]  of  <500  cells/mL)  for  prolonged  periods  of  time,  recipients  of
allogeneic HSCT, and those who receive the 
most  intensive  chemotherapy  (e.g.,  patients  with  childhood  acute  myelogenous
leukemia). 
Abbreviations Used In the Guideline
ACIP
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
ANC 
absolute neutrophil count 
COPD 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CSF 
cerebrospinal fluid 
DTAP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis 
DTP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis 
FDA 
Food and Drug Administration
GCSF
granulocyte colony stimulating factor 
HEPA
high-efficiency particulate air 
HICPAC
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
          Committee 
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus 
HME
heat-moisture exchanger 
HSCT
hemopoietic stem-cell transplant 
ICU
intensive-care unit 
IPA 
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
LAF
laminar airflow 
NIV
noninvasive ventilation 
NNIS 
National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance 
PE 
protective environment 
RSV 
respiratory syncytial virus 
SARS 
severe acute respiratory syndrome 
SDD 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract
SOP 
standing orders program 
VAP 
ventilator-associated pneumonia 
Categorization of Recommendations
In this document, each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing scientific
evidence, theoretical 
rationale,  applicability,  and  potential  economic  impact.  In  addition,  a  new  category
accommodates  recommendations  that  are  made  on  the  basis  of  existing  national  or
state  health  regulations.  The  following  categorization  scheme  is  applied  in  this
guideline: 
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by certain
clinical or epidemiologic studies and by strong theoretical rationale. 
        Category  IC.  Required  for  implementation,  as  mandated  by  federal  or  state
regulation or standard.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or by 
strong theoretical rationale.
No recommendation; unresolved issue. Practices for which insufficient evidence or no
consensus exists about efficacy. 
Prevention of Health-Care--Associated Bacterial Pneumonia
I. Staff Education and Involvement in Infection Prevention
 Educate  health-care  workers  about  the  epidemiology  of,  and  infection-control
procedures for, preventing 
health-care--associated bacterial pneumonia to ensure worker competency according to
the worker's level of responsibility in the health-care setting, and involve the workers in
the implementation of interventions to prevent 
health-care--associated pneumonia by using 
performance-improvement tools and techniques (IA) (4--11).
II. Infection and Microbiologic Surveillance
A.  Conduct  surveillance  for  bacterial  pneumonia  in  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  patients
who are at high risk for health-care--related bacterial pneumonia (e.g., patients 
with mechanically assisted ventilation or selected 
postoperative  patients)  to  determine  trends  and  help  identify  outbreaks  and  other
potential  infection-control  problems  (12,13).  The  use  of  the  new  National  Nosocomial
Infection  Surveillance  (NNIS)  system's  surveillance  definition  of  pneumonia  is
recommended (14). Include data on the causative 
microorganisms and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns 
(15). Express data as rates (e.g., number of infected patients or infections per 100 ICU
days  or  per  1,000  ventilator  days)  to  facilitate  intrahospital  comparisons  and  trend
determination (12,16,17). Link monitored rates and prevention efforts 
and return data to appropriate health-care personnel (IB) 
(18).
        B.In the absence of specific clinical, epidemiologic, or infection-control objectives,
do not routinely perform 
surveillance  cultures  of  patients  or  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for  respiratory
therapy, 
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia (II) 
(19--22).
 III. Prevention of Transmission of Microorganisms
A.Sterilization or Disinfection and Maintenance of Equipment and Devices
1.General measures
a.Thoroughly clean all equipment and devices to be sterilized or disinfected (IA) 
(23,24).
b.Whenever possible, use steam sterilization (by autoclaving) or high-level disinfection
by wet heat 
pasteurization  at  >158  F  (>70°C)  for  30  minutes  for  reprocessing  semicritical
equipment or devices (i.e., items that come into direct or indirect contact with mucous
membranes of the lower respiratory tract) that are not sensitive to 
heat and moisture (Box. Use low-temperature sterilization methods (as 
approved by the Office of Device Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiologic Health,
Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA])  for  equipment  or  devices  that  are  heat-  or
moisture-sensitive 
(24--28). After disinfection, proceed with appropriate 
rinsing, drying, and packaging, taking care not to contaminate the disinfected items in
the process (IA) (23,24).
c.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing 
reusable semicritical respiratory equipment and devices when 
rinsing  is  needed  after  they  have  been  chemically  disinfected.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
rinse the device with filtered water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water, and then rinse with isopropyl alcohol and dry 
with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) 
(24).
d.Adhere to provisions in FDA's enforcement document for single-use devices that are 
reprocessed by third parties (IC) (24,29).
2.Mechanical ventilators
 Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of mechanical ventilators
(II).
3.Breathing circuits, humidifiers, and heat-and-moisture exchangers (HMEs)
a.Breathing circuits with humidifiers
1)Do not change routinely, on the basis of duration of use, the breathing circuit (i.e.,
ventilator tubing 
and  exhalation  valve  and  the  attached  humidifier)  that  is  in  use  on  an  individual
patient. Change the 
circuit when it is visibly soiled or mechanically malfunctioning (IA) 
(30--35).
2)Breathing-circuit--tubing condensate
a)Periodically  drain  and  discard  any  condensate  that  collects  in  the  tubing  of  a
mechanical 
ventilator, taking precautions not to allow condensate to drain toward the patient (IB) 
(36).
b)Wear gloves to perform the previous procedure and/or when handling the fluid (IB) 
(37,38).
c) Decontaminate hands with soap and water (if hands are visibly soiled) or with an
alcohol-based 
hand rub after performing the procedure or handling the fluid (IA) 
(38,39).
3)No recommendation can be made for placing a filter or trap at the distal end of the
expiratory-phase 
tubing of the breathing circuit to collect condensate (Unresolved issue).
4)Humidifier fluids
a)Use sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) water to fill bubbling humidifiers (II) 
(36,40--43).
b)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  a  closed,
continuous-feed 
humidification system (Unresolved issue).
b.Ventilator breathing circuits with HMEs
1)No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of either HMEs or heated
humidifiers to 
prevent pneumonia in patients receiving mechanically assisted ventilation (Unresolved
issue) (IB) 
(44--49).
2)Changing HME
a)Change  an  HME  that  is  in  use  on  a  patient  when  it  malfunctions  mechanically  or
becomes 
visibly soiled (II).
b)Do not routinely change more frequently than every 48 hours an HME that is in use
on a patient 
(II) (50--52).
3)Do not change routinely (in the absence of gross contamination or malfunction) the
breathing 
circuit attached to an HME while it is in use on a patient (II) 
(53).
4.Oxygen humidifiers
a.Follow manufacturers' instructions for use of oxygen humidifiers (II,C) 
(29;54--56).
b.Change the humidifier-tubing (including any nasal prongs or mask) that is in use on
one patient when 
it malfunctions or becomes visibly contaminated (II).
5.Small-volume medication nebulizers: in-line and hand-held nebulizers
a.Between treatments on the same patient clean, disinfect, rinse with sterile water (if
rinsing is needed), and 
dry small-volume in-line or hand-held medication nebulizers (IB) 
(57--59).
b.Use  only  sterile  fluid  for  nebulization,  and  dispense  the  fluid  into  the  nebulizer
aseptically (IA) 
(40--42,58,60--62).
c.Whenever  possible,  use  aerosolized  medications  in  single-dose  vials.  If  multidose
medication vials are 
used,  follow  manufacturers'  instructions  for  handling,  storing,  and  dispensing  the
medications (IB) 
(60,62--67).
6.Mist tents
a.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  replace  mist  tents  and  their  nebulizers,
reservoirs, and tubings with those 
that have been subjected to sterilization or high-level disinfection (II) 
(68).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing
mist-tent nebulizers, 
reservoirs, and tubings while in use on one patient (Unresolved issue).
c.Subject  mist-tent  nebulizers,  reservoirs,  and  tubings  that  are  used  on  the  same
patient to daily 
low-level disinfection (e.g., with 2% acetic acid) or pasteurization followed by 
air-drying (II) (69).
7.Other devices used in association with respiratory therapy
a.Respirometer and ventilator thermometer: 
between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to 
high-level disinfection portable respirometers and ventilator thermometers (IB) 
(70--74).
b.Resuscitation bags
1)Between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to high-level disinfection
reusable 
hand-powered resuscitation bags (IB) 
(75--79).
2)No recommendation can be made about the frequency of changing hydrophobic 
filters placed on the connection port of resuscitation 
bags (Unresolved issue).
8.Anesthesia machines and breathing systems or patient circuits
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of anesthesia equipment
(IB) 
(80).
b.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  clean  reusable  components  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
(e.g., tracheal tube or face mask) inspiratory and expiratory breathing tubing, y-piece,
reservoir bag, humidifier, and 
tubing, and then sterilize or subject them to high-level liquid chemical disinfection or
pasteurization 
in accordance with the device manufacturers' instructions for their reprocessing (IB) 
(24,26).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  cleaning  and
disinfecting 
unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorber chambers (Unresolved issue) 
(81).
d.Follow
 published
 guidelines
 or
 manufacturers'
 instructions
 about
 in-use
maintenance, cleaning, 
and  disinfection  or  sterilization  of  other  components  or  attachments  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (IB) (82,83).
e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  placing  a  bacterial  filter  in  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (Unresolved issue) 
(4,84--89).
9.Pulmonary-function testing equipment
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the 
internal machinery of pulmonary-function testing machines 
between uses on different patients (II) 
(90,91).
b.Change  the  mouthpiece  of  a  peak  flow  meter  or  the  mouthpiece  and  filter  of  a
spirometer between uses 
on different patients (II) (24,92).
10. Room-air "humidifiers" and faucet aerators
a.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk,  and  thus  actually  are  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to 
high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(40,93,94).
b.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made about the removal of faucet aerators from areas
for 
immunocompetent patients (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part II, Section
I-C-1-d)  (Unresolved  issue).  2)If  Legionella  spp.  are  detected  in  the  water  of  a
transplant unit and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in the unit (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part 
II, Section I-C-1-d) (II) (95).
B. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission of Bacteria
1.Standard Precautions
a.Hand hygiene: Decontaminate hands by washing them with either antimicrobial soap
and water or 
with nonantimicrobial soap and water (if hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with
proteinaceous material or are soiled with blood or body fluids) or by using an 
alcohol-based waterless antiseptic agent (e.g., hand rub) 
if  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  after  contact  with  mucous  membranes,  respiratory
secretions, or 
objects  contaminated  with  respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.
Decontaminate hands as 
described previously before and after contact with a 
patient who has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place, 
and before and after contact with any respiratory device that is used on the patient,
whether or not gloves are 
worn (IA) (37,39).
b.Gloving
1)Wear  gloves  for  handling  respiratory  secretions  or  objects  contaminated  with
respiratory secretions of 
any patient (IB) (37).
2)Change gloves and decontaminate hands as described previously between contacts
with different patients; 
after handling respiratory secretions or objects contaminated with 
secretions  from  one  patient  and  before  contact  with  another  patient,  object,  or
environmental surface; and between contacts with a contaminated body site and the
respiratory tract of, or respiratory device on, the same patient (IA) 
(37,39,96--98).
c.When soiling with respiratory secretions from a patient is anticipated, wear a gown
and change it after 
soiling occurs and before providing care to another patient (IB) 
(37,97).
2.Care of patients with tracheostomy
a.Perform tracheostomy under aseptic conditions (II).
b.When  changing  a  tracheostomy  tube,  wear  a  gown,  use  aseptic  technique,  and
replace the tube with one 
that has undergone sterilization or high-level disinfection (IB) 
(23,24,37).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  daily  application  of  topical  antimicrobial
agent(s) at 
the tracheostoma (Unresolved issue) (99).
3.Suctioning of respiratory tract secretions
    (See also Section IV-B-1-d)
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential 
use of either the multiuse closed-system suction catheter 
or  the  single-use  open-system  suction  catheter  for  prevention  of  pneumonia
(Unresolved issue) (44,100-102).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  wearing  sterile  rather  than  clean  gloves
when 
performing endotracheal suctioning (Unresolved issue).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing  the
in-line suction catheter of 
a closed-suction system in use on one patient (Unresolved issue) 
(103).
d.If the open-system suction is employed, use a sterile, single-use catheter (II).
e.Use only sterile fluid to remove secretions from the suction catheter if the catheter is
to be used for 
re-entry into the patient's lower respiratory tract (II).
 IV. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Increasing Host Defense Against Infection: 
Administration of immune modulators
1.Pneumococcal vaccination. Vaccinate patients at high risk for severe pneumococcal
infections
a.Administer the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine to persons aged 
>65  years;  persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  chronic  cardiovascular  disease  (e.g.,
congestive heart failure or cardiomyopathy), chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or ermphysema, but not 
asthma),  diabetes  mellitus,  alcoholism,  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,  cirrhosis),  or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks; 
persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persons  aged
5--64
 years
 who
 are
 living
 in
 special
 environments
 or
 social
 settings;
immunocompromised persons aged 
>5 years with HIV infection, 
leukemia,  lymphoma,  Hodgkin's  disease,  multiple  myeloma,  generalized  malignancy,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  or  other  conditions  associated  with
immunosuppression (e.g., receipt of HSCT, 
solid-organ  transplant,  or  immunosuppressive  chemotherapy,  including  long-term
systemic corticosteroids); and persons in long-term--care facilities (IA) 
(104--109).
b.Administer the 7-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide protein-conjugate vaccine to
all children aged <2 
years and to children aged 24--59 months who are at increased risk for pneumococcal
disease (e.g., children 
with sickle-cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies, or children who are functionally or
anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; children who have chronic disease,
including chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease [except asthma], diabetes mellitus, or
CSF  leak;  and  children  with  immunocompromising  conditions  including  malignancies,
chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, receipt of 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy, including long-term corticosteroids, and receipt of
solid-organ  transplant).  Consider  administering  the  vaccine  to  children  aged  24--59
months,  with  priority  to  children  aged  24--35  months,  children  who  are  American
Indians/Alaska Natives or black, and children who attend group child care centers (IB)
(104).
c.In  nursing  homes  and  other  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  a  standing  order
program (SOP) for 
the administration of 23-valent vaccine to persons at high risk for acquiring 
severe pneumococcal infections, including pneumococcal pneumonia (IA) 
(105,110,111).
2.No recommendation can be made for the routine administration of preparations of 
granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor  (GCSF)  or  intravenous  gamma  globulin  for
prophylaxis against 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(112--117).
3.No recommendation can be made for the routine enteral administration of glutamine
for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(118,119).
B. Precautions for prevention of aspiration 
    As soon as the clinical indications for their use are resolved, remove devices such as
endotracheal, tracheostomy, and/or enteral (i.e.,
    oro- or nasogastric or 
jejunal) tubes from patients (IB) (120--125).
1.Prevention of aspiration associated with endotracheal intubation
a.Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) to reduce 
the need for and duration of endotracheal intubation
1)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation 
delivered continuously by face or nose mask, instead of performing 
endotracheal intubation in patients who are in respiratory failure and are not needing
immediate intubation (e.g., those who are in hypercapneic respiratory failure secondary
to acute exacerbation of COPD or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) (II) 
(126--9).
2)When  feasible  and  not  medically  contraindicated,  use  NIV  as  part  of  the  weaning
process 
(from  mechanically  assisted  ventilation)  to  shorten  the  period  of  endotracheal
intubation (II) (130).
b.As  much  as  possible,  avoid  repeat  endotracheal  intubation  in  patients  who  have
received 
mechanically assisted ventilation (II) (131).
c.Unless contraindicated by the patient's condition, 
perform orotracheal rather than nasotracheal intubation 
on patients (IB) (44,132,133).
d.If  feasible,  use  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  above  the  endotracheal
cuff to 
allow  drainage  (by  continuous  or  frequent  intermittent  suctioning)  of  tracheal
secretions that accumulate in the patient's subglottic area (II) (44,134--137).
e.Before deflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube in preparation for tube removal, or 
before moving the tube, ensure that secretions are cleared from above the tube cuff
(II).
2.Prevention of aspiration associated with enteral feeding
a.In the absence of medical contraindication(s), elevate at an angle of 30--45 degrees
of the head of the bed of 
a patient at high risk for aspiration (e.g., a person receiving mechanically 
assisted ventilation and/or who has an enteral tube in place) (II) 
(138--140).
b.Routinely verify appropriate placement of the feeding tube (IB) 
(141--143).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  small-bore  tubes  for
enteral feeding 
(Unresolved issue) (144).
d.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  preferentially  administering  enteral  feedings
continuously 
or intermittently (Unresolved issue) 
(145--148).
e.No recommendation can be made for preferentially placing the feeding tubes, (e.g.,
jejunal tubes) distal to 
the pylorus (Unresolved issue) (149--155).
3.Prevention or modulation of oropharyngeal colonization
a.Oropharyngeal cleaning and decontamination with an antiseptic agent: develop and
implement 
a  comprehensive  oral-hygiene  program  (that  might  include  the  use  of  an  antiseptic
agent) for patients in 
acute-care  settings  or  residents  in  long-term--care  facilities  who  are  at  high  risk  for
health-care--associated pneumonia (II) (156,157).
b.Chlorhexidine oral rinse
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of an oral chlorhexidine rinse
for the prevention 
of health-care--associated pneumonia in all postoperative or critically ill patients and/or
other patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) (II) 
(158).
2)Use an oral chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) rinse during the perioperative period on
adult patients 
who undergo cardiac survery (II) (158).
c.Oral decontamination with topical antimicrobial agents.
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of topical antimicrobial agents
for 
oral decontamination to prevent VAP (Unresolved issue) 
(159).
4.Prevention of gastric colonization
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of sucralfate, 
H2-antagonists,  and/or  antacids  for  stress-bleeding  prophylaxis  in  patients  receiving
mechanically 
assisted ventilation (Unresolved issue) 
(160--167).
b.No recommendation can be made for the routine selective decontamination of the
digestive tract (SDD) of 
all critically ill, mechanically ventilated, or ICU patients (Unresolved issue) 
(168--200).
c.No recommendation can be made for routinely acidifying gastric feeding (Unresolved
issue) 
(201,202).
C. Prevention of Postoperative Pneumonia
1.Instruct  preoperative  patients,  especially  those  at  high  risk  for  contracting
pneumonia, about taking deep 
breaths  and  ambulating  as  soon  as  medically  indicated  in  the  postoperative  period.
Patients  at  high  risk  include  those  who  will  have  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  repair,
thoracic surgery, or emergency surgery; those who will receive 
general  anesthesia;  those  who  are  aged  >60  years;  those  with  totally  dependent
functional  status;  those  who  have  had  a  weight  loss  >10%;  those  using  steroids  for
chronic conditions; those with recent history of alcohol use, history 
of  COPD,  or  smoking  during  the  preceding  year;  those  with  impaired  sensorium,  a
history of 
cerebrovascular  accident  with  residual  neurologic  deficit,  or  low  (<8mg/dL)  or  high
(>22 mg/dL) blood urea 
nitrogen level; and those who will have received >4 units of blood before surgery (IB) 
(203--206).
2.Encourage all postoperative patients to take deep breaths, move about the bed, and
ambulate unless 
medically contraindicated (IB) (205--207).
3.Use incentive spirometry on postoperative patients at high risk for pneumonia (IB) 
(205--207).
4.No recommendation can be made about the routine use of chest physiotherapy on
all postoperative patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(205--207).
D. Other Prophylactic Procedures for Pneumonia
1.Administration of antimicrobial agents other than in SDD
a.Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
            No recommendation can be made about the routine administration of systemic
antimicrobial agent(s) to 
prevent pneumonia in critically ill patients or in those receiving mechanically-assisted
ventilation (Unresolved issue) (200, 208).
b.Scheduled changes in the class of antimicrobial agents used for empiric therapy
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  scheduled  changes  in  the  class  of
antimicrobial agents used routinely 
for  empiric  treatment  of  suspected  infections  in  a  particular  group  of  patients
(Unresolved issue) 
(209,210).
2.Turning or rotational therapy
          No recommendation can be made for the routine use of turning or rotational
therapy, 
either by "kinetic" therapy or by continuous 
lateral rotational therapy (i.e., placing patients on beds that turn on their longitudinal 
axes intermittently or continuously) for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia in critically ill and immobilized patients (Unresolved
issue) (44,211--216).
  
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
 I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
A.Staff Education
1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
b.In
 facilities
 with
 hemopoietic
 stem-cell-
 and/or
 solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
1.Nebulizers and other devices
a.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing nebulization devices and other semicritical
respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
d.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue). 2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
2.Cooling towers
a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
3.Water-distribution system
a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
d.Provide HSCT patients with sterile water for tooth brushing or drinking or for flushing
nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
 II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT or
Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
 When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
a)If the heated water system is implicated:
i.
 Decontaminate
 the
 heated
 water
 system
 either
 by
 superheating
 or
 by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pertussis
 I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287). II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of the
last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
 III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
C. Patient Placement and Management
1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
2.Patients with suspected pertussis
a.Place  a  patient  with  suspected  pertussis  in  a  private  room.  After  pertussis  and  no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
3.Restrict  symptomatic  pertussis-infected  health-care  workers  from  work  during  the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
H. Other measures
1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pulmonary Aspergillosis
 I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
B. Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
2.Maintain surveillance for cases of health-care--associated pulmonary aspergillosis by
establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
3.Surveillance cultures
a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
4.In  facilities  with  PEs,  perform  surveillance  of  the  ventilation  status  of  these  areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
a.When  constructing  new  specialized-care  units  with  PE  for  HSCT  recipients,  ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
2)directed room airflow,
3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
4)well-sealed room, and 
5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
1.Placement of patients in PE
a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
7.Minimize  the  length  of  time  that  immunocompromised  patients  in  PEs  are  outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
8.Systematically  review  and  coordinate  infection-control  strategies  with  personnel  in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
10.  During  construction,  demolition,  or  renovation  activities,  construct  impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
11. Direct pedestrian traffic that come from construction areas away from patient-care
areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
a.Obtain  and  use  the  following  information  to  help  in  the  investigation:  background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local
 or
 state
 health
 department
 (IB).
 4.Use
 an
 antifungal
 biocide
 (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
 III. Chemoprophylaxis
A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
      
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus, Parainfluenza Virus, and Adenovirus Infections
 I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education and Monitoring
1.Staff education
a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
2.In acute-care facilities, establish mechanisms by which the infection-control staff can
monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
B. Surveillance
1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
a.Hand hygiene
1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
b.Gloving
1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
c.Gowning
1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
d.Masking and wearing eye protection
1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
1)Limit  to  essential  purposes  only  the  movement  or  transport  of  patients  from  their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
a.Staffing
1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB). b.Personnel cohorting
1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
1)No recommendation can be made for the use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal
antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Influenza
 I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
 II. Surveillance
A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
1.Determine the threshold incidence or prevalence of influenza or influenza-like illness
in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
 III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Vaccination
1.In acute-care settings (including acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, and walk-in
clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
a.Obtain  consent  for  influenza  vaccination  (if  such  is  required  by  local  or  state  law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
b.Routinely  vaccinate  all  residents,  except  those  with  medical  contraindication(s)  to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
3.Personnel
a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
b.Educate  health-care  personnel  about  the  benefits  of  vaccination  and  the  potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
c.Take measures to provide all health-care personnel convenient access to inactivated
influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
 IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
A.Droplet Precautions
1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
3.Wear  a  surgical  mask  upon  entering  the  patient's  room  or  when  working  within  3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
D. Standard Precautions
1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37).
E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
 V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
C. Antiviral Agent Administration
1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
e.No recommendation can be made about the prophylactic administration of zanamivir
to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel if
laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
          1.  Curtail or eliminate elective medical and surgical admissions (II) 
(416).
          2.  Restrict cardiovascular and pulmonary surgery to emergency cases only (II) 
(416).
          3.  Restrict persons with influenza or influenza-like illness from visiting patients in
the health-care facility (II) 
(416).
          4.  Restrict personnel with influenza or influenza-like illness from patient care (IB)
(416).
        
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 Because  of  the  high  morbidity  and  mortality  associated  with  health-care--associated
pneumonia, several guidelines for its prevention and control have been published. The
first CDC Guideline for Prevention of Nosocomial Pneumonia 
was  published  in  1981  and  addressed  the  main  infection-control  problems  related  to
hospital-acquired pneumonia at the time: the use of large-volume nebulizers that were
attached  to  mechanical  ventilators  and  improper  reprocessing  (i.e.,  cleaning  and
disinfection or sterilization) of respiratory-care equipment. The document also covered
the prevention and control of hospital-acquired influenza and respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) infection.
 In 1994, the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) (then
known as the 
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee) revised and expanded the CDC
Guideline for Prevention of Nosocomial Pneumonia to include Legionnaires disease and
pulmonary aspergillosis 
(1). HICPAC advises the secretary of Health 
and  Human  Services  and  the  directors  of  CDC  about  the  prevention  and  control  of
health-care--associated infections 
and  related  adverse  events.  The  1994  guideline  addressed  concerns  related  to
preventing  ventilator-associated  pneumonia  (VAP)  (e.g.,  the  role  of  stress-ulcer
prophylaxis in the causation of pneumonia and the contentious roles of selective 
gastrointestinal  decontamination  and  periodic  changes  of  ventilator  tubings  in  the
prevention  of  the  infection).  The  report  also  presented  major  changes  in  the
recommendations to prevent and control hospital-acquired pneumonia caused by 
Legionnella spp. and aspergilli.
 In  recent  years,  demand  has  increased  for  guidance  on  preventing  and  controlling
pneumonia and other lower 
respiratory  tract  infections  in  health-care  settings  other  than  the  acute-care  hospital,
probably resulting in part from the progressive shift in the burden and focus of health
care in the United States away from inpatient care in the acute-care hospital and 
towards outpatient and long-term care in other health-care settings. In response to this
demand,  HICPAC  revised  the  guideline  to  cover  these  other  settings.  However,
infection-control  data  about  the  acute-care  hospital  setting  are  more  abundant  and
well-analyzed;  in  comparison,  data  are  limited  from  long-term  care,  ambulatory,  and
psychiatric facilities and other health-care settings.
 This report consists of Parts II and III of a three-part document 
(2)  and  contains  the  consensus  HICPAC  recommendations  for  the  prevention  of  the
following  infections:  bacterial  pneumonia,  Legionnaires  disease,  pertussis,  invasive
pulmonary  aspergillosis  (IPA),  lower  respiratory  tract  infections  caused  by  RSV,
parainfluenza and 
adenoviruses, and influenza. Part III provides suggested performance 
indicators to assist infection-control personnel in monitoring 
the implementation of the guideline recommendations in their facilities.
 Part I of the guideline provides the background for the recommendations and includes
a discussion of the epidemiology, diagnosis, pathogenesis, modes of transmission, and
prevention  and  control  of  the  infections  (3).  Part  I  can  be  an  important  resource  for
educating health-care personnel. 
Because education of health-care personnel is the cornerstone of an 
effective  infection-control  program,  health-care  agencies  should  give  high  priority  to
continuing infection-control education programs for their staff members.
 HICPAC recommendations address such issues as education of health-care personnel
about the prevention and control 
of  health-care--associated  pneumonia  and  other  lower  respiratory  tract  infections,
surveillance and reporting of 
diagnosed  cases  of  infections,  prevention  of  person-to-person  transmission  of  each
disease,  and  reduction  of  host  risk  for  infection.   Lower  respiratory  tract  infection
caused by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis  is  not  addressed  in  this  document;  however,  it  is  covered  in  a  separate
publication (3).
 The  document  was  prepared  by  CDC;  reviewed  by  experts  in  infection  control,
intensive-care medicine, 
pulmonology,  respiratory  therapy,  anesthesiology,  internal  medicine,  and  pediatrics;
and approved by HICPAC. The recommendations are endorsed by the American College
of Chest Physicians, American Healthcare Association, Association for Professionals 
of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Infectious Diseases Society of America, Society
for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America, and Society of Critical Care Medicine.
Key Terms Used In the Guideline
Protective environment (PE) is a specialized patient-care area, usually in a hospital, with
a positive air flow relative to the corridor (i.e., air flows from the room to the outside
adjacent space). The combination of high-efficiency particulate 
air 
(HEPA)  filtration,  high  numbers  (>12)  of  air  changes  per  hour  (ACH),  and  minimal
leakage  of  air  into  the  room  creates  an  environment  that  can  safely  accommodate
patients  who  have  received  allogeneic  hemopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  (HSCT).
Immunocompromised  patients  are  those  patients  whose  immune  mechanisms  are
deficient because of 
immunologic disorders (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, congenital
immune deficiency syndrome, and 
chronic  diseases  [(diabetes  mellitus,  cancer,  emphysema,  or  cardiac  failure]),  or
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., 
radiation,
 cytotoxic
 chemotherapy,
 anti-rejection
 medication,
 and
 steroids).
Immunocompromised  patients  who  are  identified  as  patients  at  high  risk  have  the
greatest risk for infection and include persons with severe neutropenia (i.e., an absolute
neutrophil  count  [ANC]  of  <500  cells/mL)  for  prolonged  periods  of  time,  recipients  of
allogeneic HSCT, and those who receive the 
most  intensive  chemotherapy  (e.g.,  patients  with  childhood  acute  myelogenous
leukemia). 
Abbreviations Used In the Guideline
ACIP
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
ANC 
absolute neutrophil count 
COPD 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CSF 
cerebrospinal fluid 
DTAP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis 
DTP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis 
FDA 
Food and Drug Administration
GCSF
granulocyte colony stimulating factor 
HEPA
high-efficiency particulate air 
HICPAC
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
          Committee 
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus 
HME
heat-moisture exchanger 
HSCT
hemopoietic stem-cell transplant 
ICU
intensive-care unit 
IPA 
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
LAF
laminar airflow 
NIV
noninvasive ventilation 
NNIS 
National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance 
PE 
protective environment 
RSV 
respiratory syncytial virus 
SARS 
severe acute respiratory syndrome 
SDD 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract
SOP 
standing orders program 
VAP 
ventilator-associated pneumonia 
Categorization of Recommendations
In this document, each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing scientific
evidence, theoretical 
rationale,  applicability,  and  potential  economic  impact.  In  addition,  a  new  category
accommodates  recommendations  that  are  made  on  the  basis  of  existing  national  or
state  health  regulations.  The  following  categorization  scheme  is  applied  in  this
guideline: 
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by certain
clinical or epidemiologic studies and by strong theoretical rationale. 
        Category  IC.  Required  for  implementation,  as  mandated  by  federal  or  state
regulation or standard.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or by 
strong theoretical rationale.
No recommendation; unresolved issue. Practices for which insufficient evidence or no
consensus exists about efficacy. 
Prevention of Health-Care--Associated Bacterial Pneumonia
I. Staff Education and Involvement in Infection Prevention
 Educate  health-care  workers  about  the  epidemiology  of,  and  infection-control
procedures for, preventing 
health-care--associated bacterial pneumonia to ensure worker competency according to
the worker's level of responsibility in the health-care setting, and involve the workers in
the implementation of interventions to prevent 
health-care--associated pneumonia by using 
performance-improvement tools and techniques (IA) (4--11).
II. Infection and Microbiologic Surveillance
A.  Conduct  surveillance  for  bacterial  pneumonia  in  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  patients
who are at high risk for health-care--related bacterial pneumonia (e.g., patients 
with mechanically assisted ventilation or selected 
postoperative  patients)  to  determine  trends  and  help  identify  outbreaks  and  other
potential  infection-control  problems  (12,13).  The  use  of  the  new  National  Nosocomial
Infection  Surveillance  (NNIS)  system's  surveillance  definition  of  pneumonia  is
recommended (14). Include data on the causative 
microorganisms and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns 
(15). Express data as rates (e.g., number of infected patients or infections per 100 ICU
days  or  per  1,000  ventilator  days)  to  facilitate  intrahospital  comparisons  and  trend
determination (12,16,17). Link monitored rates and prevention efforts 
and return data to appropriate health-care personnel (IB) 
(18).
        B.In the absence of specific clinical, epidemiologic, or infection-control objectives,
do not routinely perform 
surveillance  cultures  of  patients  or  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for  respiratory
therapy, 
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia (II) 
(19--22).
 III. Prevention of Transmission of Microorganisms
A.Sterilization or Disinfection and Maintenance of Equipment and Devices
1.General measures
a.Thoroughly clean all equipment and devices to be sterilized or disinfected (IA) 
(23,24).
b.Whenever possible, use steam sterilization (by autoclaving) or high-level disinfection
by wet heat 
pasteurization  at  >158  F  (>70°C)  for  30  minutes  for  reprocessing  semicritical
equipment or devices (i.e., items that come into direct or indirect contact with mucous
membranes of the lower respiratory tract) that are not sensitive to 
heat and moisture (Box. Use low-temperature sterilization methods (as 
approved by the Office of Device Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiologic Health,
Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA])  for  equipment  or  devices  that  are  heat-  or
moisture-sensitive 
(24--28). After disinfection, proceed with appropriate 
rinsing, drying, and packaging, taking care not to contaminate the disinfected items in
the process (IA) (23,24).
c.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing 
reusable semicritical respiratory equipment and devices when 
rinsing  is  needed  after  they  have  been  chemically  disinfected.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
rinse the device with filtered water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water, and then rinse with isopropyl alcohol and dry 
with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) 
(24).
d.Adhere to provisions in FDA's enforcement document for single-use devices that are 
reprocessed by third parties (IC) (24,29).
2.Mechanical ventilators
 Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of mechanical ventilators
(II).
3.Breathing circuits, humidifiers, and heat-and-moisture exchangers (HMEs)
a.Breathing circuits with humidifiers
1)Do not change routinely, on the basis of duration of use, the breathing circuit (i.e.,
ventilator tubing 
and  exhalation  valve  and  the  attached  humidifier)  that  is  in  use  on  an  individual
patient. Change the 
circuit when it is visibly soiled or mechanically malfunctioning (IA) 
(30--35).
2)Breathing-circuit--tubing condensate
a)Periodically  drain  and  discard  any  condensate  that  collects  in  the  tubing  of  a
mechanical 
ventilator, taking precautions not to allow condensate to drain toward the patient (IB) 
(36).
b)Wear gloves to perform the previous procedure and/or when handling the fluid (IB) 
(37,38).
c) Decontaminate hands with soap and water (if hands are visibly soiled) or with an
alcohol-based 
hand rub after performing the procedure or handling the fluid (IA) 
(38,39).
3)No recommendation can be made for placing a filter or trap at the distal end of the
expiratory-phase 
tubing of the breathing circuit to collect condensate (Unresolved issue).
4)Humidifier fluids
a)Use sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) water to fill bubbling humidifiers (II) 
(36,40--43).
b)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  a  closed,
continuous-feed 
humidification system (Unresolved issue).
b.Ventilator breathing circuits with HMEs
1)No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of either HMEs or heated
humidifiers to 
prevent pneumonia in patients receiving mechanically assisted ventilation (Unresolved
issue) (IB) 
(44--49).
2)Changing HME
a)Change  an  HME  that  is  in  use  on  a  patient  when  it  malfunctions  mechanically  or
becomes 
visibly soiled (II).
b)Do not routinely change more frequently than every 48 hours an HME that is in use
on a patient 
(II) (50--52).
3)Do not change routinely (in the absence of gross contamination or malfunction) the
breathing 
circuit attached to an HME while it is in use on a patient (II) 
(53).
4.Oxygen humidifiers
a.Follow manufacturers' instructions for use of oxygen humidifiers (II,C) 
(29;54--56).
b.Change the humidifier-tubing (including any nasal prongs or mask) that is in use on
one patient when 
it malfunctions or becomes visibly contaminated (II).
5.Small-volume medication nebulizers: in-line and hand-held nebulizers
a.Between treatments on the same patient clean, disinfect, rinse with sterile water (if
rinsing is needed), and 
dry small-volume in-line or hand-held medication nebulizers (IB) 
(57--59).
b.Use  only  sterile  fluid  for  nebulization,  and  dispense  the  fluid  into  the  nebulizer
aseptically (IA) 
(40--42,58,60--62).
c.Whenever  possible,  use  aerosolized  medications  in  single-dose  vials.  If  multidose
medication vials are 
used,  follow  manufacturers'  instructions  for  handling,  storing,  and  dispensing  the
medications (IB) 
(60,62--67).
6.Mist tents
a.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  replace  mist  tents  and  their  nebulizers,
reservoirs, and tubings with those 
that have been subjected to sterilization or high-level disinfection (II) 
(68).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing
mist-tent nebulizers, 
reservoirs, and tubings while in use on one patient (Unresolved issue).
c.Subject  mist-tent  nebulizers,  reservoirs,  and  tubings  that  are  used  on  the  same
patient to daily 
low-level disinfection (e.g., with 2% acetic acid) or pasteurization followed by 
air-drying (II) (69).
7.Other devices used in association with respiratory therapy
a.Respirometer and ventilator thermometer: 
between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to 
high-level disinfection portable respirometers and ventilator thermometers (IB) 
(70--74).
b.Resuscitation bags
1)Between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to high-level disinfection
reusable 
hand-powered resuscitation bags (IB) 
(75--79).
2)No recommendation can be made about the frequency of changing hydrophobic 
filters placed on the connection port of resuscitation 
bags (Unresolved issue).
8.Anesthesia machines and breathing systems or patient circuits
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of anesthesia equipment
(IB) 
(80).
b.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  clean  reusable  components  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
(e.g., tracheal tube or face mask) inspiratory and expiratory breathing tubing, y-piece,
reservoir bag, humidifier, and 
tubing, and then sterilize or subject them to high-level liquid chemical disinfection or
pasteurization 
in accordance with the device manufacturers' instructions for their reprocessing (IB) 
(24,26).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  cleaning  and
disinfecting 
unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorber chambers (Unresolved issue) 
(81).
d.Follow
 published
 guidelines
 or
 manufacturers'
 instructions
 about
 in-use
maintenance, cleaning, 
and  disinfection  or  sterilization  of  other  components  or  attachments  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (IB) (82,83).
e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  placing  a  bacterial  filter  in  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (Unresolved issue) 
(4,84--89).
9.Pulmonary-function testing equipment
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the 
internal machinery of pulmonary-function testing machines 
between uses on different patients (II) 
(90,91).
b.Change  the  mouthpiece  of  a  peak  flow  meter  or  the  mouthpiece  and  filter  of  a
spirometer between uses 
on different patients (II) (24,92).
10. Room-air "humidifiers" and faucet aerators
a.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk,  and  thus  actually  are  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to 
high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(40,93,94).
b.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made about the removal of faucet aerators from areas
for 
immunocompetent patients (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part II, Section
I-C-1-d)  (Unresolved  issue).  2)If  Legionella  spp.  are  detected  in  the  water  of  a
transplant unit and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in the unit (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part 
II, Section I-C-1-d) (II) (95).
B. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission of Bacteria
1.Standard Precautions
a.Hand hygiene: Decontaminate hands by washing them with either antimicrobial soap
and water or 
with nonantimicrobial soap and water (if hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with
proteinaceous material or are soiled with blood or body fluids) or by using an 
alcohol-based waterless antiseptic agent (e.g., hand rub) 
if  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  after  contact  with  mucous  membranes,  respiratory
secretions, or 
objects  contaminated  with  respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.
Decontaminate hands as 
described previously before and after contact with a 
patient who has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place, 
and before and after contact with any respiratory device that is used on the patient,
whether or not gloves are 
worn (IA) (37,39).
b.Gloving
1)Wear  gloves  for  handling  respiratory  secretions  or  objects  contaminated  with
respiratory secretions of 
any patient (IB) (37).
2)Change gloves and decontaminate hands as described previously between contacts
with different patients; 
after handling respiratory secretions or objects contaminated with 
secretions  from  one  patient  and  before  contact  with  another  patient,  object,  or
environmental surface; and between contacts with a contaminated body site and the
respiratory tract of, or respiratory device on, the same patient (IA) 
(37,39,96--98).
c.When soiling with respiratory secretions from a patient is anticipated, wear a gown
and change it after 
soiling occurs and before providing care to another patient (IB) 
(37,97).
2.Care of patients with tracheostomy
a.Perform tracheostomy under aseptic conditions (II).
b.When  changing  a  tracheostomy  tube,  wear  a  gown,  use  aseptic  technique,  and
replace the tube with one 
that has undergone sterilization or high-level disinfection (IB) 
(23,24,37).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  daily  application  of  topical  antimicrobial
agent(s) at 
the tracheostoma (Unresolved issue) (99).
3.Suctioning of respiratory tract secretions
    (See also Section IV-B-1-d)
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential 
use of either the multiuse closed-system suction catheter 
or  the  single-use  open-system  suction  catheter  for  prevention  of  pneumonia
(Unresolved issue) (44,100-102).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  wearing  sterile  rather  than  clean  gloves
when 
performing endotracheal suctioning (Unresolved issue).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing  the
in-line suction catheter of 
a closed-suction system in use on one patient (Unresolved issue) 
(103).
d.If the open-system suction is employed, use a sterile, single-use catheter (II).
e.Use only sterile fluid to remove secretions from the suction catheter if the catheter is
to be used for 
re-entry into the patient's lower respiratory tract (II).
 IV. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Increasing Host Defense Against Infection: 
Administration of immune modulators
1.Pneumococcal vaccination. Vaccinate patients at high risk for severe pneumococcal
infections
a.Administer the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine to persons aged 
>65  years;  persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  chronic  cardiovascular  disease  (e.g.,
congestive heart failure or cardiomyopathy), chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or ermphysema, but not 
asthma),  diabetes  mellitus,  alcoholism,  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,  cirrhosis),  or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks; 
persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persons  aged
5--64
 years
 who
 are
 living
 in
 special
 environments
 or
 social
 settings;
immunocompromised persons aged 
>5 years with HIV infection, 
leukemia,  lymphoma,  Hodgkin's  disease,  multiple  myeloma,  generalized  malignancy,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  or  other  conditions  associated  with
immunosuppression (e.g., receipt of HSCT, 
solid-organ  transplant,  or  immunosuppressive  chemotherapy,  including  long-term
systemic corticosteroids); and persons in long-term--care facilities (IA) 
(104--109).
b.Administer the 7-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide protein-conjugate vaccine to
all children aged <2 
years and to children aged 24--59 months who are at increased risk for pneumococcal
disease (e.g., children 
with sickle-cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies, or children who are functionally or
anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; children who have chronic disease,
including chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease [except asthma], diabetes mellitus, or
CSF  leak;  and  children  with  immunocompromising  conditions  including  malignancies,
chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, receipt of 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy, including long-term corticosteroids, and receipt of
solid-organ  transplant).  Consider  administering  the  vaccine  to  children  aged  24--59
months,  with  priority  to  children  aged  24--35  months,  children  who  are  American
Indians/Alaska Natives or black, and children who attend group child care centers (IB)
(104).
c.In  nursing  homes  and  other  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  a  standing  order
program (SOP) for 
the administration of 23-valent vaccine to persons at high risk for acquiring 
severe pneumococcal infections, including pneumococcal pneumonia (IA) 
(105,110,111).
2.No recommendation can be made for the routine administration of preparations of 
granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor  (GCSF)  or  intravenous  gamma  globulin  for
prophylaxis against 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(112--117).
3.No recommendation can be made for the routine enteral administration of glutamine
for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(118,119).
B. Precautions for prevention of aspiration 
    As soon as the clinical indications for their use are resolved, remove devices such as
endotracheal, tracheostomy, and/or enteral (i.e.,
    oro- or nasogastric or 
jejunal) tubes from patients (IB) (120--125).
1.Prevention of aspiration associated with endotracheal intubation
a.Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) to reduce 
the need for and duration of endotracheal intubation
1)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation 
delivered continuously by face or nose mask, instead of performing 
endotracheal intubation in patients who are in respiratory failure and are not needing
immediate intubation (e.g., those who are in hypercapneic respiratory failure secondary
to acute exacerbation of COPD or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) (II) 
(126--9).
2)When  feasible  and  not  medically  contraindicated,  use  NIV  as  part  of  the  weaning
process 
(from  mechanically  assisted  ventilation)  to  shorten  the  period  of  endotracheal
intubation (II) (130).
b.As  much  as  possible,  avoid  repeat  endotracheal  intubation  in  patients  who  have
received 
mechanically assisted ventilation (II) (131).
c.Unless contraindicated by the patient's condition, 
perform orotracheal rather than nasotracheal intubation 
on patients (IB) (44,132,133).
d.If  feasible,  use  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  above  the  endotracheal
cuff to 
allow  drainage  (by  continuous  or  frequent  intermittent  suctioning)  of  tracheal
secretions that accumulate in the patient's subglottic area (II) (44,134--137).
e.Before deflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube in preparation for tube removal, or 
before moving the tube, ensure that secretions are cleared from above the tube cuff
(II).
2.Prevention of aspiration associated with enteral feeding
a.In the absence of medical contraindication(s), elevate at an angle of 30--45 degrees
of the head of the bed of 
a patient at high risk for aspiration (e.g., a person receiving mechanically 
assisted ventilation and/or who has an enteral tube in place) (II) 
(138--140).
b.Routinely verify appropriate placement of the feeding tube (IB) 
(141--143).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  small-bore  tubes  for
enteral feeding 
(Unresolved issue) (144).
d.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  preferentially  administering  enteral  feedings
continuously 
or intermittently (Unresolved issue) 
(145--148).
e.No recommendation can be made for preferentially placing the feeding tubes, (e.g.,
jejunal tubes) distal to 
the pylorus (Unresolved issue) (149--155).
3.Prevention or modulation of oropharyngeal colonization
a.Oropharyngeal cleaning and decontamination with an antiseptic agent: develop and
implement 
a  comprehensive  oral-hygiene  program  (that  might  include  the  use  of  an  antiseptic
agent) for patients in 
acute-care  settings  or  residents  in  long-term--care  facilities  who  are  at  high  risk  for
health-care--associated pneumonia (II) (156,157).
b.Chlorhexidine oral rinse
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of an oral chlorhexidine rinse
for the prevention 
of health-care--associated pneumonia in all postoperative or critically ill patients and/or
other patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) (II) 
(158).
2)Use an oral chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) rinse during the perioperative period on
adult patients 
who undergo cardiac survery (II) (158).
c.Oral decontamination with topical antimicrobial agents.
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of topical antimicrobial agents
for 
oral decontamination to prevent VAP (Unresolved issue) 
(159).
4.Prevention of gastric colonization
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of sucralfate, 
H2-antagonists,  and/or  antacids  for  stress-bleeding  prophylaxis  in  patients  receiving
mechanically 
assisted ventilation (Unresolved issue) 
(160--167).
b.No recommendation can be made for the routine selective decontamination of the
digestive tract (SDD) of 
all critically ill, mechanically ventilated, or ICU patients (Unresolved issue) 
(168--200).
c.No recommendation can be made for routinely acidifying gastric feeding (Unresolved
issue) 
(201,202).
C. Prevention of Postoperative Pneumonia
1.Instruct  preoperative  patients,  especially  those  at  high  risk  for  contracting
pneumonia, about taking deep 
breaths  and  ambulating  as  soon  as  medically  indicated  in  the  postoperative  period.
Patients  at  high  risk  include  those  who  will  have  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  repair,
thoracic surgery, or emergency surgery; those who will receive 
general  anesthesia;  those  who  are  aged  >60  years;  those  with  totally  dependent
functional  status;  those  who  have  had  a  weight  loss  >10%;  those  using  steroids  for
chronic conditions; those with recent history of alcohol use, history 
of  COPD,  or  smoking  during  the  preceding  year;  those  with  impaired  sensorium,  a
history of 
cerebrovascular  accident  with  residual  neurologic  deficit,  or  low  (<8mg/dL)  or  high
(>22 mg/dL) blood urea 
nitrogen level; and those who will have received >4 units of blood before surgery (IB) 
(203--206).
2.Encourage all postoperative patients to take deep breaths, move about the bed, and
ambulate unless 
medically contraindicated (IB) (205--207).
3.Use incentive spirometry on postoperative patients at high risk for pneumonia (IB) 
(205--207).
4.No recommendation can be made about the routine use of chest physiotherapy on
all postoperative patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(205--207).
D. Other Prophylactic Procedures for Pneumonia
1.Administration of antimicrobial agents other than in SDD
a.Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
            No recommendation can be made about the routine administration of systemic
antimicrobial agent(s) to 
prevent pneumonia in critically ill patients or in those receiving mechanically-assisted
ventilation (Unresolved issue) (200, 208).
b.Scheduled changes in the class of antimicrobial agents used for empiric therapy
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  scheduled  changes  in  the  class  of
antimicrobial agents used routinely 
for  empiric  treatment  of  suspected  infections  in  a  particular  group  of  patients
(Unresolved issue) 
(209,210).
2.Turning or rotational therapy
          No recommendation can be made for the routine use of turning or rotational
therapy, 
either by "kinetic" therapy or by continuous 
lateral rotational therapy (i.e., placing patients on beds that turn on their longitudinal 
axes intermittently or continuously) for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia in critically ill and immobilized patients (Unresolved
issue) (44,211--216).
  
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
 I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
A.Staff Education
1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
b.In
 facilities
 with
 hemopoietic
 stem-cell-
 and/or
 solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
1.Nebulizers and other devices
a.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing nebulization devices and other semicritical
respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
d.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue). 2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
2.Cooling towers
a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
3.Water-distribution system
a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
d.Provide HSCT patients with sterile water for tooth brushing or drinking or for flushing
nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
 II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT or
Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
 When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
a)If the heated water system is implicated:
i.
 Decontaminate
 the
 heated
 water
 system
 either
 by
 superheating
 or
 by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pertussis
 I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287). II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of the
last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
 III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
C. Patient Placement and Management
1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
2.Patients with suspected pertussis
a.Place  a  patient  with  suspected  pertussis  in  a  private  room.  After  pertussis  and  no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
3.Restrict  symptomatic  pertussis-infected  health-care  workers  from  work  during  the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
H. Other measures
1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pulmonary Aspergillosis
 I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
B. Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
2.Maintain surveillance for cases of health-care--associated pulmonary aspergillosis by
establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
3.Surveillance cultures
a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
4.In  facilities  with  PEs,  perform  surveillance  of  the  ventilation  status  of  these  areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
a.When  constructing  new  specialized-care  units  with  PE  for  HSCT  recipients,  ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
2)directed room airflow,
3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
4)well-sealed room, and 
5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
1.Placement of patients in PE
a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
7.Minimize  the  length  of  time  that  immunocompromised  patients  in  PEs  are  outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
8.Systematically  review  and  coordinate  infection-control  strategies  with  personnel  in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
10.  During  construction,  demolition,  or  renovation  activities,  construct  impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
11. Direct pedestrian traffic that come from construction areas away from patient-care
areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
a.Obtain  and  use  the  following  information  to  help  in  the  investigation:  background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local
 or
 state
 health
 department
 (IB).
 4.Use
 an
 antifungal
 biocide
 (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
 III. Chemoprophylaxis
A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
      
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus, Parainfluenza Virus, and Adenovirus Infections
 I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education and Monitoring
1.Staff education
a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
2.In acute-care facilities, establish mechanisms by which the infection-control staff can
monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
B. Surveillance
1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
a.Hand hygiene
1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
b.Gloving
1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
c.Gowning
1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
d.Masking and wearing eye protection
1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
1)Limit  to  essential  purposes  only  the  movement  or  transport  of  patients  from  their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
a.Staffing
1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB). b.Personnel cohorting
1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
1)No recommendation can be made for the use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal
antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Influenza
 I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
 II. Surveillance
A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
1.Determine the threshold incidence or prevalence of influenza or influenza-like illness
in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
 III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Vaccination
1.In acute-care settings (including acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, and walk-in
clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
a.Obtain  consent  for  influenza  vaccination  (if  such  is  required  by  local  or  state  law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
b.Routinely  vaccinate  all  residents,  except  those  with  medical  contraindication(s)  to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
3.Personnel
a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
b.Educate  health-care  personnel  about  the  benefits  of  vaccination  and  the  potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
c.Take measures to provide all health-care personnel convenient access to inactivated
influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
 IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
A.Droplet Precautions
1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
3.Wear  a  surgical  mask  upon  entering  the  patient's  room  or  when  working  within  3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
D. Standard Precautions
1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37).
E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
 V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
C. Antiviral Agent Administration
1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
e.No recommendation can be made about the prophylactic administration of zanamivir
to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel if
laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
          1.  Curtail or eliminate elective medical and surgical admissions (II) 
(416).
          2.  Restrict cardiovascular and pulmonary surgery to emergency cases only (II) 
(416).
          3.  Restrict persons with influenza or influenza-like illness from visiting patients in
the health-care facility (II) 
(416).
          4.  Restrict personnel with influenza or influenza-like illness from patient care (IB)
(416).
        
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 Protective  environment  (PE)  is  a  specialized  patient-care  area,  usually  in  a  hospital,
with  a  positive  air  flow  relative  to  the  corridor  (i.e.,  air  flows  from  the  room  to  the
outside adjacent space). The combination of high-efficiency particulate 
air 
(HEPA)  filtration,  high  numbers  (>12)  of  air  changes  per  hour  (ACH),  and  minimal
leakage  of  air  into  the  room  creates  an  environment  that  can  safely  accommodate
patients  who  have  received  allogeneic  hemopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  (HSCT).  
Immunocompromised  patients  are  those  patients  whose  immune  mechanisms  are
deficient because of 
immunologic disorders (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, congenital
immune deficiency syndrome, and 
chronic  diseases  [(diabetes  mellitus,  cancer,  emphysema,  or  cardiac  failure]),  or
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., 
radiation,
 cytotoxic
 chemotherapy,
 anti-rejection
 medication,
 and
 steroids).
Immunocompromised  patients  who  are  identified  as  patients  at  high  risk  have  the
greatest risk for infection and include persons with severe neutropenia (i.e., an absolute
neutrophil  count  [ANC]  of  <500  cells/mL)  for  prolonged  periods  of  time,  recipients  of
allogeneic HSCT, and those who receive the 
most  intensive  chemotherapy  (e.g.,  patients  with  childhood  acute  myelogenous
leukemia). 
Abbreviations Used In the Guideline
ACIP
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
ANC 
absolute neutrophil count 
COPD 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CSF 
cerebrospinal fluid 
DTAP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis 
DTP 
diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis 
FDA 
Food and Drug Administration
GCSF
granulocyte colony stimulating factor 
HEPA
high-efficiency particulate air 
HICPAC
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
          Committee 
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus 
HME
heat-moisture exchanger 
HSCT
hemopoietic stem-cell transplant 
ICU
intensive-care unit 
IPA 
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
LAF
laminar airflow 
NIV
noninvasive ventilation 
NNIS 
National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance 
PE 
protective environment 
RSV 
respiratory syncytial virus 
SARS 
severe acute respiratory syndrome 
SDD 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract
SOP 
standing orders program 
VAP 
ventilator-associated pneumonia 
Categorization of Recommendations
In this document, each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing scientific
evidence, theoretical 
rationale,  applicability,  and  potential  economic  impact.  In  addition,  a  new  category
accommodates  recommendations  that  are  made  on  the  basis  of  existing  national  or
state  health  regulations.  The  following  categorization  scheme  is  applied  in  this
guideline: 
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by certain
clinical or epidemiologic studies and by strong theoretical rationale. 
        Category  IC.  Required  for  implementation,  as  mandated  by  federal  or  state
regulation or standard.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or by 
strong theoretical rationale.
No recommendation; unresolved issue. Practices for which insufficient evidence or no
consensus exists about efficacy. 
Prevention of Health-Care--Associated Bacterial Pneumonia
I. Staff Education and Involvement in Infection Prevention
 Educate  health-care  workers  about  the  epidemiology  of,  and  infection-control
procedures for, preventing 
health-care--associated bacterial pneumonia to ensure worker competency according to
the worker's level of responsibility in the health-care setting, and involve the workers in
the implementation of interventions to prevent 
health-care--associated pneumonia by using 
performance-improvement tools and techniques (IA) (4--11).
II. Infection and Microbiologic Surveillance
A.  Conduct  surveillance  for  bacterial  pneumonia  in  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  patients
who are at high risk for health-care--related bacterial pneumonia (e.g., patients 
with mechanically assisted ventilation or selected 
postoperative  patients)  to  determine  trends  and  help  identify  outbreaks  and  other
potential  infection-control  problems  (12,13).  The  use  of  the  new  National  Nosocomial
Infection  Surveillance  (NNIS)  system's  surveillance  definition  of  pneumonia  is
recommended (14). Include data on the causative 
microorganisms and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns 
(15). Express data as rates (e.g., number of infected patients or infections per 100 ICU
days  or  per  1,000  ventilator  days)  to  facilitate  intrahospital  comparisons  and  trend
determination (12,16,17). Link monitored rates and prevention efforts 
and return data to appropriate health-care personnel (IB) 
(18).
        B.In the absence of specific clinical, epidemiologic, or infection-control objectives,
do not routinely perform 
surveillance  cultures  of  patients  or  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for  respiratory
therapy, 
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia (II) 
(19--22).
 III. Prevention of Transmission of Microorganisms
A.Sterilization or Disinfection and Maintenance of Equipment and Devices
1.General measures
a.Thoroughly clean all equipment and devices to be sterilized or disinfected (IA) 
(23,24).
b.Whenever possible, use steam sterilization (by autoclaving) or high-level disinfection
by wet heat 
pasteurization  at  >158  F  (>70°C)  for  30  minutes  for  reprocessing  semicritical
equipment or devices (i.e., items that come into direct or indirect contact with mucous
membranes of the lower respiratory tract) that are not sensitive to 
heat and moisture (Box. Use low-temperature sterilization methods (as 
approved by the Office of Device Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiologic Health,
Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA])  for  equipment  or  devices  that  are  heat-  or
moisture-sensitive 
(24--28). After disinfection, proceed with appropriate 
rinsing, drying, and packaging, taking care not to contaminate the disinfected items in
the process (IA) (23,24).
c.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing 
reusable semicritical respiratory equipment and devices when 
rinsing  is  needed  after  they  have  been  chemically  disinfected.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
rinse the device with filtered water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water, and then rinse with isopropyl alcohol and dry 
with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) 
(24).
d.Adhere to provisions in FDA's enforcement document for single-use devices that are 
reprocessed by third parties (IC) (24,29).
2.Mechanical ventilators
 Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of mechanical ventilators
(II).
3.Breathing circuits, humidifiers, and heat-and-moisture exchangers (HMEs)
a.Breathing circuits with humidifiers
1)Do not change routinely, on the basis of duration of use, the breathing circuit (i.e.,
ventilator tubing 
and  exhalation  valve  and  the  attached  humidifier)  that  is  in  use  on  an  individual
patient. Change the 
circuit when it is visibly soiled or mechanically malfunctioning (IA) 
(30--35).
2)Breathing-circuit--tubing condensate
a)Periodically  drain  and  discard  any  condensate  that  collects  in  the  tubing  of  a
mechanical 
ventilator, taking precautions not to allow condensate to drain toward the patient (IB) 
(36).
b)Wear gloves to perform the previous procedure and/or when handling the fluid (IB) 
(37,38).
c) Decontaminate hands with soap and water (if hands are visibly soiled) or with an
alcohol-based 
hand rub after performing the procedure or handling the fluid (IA) 
(38,39).
3)No recommendation can be made for placing a filter or trap at the distal end of the
expiratory-phase 
tubing of the breathing circuit to collect condensate (Unresolved issue).
4)Humidifier fluids
a)Use sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) water to fill bubbling humidifiers (II) 
(36,40--43).
b)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  a  closed,
continuous-feed 
humidification system (Unresolved issue).
b.Ventilator breathing circuits with HMEs
1)No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of either HMEs or heated
humidifiers to 
prevent pneumonia in patients receiving mechanically assisted ventilation (Unresolved
issue) (IB) 
(44--49).
2)Changing HME
a)Change  an  HME  that  is  in  use  on  a  patient  when  it  malfunctions  mechanically  or
becomes 
visibly soiled (II).
b)Do not routinely change more frequently than every 48 hours an HME that is in use
on a patient 
(II) (50--52).
3)Do not change routinely (in the absence of gross contamination or malfunction) the
breathing 
circuit attached to an HME while it is in use on a patient (II) 
(53).
4.Oxygen humidifiers
a.Follow manufacturers' instructions for use of oxygen humidifiers (II,C) 
(29;54--56).
b.Change the humidifier-tubing (including any nasal prongs or mask) that is in use on
one patient when 
it malfunctions or becomes visibly contaminated (II).
5.Small-volume medication nebulizers: in-line and hand-held nebulizers
a.Between treatments on the same patient clean, disinfect, rinse with sterile water (if
rinsing is needed), and 
dry small-volume in-line or hand-held medication nebulizers (IB) 
(57--59).
b.Use  only  sterile  fluid  for  nebulization,  and  dispense  the  fluid  into  the  nebulizer
aseptically (IA) 
(40--42,58,60--62).
c.Whenever  possible,  use  aerosolized  medications  in  single-dose  vials.  If  multidose
medication vials are 
used,  follow  manufacturers'  instructions  for  handling,  storing,  and  dispensing  the
medications (IB) 
(60,62--67).
6.Mist tents
a.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  replace  mist  tents  and  their  nebulizers,
reservoirs, and tubings with those 
that have been subjected to sterilization or high-level disinfection (II) 
(68).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing
mist-tent nebulizers, 
reservoirs, and tubings while in use on one patient (Unresolved issue).
c.Subject  mist-tent  nebulizers,  reservoirs,  and  tubings  that  are  used  on  the  same
patient to daily 
low-level disinfection (e.g., with 2% acetic acid) or pasteurization followed by 
air-drying (II) (69).
7.Other devices used in association with respiratory therapy
a.Respirometer and ventilator thermometer: 
between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to 
high-level disinfection portable respirometers and ventilator thermometers (IB) 
(70--74).
b.Resuscitation bags
1)Between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to high-level disinfection
reusable 
hand-powered resuscitation bags (IB) 
(75--79).
2)No recommendation can be made about the frequency of changing hydrophobic 
filters placed on the connection port of resuscitation 
bags (Unresolved issue).
8.Anesthesia machines and breathing systems or patient circuits
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of anesthesia equipment
(IB) 
(80).
b.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  clean  reusable  components  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
(e.g., tracheal tube or face mask) inspiratory and expiratory breathing tubing, y-piece,
reservoir bag, humidifier, and 
tubing, and then sterilize or subject them to high-level liquid chemical disinfection or
pasteurization 
in accordance with the device manufacturers' instructions for their reprocessing (IB) 
(24,26).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  cleaning  and
disinfecting 
unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorber chambers (Unresolved issue) 
(81).
d.Follow
 published
 guidelines
 or
 manufacturers'
 instructions
 about
 in-use
maintenance, cleaning, 
and  disinfection  or  sterilization  of  other  components  or  attachments  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (IB) (82,83).
e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  placing  a  bacterial  filter  in  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (Unresolved issue) 
(4,84--89).
9.Pulmonary-function testing equipment
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the 
internal machinery of pulmonary-function testing machines 
between uses on different patients (II) 
(90,91).
b.Change  the  mouthpiece  of  a  peak  flow  meter  or  the  mouthpiece  and  filter  of  a
spirometer between uses 
on different patients (II) (24,92).
10. Room-air "humidifiers" and faucet aerators
a.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk,  and  thus  actually  are  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to 
high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(40,93,94).
b.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made about the removal of faucet aerators from areas
for 
immunocompetent patients (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part II, Section
I-C-1-d)  (Unresolved  issue).  2)If  Legionella  spp.  are  detected  in  the  water  of  a
transplant unit and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in the unit (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part 
II, Section I-C-1-d) (II) (95).
B. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission of Bacteria
1.Standard Precautions
a.Hand hygiene: Decontaminate hands by washing them with either antimicrobial soap
and water or 
with nonantimicrobial soap and water (if hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with
proteinaceous material or are soiled with blood or body fluids) or by using an 
alcohol-based waterless antiseptic agent (e.g., hand rub) 
if  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  after  contact  with  mucous  membranes,  respiratory
secretions, or 
objects  contaminated  with  respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.
Decontaminate hands as 
described previously before and after contact with a 
patient who has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place, 
and before and after contact with any respiratory device that is used on the patient,
whether or not gloves are 
worn (IA) (37,39).
b.Gloving
1)Wear  gloves  for  handling  respiratory  secretions  or  objects  contaminated  with
respiratory secretions of 
any patient (IB) (37).
2)Change gloves and decontaminate hands as described previously between contacts
with different patients; 
after handling respiratory secretions or objects contaminated with 
secretions  from  one  patient  and  before  contact  with  another  patient,  object,  or
environmental surface; and between contacts with a contaminated body site and the
respiratory tract of, or respiratory device on, the same patient (IA) 
(37,39,96--98).
c.When soiling with respiratory secretions from a patient is anticipated, wear a gown
and change it after 
soiling occurs and before providing care to another patient (IB) 
(37,97).
2.Care of patients with tracheostomy
a.Perform tracheostomy under aseptic conditions (II).
b.When  changing  a  tracheostomy  tube,  wear  a  gown,  use  aseptic  technique,  and
replace the tube with one 
that has undergone sterilization or high-level disinfection (IB) 
(23,24,37).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  daily  application  of  topical  antimicrobial
agent(s) at 
the tracheostoma (Unresolved issue) (99).
3.Suctioning of respiratory tract secretions
    (See also Section IV-B-1-d)
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential 
use of either the multiuse closed-system suction catheter 
or  the  single-use  open-system  suction  catheter  for  prevention  of  pneumonia
(Unresolved issue) (44,100-102).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  wearing  sterile  rather  than  clean  gloves
when 
performing endotracheal suctioning (Unresolved issue).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing  the
in-line suction catheter of 
a closed-suction system in use on one patient (Unresolved issue) 
(103).
d.If the open-system suction is employed, use a sterile, single-use catheter (II).
e.Use only sterile fluid to remove secretions from the suction catheter if the catheter is
to be used for 
re-entry into the patient's lower respiratory tract (II).
 IV. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Increasing Host Defense Against Infection: 
Administration of immune modulators
1.Pneumococcal vaccination. Vaccinate patients at high risk for severe pneumococcal
infections
a.Administer the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine to persons aged 
>65  years;  persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  chronic  cardiovascular  disease  (e.g.,
congestive heart failure or cardiomyopathy), chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or ermphysema, but not 
asthma),  diabetes  mellitus,  alcoholism,  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,  cirrhosis),  or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks; 
persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persons  aged
5--64
 years
 who
 are
 living
 in
 special
 environments
 or
 social
 settings;
immunocompromised persons aged 
>5 years with HIV infection, 
leukemia,  lymphoma,  Hodgkin's  disease,  multiple  myeloma,  generalized  malignancy,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  or  other  conditions  associated  with
immunosuppression (e.g., receipt of HSCT, 
solid-organ  transplant,  or  immunosuppressive  chemotherapy,  including  long-term
systemic corticosteroids); and persons in long-term--care facilities (IA) 
(104--109).
b.Administer the 7-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide protein-conjugate vaccine to
all children aged <2 
years and to children aged 24--59 months who are at increased risk for pneumococcal
disease (e.g., children 
with sickle-cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies, or children who are functionally or
anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; children who have chronic disease,
including chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease [except asthma], diabetes mellitus, or
CSF  leak;  and  children  with  immunocompromising  conditions  including  malignancies,
chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, receipt of 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy, including long-term corticosteroids, and receipt of
solid-organ  transplant).  Consider  administering  the  vaccine  to  children  aged  24--59
months,  with  priority  to  children  aged  24--35  months,  children  who  are  American
Indians/Alaska Natives or black, and children who attend group child care centers (IB)
(104).
c.In  nursing  homes  and  other  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  a  standing  order
program (SOP) for 
the administration of 23-valent vaccine to persons at high risk for acquiring 
severe pneumococcal infections, including pneumococcal pneumonia (IA) 
(105,110,111).
2.No recommendation can be made for the routine administration of preparations of 
granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor  (GCSF)  or  intravenous  gamma  globulin  for
prophylaxis against 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(112--117).
3.No recommendation can be made for the routine enteral administration of glutamine
for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(118,119).
B. Precautions for prevention of aspiration 
    As soon as the clinical indications for their use are resolved, remove devices such as
endotracheal, tracheostomy, and/or enteral (i.e.,
    oro- or nasogastric or 
jejunal) tubes from patients (IB) (120--125).
1.Prevention of aspiration associated with endotracheal intubation
a.Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) to reduce 
the need for and duration of endotracheal intubation
1)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation 
delivered continuously by face or nose mask, instead of performing 
endotracheal intubation in patients who are in respiratory failure and are not needing
immediate intubation (e.g., those who are in hypercapneic respiratory failure secondary
to acute exacerbation of COPD or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) (II) 
(126--9).
2)When  feasible  and  not  medically  contraindicated,  use  NIV  as  part  of  the  weaning
process 
(from  mechanically  assisted  ventilation)  to  shorten  the  period  of  endotracheal
intubation (II) (130).
b.As  much  as  possible,  avoid  repeat  endotracheal  intubation  in  patients  who  have
received 
mechanically assisted ventilation (II) (131).
c.Unless contraindicated by the patient's condition, 
perform orotracheal rather than nasotracheal intubation 
on patients (IB) (44,132,133).
d.If  feasible,  use  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  above  the  endotracheal
cuff to 
allow  drainage  (by  continuous  or  frequent  intermittent  suctioning)  of  tracheal
secretions that accumulate in the patient's subglottic area (II) (44,134--137).
e.Before deflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube in preparation for tube removal, or 
before moving the tube, ensure that secretions are cleared from above the tube cuff
(II).
2.Prevention of aspiration associated with enteral feeding
a.In the absence of medical contraindication(s), elevate at an angle of 30--45 degrees
of the head of the bed of 
a patient at high risk for aspiration (e.g., a person receiving mechanically 
assisted ventilation and/or who has an enteral tube in place) (II) 
(138--140).
b.Routinely verify appropriate placement of the feeding tube (IB) 
(141--143).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  small-bore  tubes  for
enteral feeding 
(Unresolved issue) (144).
d.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  preferentially  administering  enteral  feedings
continuously 
or intermittently (Unresolved issue) 
(145--148).
e.No recommendation can be made for preferentially placing the feeding tubes, (e.g.,
jejunal tubes) distal to 
the pylorus (Unresolved issue) (149--155).
3.Prevention or modulation of oropharyngeal colonization
a.Oropharyngeal cleaning and decontamination with an antiseptic agent: develop and
implement 
a  comprehensive  oral-hygiene  program  (that  might  include  the  use  of  an  antiseptic
agent) for patients in 
acute-care  settings  or  residents  in  long-term--care  facilities  who  are  at  high  risk  for
health-care--associated pneumonia (II) (156,157).
b.Chlorhexidine oral rinse
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of an oral chlorhexidine rinse
for the prevention 
of health-care--associated pneumonia in all postoperative or critically ill patients and/or
other patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) (II) 
(158).
2)Use an oral chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) rinse during the perioperative period on
adult patients 
who undergo cardiac survery (II) (158).
c.Oral decontamination with topical antimicrobial agents.
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of topical antimicrobial agents
for 
oral decontamination to prevent VAP (Unresolved issue) 
(159).
4.Prevention of gastric colonization
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of sucralfate, 
H2-antagonists,  and/or  antacids  for  stress-bleeding  prophylaxis  in  patients  receiving
mechanically 
assisted ventilation (Unresolved issue) 
(160--167).
b.No recommendation can be made for the routine selective decontamination of the
digestive tract (SDD) of 
all critically ill, mechanically ventilated, or ICU patients (Unresolved issue) 
(168--200).
c.No recommendation can be made for routinely acidifying gastric feeding (Unresolved
issue) 
(201,202).
C. Prevention of Postoperative Pneumonia
1.Instruct  preoperative  patients,  especially  those  at  high  risk  for  contracting
pneumonia, about taking deep 
breaths  and  ambulating  as  soon  as  medically  indicated  in  the  postoperative  period.
Patients  at  high  risk  include  those  who  will  have  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  repair,
thoracic surgery, or emergency surgery; those who will receive 
general  anesthesia;  those  who  are  aged  >60  years;  those  with  totally  dependent
functional  status;  those  who  have  had  a  weight  loss  >10%;  those  using  steroids  for
chronic conditions; those with recent history of alcohol use, history 
of  COPD,  or  smoking  during  the  preceding  year;  those  with  impaired  sensorium,  a
history of 
cerebrovascular  accident  with  residual  neurologic  deficit,  or  low  (<8mg/dL)  or  high
(>22 mg/dL) blood urea 
nitrogen level; and those who will have received >4 units of blood before surgery (IB) 
(203--206).
2.Encourage all postoperative patients to take deep breaths, move about the bed, and
ambulate unless 
medically contraindicated (IB) (205--207).
3.Use incentive spirometry on postoperative patients at high risk for pneumonia (IB) 
(205--207).
4.No recommendation can be made about the routine use of chest physiotherapy on
all postoperative patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(205--207).
D. Other Prophylactic Procedures for Pneumonia
1.Administration of antimicrobial agents other than in SDD
a.Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
            No recommendation can be made about the routine administration of systemic
antimicrobial agent(s) to 
prevent pneumonia in critically ill patients or in those receiving mechanically-assisted
ventilation (Unresolved issue) (200, 208).
b.Scheduled changes in the class of antimicrobial agents used for empiric therapy
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  scheduled  changes  in  the  class  of
antimicrobial agents used routinely 
for  empiric  treatment  of  suspected  infections  in  a  particular  group  of  patients
(Unresolved issue) 
(209,210).
2.Turning or rotational therapy
          No recommendation can be made for the routine use of turning or rotational
therapy, 
either by "kinetic" therapy or by continuous 
lateral rotational therapy (i.e., placing patients on beds that turn on their longitudinal 
axes intermittently or continuously) for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia in critically ill and immobilized patients (Unresolved
issue) (44,211--216).
  
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
 I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
A.Staff Education
1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
b.In
 facilities
 with
 hemopoietic
 stem-cell-
 and/or
 solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
1.Nebulizers and other devices
a.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing nebulization devices and other semicritical
respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
d.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue). 2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
2.Cooling towers
a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
3.Water-distribution system
a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
d.Provide HSCT patients with sterile water for tooth brushing or drinking or for flushing
nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
 II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT or
Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
 When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
a)If the heated water system is implicated:
i.
 Decontaminate
 the
 heated
 water
 system
 either
 by
 superheating
 or
 by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pertussis
 I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287). II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of the
last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
 III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
C. Patient Placement and Management
1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
2.Patients with suspected pertussis
a.Place  a  patient  with  suspected  pertussis  in  a  private  room.  After  pertussis  and  no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
3.Restrict  symptomatic  pertussis-infected  health-care  workers  from  work  during  the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
H. Other measures
1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pulmonary Aspergillosis
 I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
B. Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
2.Maintain surveillance for cases of health-care--associated pulmonary aspergillosis by
establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
3.Surveillance cultures
a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
4.In  facilities  with  PEs,  perform  surveillance  of  the  ventilation  status  of  these  areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
a.When  constructing  new  specialized-care  units  with  PE  for  HSCT  recipients,  ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
2)directed room airflow,
3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
4)well-sealed room, and 
5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
1.Placement of patients in PE
a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
7.Minimize  the  length  of  time  that  immunocompromised  patients  in  PEs  are  outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
8.Systematically  review  and  coordinate  infection-control  strategies  with  personnel  in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
10.  During  construction,  demolition,  or  renovation  activities,  construct  impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
11. Direct pedestrian traffic that come from construction areas away from patient-care
areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
a.Obtain  and  use  the  following  information  to  help  in  the  investigation:  background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local
 or
 state
 health
 department
 (IB).
 4.Use
 an
 antifungal
 biocide
 (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
 III. Chemoprophylaxis
A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
      
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus, Parainfluenza Virus, and Adenovirus Infections
 I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education and Monitoring
1.Staff education
a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
2.In acute-care facilities, establish mechanisms by which the infection-control staff can
monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
B. Surveillance
1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
a.Hand hygiene
1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
b.Gloving
1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
c.Gowning
1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
d.Masking and wearing eye protection
1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
1)Limit  to  essential  purposes  only  the  movement  or  transport  of  patients  from  their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
a.Staffing
1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB). b.Personnel cohorting
1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
1)No recommendation can be made for the use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal
antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Influenza
 I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
 II. Surveillance
A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
1.Determine the threshold incidence or prevalence of influenza or influenza-like illness
in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
 III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Vaccination
1.In acute-care settings (including acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, and walk-in
clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
a.Obtain  consent  for  influenza  vaccination  (if  such  is  required  by  local  or  state  law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
b.Routinely  vaccinate  all  residents,  except  those  with  medical  contraindication(s)  to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
3.Personnel
a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
b.Educate  health-care  personnel  about  the  benefits  of  vaccination  and  the  potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
c.Take measures to provide all health-care personnel convenient access to inactivated
influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
 IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
A.Droplet Precautions
1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
3.Wear  a  surgical  mask  upon  entering  the  patient's  room  or  when  working  within  3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
D. Standard Precautions
1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37).
E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
 V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
C. Antiviral Agent Administration
1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
e.No recommendation can be made about the prophylactic administration of zanamivir
to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel if
laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
          1.  Curtail or eliminate elective medical and surgical admissions (II) 
(416).
          2.  Restrict cardiovascular and pulmonary surgery to emergency cases only (II) 
(416).
          3.  Restrict persons with influenza or influenza-like illness from visiting patients in
the health-care facility (II) 
(416).
          4.  Restrict personnel with influenza or influenza-like illness from patient care (IB)
(416).
        
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 In  this  document,  each  recommendation  is  categorized  on  the  basis  of  existing
scientific evidence, theoretical 
rationale,  applicability,  and  potential  economic  impact.  In  addition,  a  new  category
accommodates  recommendations  that  are  made  on  the  basis  of  existing  national  or
state  health  regulations.  The  following  categorization  scheme  is  applied  in  this
guideline:   Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly
supported by well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by certain
clinical or epidemiologic studies and by strong theoretical rationale. 
        Category  IC.  Required  for  implementation,  as  mandated  by  federal  or  state
regulation or standard.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or by 
strong theoretical rationale.
 No recommendation; unresolved issue. Practices for which insufficient evidence or no
consensus exists about efficacy. 
Prevention of Health-Care--Associated Bacterial Pneumonia
I. Staff Education and Involvement in Infection Prevention
 Educate  health-care  workers  about  the  epidemiology  of,  and  infection-control
procedures for, preventing 
health-care--associated bacterial pneumonia to ensure worker competency according to
the worker's level of responsibility in the health-care setting, and involve the workers in
the implementation of interventions to prevent 
health-care--associated pneumonia by using 
performance-improvement tools and techniques (IA) (4--11).
II. Infection and Microbiologic Surveillance
A.  Conduct  surveillance  for  bacterial  pneumonia  in  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  patients
who are at high risk for health-care--related bacterial pneumonia (e.g., patients 
with mechanically assisted ventilation or selected 
postoperative  patients)  to  determine  trends  and  help  identify  outbreaks  and  other
potential  infection-control  problems  (12,13).  The  use  of  the  new  National  Nosocomial
Infection  Surveillance  (NNIS)  system's  surveillance  definition  of  pneumonia  is
recommended (14). Include data on the causative 
microorganisms and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns 
(15). Express data as rates (e.g., number of infected patients or infections per 100 ICU
days  or  per  1,000  ventilator  days)  to  facilitate  intrahospital  comparisons  and  trend
determination (12,16,17). Link monitored rates and prevention efforts 
and return data to appropriate health-care personnel (IB) 
(18).
        B.In the absence of specific clinical, epidemiologic, or infection-control objectives,
do not routinely perform 
surveillance  cultures  of  patients  or  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for  respiratory
therapy, 
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia (II) 
(19--22).
 III. Prevention of Transmission of Microorganisms
A.Sterilization or Disinfection and Maintenance of Equipment and Devices
1.General measures
a.Thoroughly clean all equipment and devices to be sterilized or disinfected (IA) 
(23,24).
b.Whenever possible, use steam sterilization (by autoclaving) or high-level disinfection
by wet heat 
pasteurization  at  >158  F  (>70°C)  for  30  minutes  for  reprocessing  semicritical
equipment or devices (i.e., items that come into direct or indirect contact with mucous
membranes of the lower respiratory tract) that are not sensitive to 
heat and moisture (Box. Use low-temperature sterilization methods (as 
approved by the Office of Device Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiologic Health,
Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA])  for  equipment  or  devices  that  are  heat-  or
moisture-sensitive 
(24--28). After disinfection, proceed with appropriate 
rinsing, drying, and packaging, taking care not to contaminate the disinfected items in
the process (IA) (23,24).
c.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing 
reusable semicritical respiratory equipment and devices when 
rinsing  is  needed  after  they  have  been  chemically  disinfected.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
rinse the device with filtered water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water, and then rinse with isopropyl alcohol and dry 
with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) 
(24).
d.Adhere to provisions in FDA's enforcement document for single-use devices that are 
reprocessed by third parties (IC) (24,29).
2.Mechanical ventilators
 Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of mechanical ventilators
(II).
3.Breathing circuits, humidifiers, and heat-and-moisture exchangers (HMEs)
a.Breathing circuits with humidifiers
1)Do not change routinely, on the basis of duration of use, the breathing circuit (i.e.,
ventilator tubing 
and  exhalation  valve  and  the  attached  humidifier)  that  is  in  use  on  an  individual
patient. Change the 
circuit when it is visibly soiled or mechanically malfunctioning (IA) 
(30--35).
2)Breathing-circuit--tubing condensate
a)Periodically  drain  and  discard  any  condensate  that  collects  in  the  tubing  of  a
mechanical 
ventilator, taking precautions not to allow condensate to drain toward the patient (IB) 
(36).
b)Wear gloves to perform the previous procedure and/or when handling the fluid (IB) 
(37,38).
c) Decontaminate hands with soap and water (if hands are visibly soiled) or with an
alcohol-based 
hand rub after performing the procedure or handling the fluid (IA) 
(38,39).
3)No recommendation can be made for placing a filter or trap at the distal end of the
expiratory-phase 
tubing of the breathing circuit to collect condensate (Unresolved issue).
4)Humidifier fluids
a)Use sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) water to fill bubbling humidifiers (II) 
(36,40--43).
b)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  a  closed,
continuous-feed 
humidification system (Unresolved issue).
b.Ventilator breathing circuits with HMEs
1)No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of either HMEs or heated
humidifiers to 
prevent pneumonia in patients receiving mechanically assisted ventilation (Unresolved
issue) (IB) 
(44--49).
2)Changing HME
a)Change  an  HME  that  is  in  use  on  a  patient  when  it  malfunctions  mechanically  or
becomes 
visibly soiled (II).
b)Do not routinely change more frequently than every 48 hours an HME that is in use
on a patient 
(II) (50--52).
3)Do not change routinely (in the absence of gross contamination or malfunction) the
breathing 
circuit attached to an HME while it is in use on a patient (II) 
(53).
4.Oxygen humidifiers
a.Follow manufacturers' instructions for use of oxygen humidifiers (II,C) 
(29;54--56).
b.Change the humidifier-tubing (including any nasal prongs or mask) that is in use on
one patient when 
it malfunctions or becomes visibly contaminated (II).
5.Small-volume medication nebulizers: in-line and hand-held nebulizers
a.Between treatments on the same patient clean, disinfect, rinse with sterile water (if
rinsing is needed), and 
dry small-volume in-line or hand-held medication nebulizers (IB) 
(57--59).
b.Use  only  sterile  fluid  for  nebulization,  and  dispense  the  fluid  into  the  nebulizer
aseptically (IA) 
(40--42,58,60--62).
c.Whenever  possible,  use  aerosolized  medications  in  single-dose  vials.  If  multidose
medication vials are 
used,  follow  manufacturers'  instructions  for  handling,  storing,  and  dispensing  the
medications (IB) 
(60,62--67).
6.Mist tents
a.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  replace  mist  tents  and  their  nebulizers,
reservoirs, and tubings with those 
that have been subjected to sterilization or high-level disinfection (II) 
(68).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing
mist-tent nebulizers, 
reservoirs, and tubings while in use on one patient (Unresolved issue).
c.Subject  mist-tent  nebulizers,  reservoirs,  and  tubings  that  are  used  on  the  same
patient to daily 
low-level disinfection (e.g., with 2% acetic acid) or pasteurization followed by 
air-drying (II) (69).
7.Other devices used in association with respiratory therapy
a.Respirometer and ventilator thermometer: 
between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to 
high-level disinfection portable respirometers and ventilator thermometers (IB) 
(70--74).
b.Resuscitation bags
1)Between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to high-level disinfection
reusable 
hand-powered resuscitation bags (IB) 
(75--79).
2)No recommendation can be made about the frequency of changing hydrophobic 
filters placed on the connection port of resuscitation 
bags (Unresolved issue).
8.Anesthesia machines and breathing systems or patient circuits
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of anesthesia equipment
(IB) 
(80).
b.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  clean  reusable  components  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
(e.g., tracheal tube or face mask) inspiratory and expiratory breathing tubing, y-piece,
reservoir bag, humidifier, and 
tubing, and then sterilize or subject them to high-level liquid chemical disinfection or
pasteurization 
in accordance with the device manufacturers' instructions for their reprocessing (IB) 
(24,26).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  cleaning  and
disinfecting 
unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorber chambers (Unresolved issue) 
(81).
d.Follow
 published
 guidelines
 or
 manufacturers'
 instructions
 about
 in-use
maintenance, cleaning, 
and  disinfection  or  sterilization  of  other  components  or  attachments  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (IB) (82,83).
e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  placing  a  bacterial  filter  in  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (Unresolved issue) 
(4,84--89).
9.Pulmonary-function testing equipment
a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the 
internal machinery of pulmonary-function testing machines 
between uses on different patients (II) 
(90,91).
b.Change  the  mouthpiece  of  a  peak  flow  meter  or  the  mouthpiece  and  filter  of  a
spirometer between uses 
on different patients (II) (24,92).
10. Room-air "humidifiers" and faucet aerators
a.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk,  and  thus  actually  are  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to 
high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(40,93,94).
b.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made about the removal of faucet aerators from areas
for 
immunocompetent patients (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part II, Section
I-C-1-d)  (Unresolved  issue).  2)If  Legionella  spp.  are  detected  in  the  water  of  a
transplant unit and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in the unit (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part 
II, Section I-C-1-d) (II) (95).
B. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission of Bacteria
1.Standard Precautions
a.Hand hygiene: Decontaminate hands by washing them with either antimicrobial soap
and water or 
with nonantimicrobial soap and water (if hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with
proteinaceous material or are soiled with blood or body fluids) or by using an 
alcohol-based waterless antiseptic agent (e.g., hand rub) 
if  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  after  contact  with  mucous  membranes,  respiratory
secretions, or 
objects  contaminated  with  respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.
Decontaminate hands as 
described previously before and after contact with a 
patient who has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place, 
and before and after contact with any respiratory device that is used on the patient,
whether or not gloves are 
worn (IA) (37,39).
b.Gloving
1)Wear  gloves  for  handling  respiratory  secretions  or  objects  contaminated  with
respiratory secretions of 
any patient (IB) (37).
2)Change gloves and decontaminate hands as described previously between contacts
with different patients; 
after handling respiratory secretions or objects contaminated with 
secretions  from  one  patient  and  before  contact  with  another  patient,  object,  or
environmental surface; and between contacts with a contaminated body site and the
respiratory tract of, or respiratory device on, the same patient (IA) 
(37,39,96--98).
c.When soiling with respiratory secretions from a patient is anticipated, wear a gown
and change it after 
soiling occurs and before providing care to another patient (IB) 
(37,97).
2.Care of patients with tracheostomy
a.Perform tracheostomy under aseptic conditions (II).
b.When  changing  a  tracheostomy  tube,  wear  a  gown,  use  aseptic  technique,  and
replace the tube with one 
that has undergone sterilization or high-level disinfection (IB) 
(23,24,37).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  daily  application  of  topical  antimicrobial
agent(s) at 
the tracheostoma (Unresolved issue) (99).
3.Suctioning of respiratory tract secretions
    (See also Section IV-B-1-d)
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential 
use of either the multiuse closed-system suction catheter 
or  the  single-use  open-system  suction  catheter  for  prevention  of  pneumonia
(Unresolved issue) (44,100-102).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  wearing  sterile  rather  than  clean  gloves
when 
performing endotracheal suctioning (Unresolved issue).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing  the
in-line suction catheter of 
a closed-suction system in use on one patient (Unresolved issue) 
(103).
d.If the open-system suction is employed, use a sterile, single-use catheter (II).
e.Use only sterile fluid to remove secretions from the suction catheter if the catheter is
to be used for 
re-entry into the patient's lower respiratory tract (II).
 IV. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Increasing Host Defense Against Infection: 
Administration of immune modulators
1.Pneumococcal vaccination. Vaccinate patients at high risk for severe pneumococcal
infections
a.Administer the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine to persons aged 
>65  years;  persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  chronic  cardiovascular  disease  (e.g.,
congestive heart failure or cardiomyopathy), chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or ermphysema, but not 
asthma),  diabetes  mellitus,  alcoholism,  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,  cirrhosis),  or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks; 
persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persons  aged
5--64
 years
 who
 are
 living
 in
 special
 environments
 or
 social
 settings;
immunocompromised persons aged 
>5 years with HIV infection, 
leukemia,  lymphoma,  Hodgkin's  disease,  multiple  myeloma,  generalized  malignancy,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  or  other  conditions  associated  with
immunosuppression (e.g., receipt of HSCT, 
solid-organ  transplant,  or  immunosuppressive  chemotherapy,  including  long-term
systemic corticosteroids); and persons in long-term--care facilities (IA) 
(104--109).
b.Administer the 7-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide protein-conjugate vaccine to
all children aged <2 
years and to children aged 24--59 months who are at increased risk for pneumococcal
disease (e.g., children 
with sickle-cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies, or children who are functionally or
anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; children who have chronic disease,
including chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease [except asthma], diabetes mellitus, or
CSF  leak;  and  children  with  immunocompromising  conditions  including  malignancies,
chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, receipt of 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy, including long-term corticosteroids, and receipt of
solid-organ  transplant).  Consider  administering  the  vaccine  to  children  aged  24--59
months,  with  priority  to  children  aged  24--35  months,  children  who  are  American
Indians/Alaska Natives or black, and children who attend group child care centers (IB)
(104).
c.In  nursing  homes  and  other  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  a  standing  order
program (SOP) for 
the administration of 23-valent vaccine to persons at high risk for acquiring 
severe pneumococcal infections, including pneumococcal pneumonia (IA) 
(105,110,111).
2.No recommendation can be made for the routine administration of preparations of 
granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor  (GCSF)  or  intravenous  gamma  globulin  for
prophylaxis against 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(112--117).
3.No recommendation can be made for the routine enteral administration of glutamine
for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(118,119).
B. Precautions for prevention of aspiration 
    As soon as the clinical indications for their use are resolved, remove devices such as
endotracheal, tracheostomy, and/or enteral (i.e.,
    oro- or nasogastric or 
jejunal) tubes from patients (IB) (120--125).
1.Prevention of aspiration associated with endotracheal intubation
a.Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) to reduce 
the need for and duration of endotracheal intubation
1)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation 
delivered continuously by face or nose mask, instead of performing 
endotracheal intubation in patients who are in respiratory failure and are not needing
immediate intubation (e.g., those who are in hypercapneic respiratory failure secondary
to acute exacerbation of COPD or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) (II) 
(126--9).
2)When  feasible  and  not  medically  contraindicated,  use  NIV  as  part  of  the  weaning
process 
(from  mechanically  assisted  ventilation)  to  shorten  the  period  of  endotracheal
intubation (II) (130).
b.As  much  as  possible,  avoid  repeat  endotracheal  intubation  in  patients  who  have
received 
mechanically assisted ventilation (II) (131).
c.Unless contraindicated by the patient's condition, 
perform orotracheal rather than nasotracheal intubation 
on patients (IB) (44,132,133).
d.If  feasible,  use  an  endotracheal  tube  with  a  dorsal  lumen  above  the  endotracheal
cuff to 
allow  drainage  (by  continuous  or  frequent  intermittent  suctioning)  of  tracheal
secretions that accumulate in the patient's subglottic area (II) (44,134--137).
e.Before deflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube in preparation for tube removal, or 
before moving the tube, ensure that secretions are cleared from above the tube cuff
(II).
2.Prevention of aspiration associated with enteral feeding
a.In the absence of medical contraindication(s), elevate at an angle of 30--45 degrees
of the head of the bed of 
a patient at high risk for aspiration (e.g., a person receiving mechanically 
assisted ventilation and/or who has an enteral tube in place) (II) 
(138--140).
b.Routinely verify appropriate placement of the feeding tube (IB) 
(141--143).
c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  small-bore  tubes  for
enteral feeding 
(Unresolved issue) (144).
d.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  preferentially  administering  enteral  feedings
continuously 
or intermittently (Unresolved issue) 
(145--148).
e.No recommendation can be made for preferentially placing the feeding tubes, (e.g.,
jejunal tubes) distal to 
the pylorus (Unresolved issue) (149--155).
3.Prevention or modulation of oropharyngeal colonization
a.Oropharyngeal cleaning and decontamination with an antiseptic agent: develop and
implement 
a  comprehensive  oral-hygiene  program  (that  might  include  the  use  of  an  antiseptic
agent) for patients in 
acute-care  settings  or  residents  in  long-term--care  facilities  who  are  at  high  risk  for
health-care--associated pneumonia (II) (156,157).
b.Chlorhexidine oral rinse
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of an oral chlorhexidine rinse
for the prevention 
of health-care--associated pneumonia in all postoperative or critically ill patients and/or
other patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) (II) 
(158).
2)Use an oral chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) rinse during the perioperative period on
adult patients 
who undergo cardiac survery (II) (158).
c.Oral decontamination with topical antimicrobial agents.
1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of topical antimicrobial agents
for 
oral decontamination to prevent VAP (Unresolved issue) 
(159).
4.Prevention of gastric colonization
a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of sucralfate, 
H2-antagonists,  and/or  antacids  for  stress-bleeding  prophylaxis  in  patients  receiving
mechanically 
assisted ventilation (Unresolved issue) 
(160--167).
b.No recommendation can be made for the routine selective decontamination of the
digestive tract (SDD) of 
all critically ill, mechanically ventilated, or ICU patients (Unresolved issue) 
(168--200).
c.No recommendation can be made for routinely acidifying gastric feeding (Unresolved
issue) 
(201,202).
C. Prevention of Postoperative Pneumonia
1.Instruct  preoperative  patients,  especially  those  at  high  risk  for  contracting
pneumonia, about taking deep 
breaths  and  ambulating  as  soon  as  medically  indicated  in  the  postoperative  period.
Patients  at  high  risk  include  those  who  will  have  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  repair,
thoracic surgery, or emergency surgery; those who will receive 
general  anesthesia;  those  who  are  aged  >60  years;  those  with  totally  dependent
functional  status;  those  who  have  had  a  weight  loss  >10%;  those  using  steroids  for
chronic conditions; those with recent history of alcohol use, history 
of  COPD,  or  smoking  during  the  preceding  year;  those  with  impaired  sensorium,  a
history of 
cerebrovascular  accident  with  residual  neurologic  deficit,  or  low  (<8mg/dL)  or  high
(>22 mg/dL) blood urea 
nitrogen level; and those who will have received >4 units of blood before surgery (IB) 
(203--206).
2.Encourage all postoperative patients to take deep breaths, move about the bed, and
ambulate unless 
medically contraindicated (IB) (205--207).
3.Use incentive spirometry on postoperative patients at high risk for pneumonia (IB) 
(205--207).
4.No recommendation can be made about the routine use of chest physiotherapy on
all postoperative patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(205--207).
D. Other Prophylactic Procedures for Pneumonia
1.Administration of antimicrobial agents other than in SDD
a.Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
            No recommendation can be made about the routine administration of systemic
antimicrobial agent(s) to 
prevent pneumonia in critically ill patients or in those receiving mechanically-assisted
ventilation (Unresolved issue) (200, 208).
b.Scheduled changes in the class of antimicrobial agents used for empiric therapy
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  scheduled  changes  in  the  class  of
antimicrobial agents used routinely 
for  empiric  treatment  of  suspected  infections  in  a  particular  group  of  patients
(Unresolved issue) 
(209,210).
2.Turning or rotational therapy
          No recommendation can be made for the routine use of turning or rotational
therapy, 
either by "kinetic" therapy or by continuous 
lateral rotational therapy (i.e., placing patients on beds that turn on their longitudinal 
axes intermittently or continuously) for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia in critically ill and immobilized patients (Unresolved
issue) (44,211--216).
  
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
 I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
A.Staff Education
1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
b.In
 facilities
 with
 hemopoietic
 stem-cell-
 and/or
 solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
1.Nebulizers and other devices
a.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing nebulization devices and other semicritical
respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
d.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue). 2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
2.Cooling towers
a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
3.Water-distribution system
a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
d.Provide HSCT patients with sterile water for tooth brushing or drinking or for flushing
nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
 II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT or
Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
 When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
a)If the heated water system is implicated:
i.
 Decontaminate
 the
 heated
 water
 system
 either
 by
 superheating
 or
 by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pertussis
 I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287). II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of the
last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
 III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
C. Patient Placement and Management
1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
2.Patients with suspected pertussis
a.Place  a  patient  with  suspected  pertussis  in  a  private  room.  After  pertussis  and  no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
3.Restrict  symptomatic  pertussis-infected  health-care  workers  from  work  during  the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
H. Other measures
1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pulmonary Aspergillosis
 I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
B. Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
2.Maintain surveillance for cases of health-care--associated pulmonary aspergillosis by
establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
3.Surveillance cultures
a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
4.In  facilities  with  PEs,  perform  surveillance  of  the  ventilation  status  of  these  areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
a.When  constructing  new  specialized-care  units  with  PE  for  HSCT  recipients,  ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
2)directed room airflow,
3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
4)well-sealed room, and 
5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
1.Placement of patients in PE
a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
7.Minimize  the  length  of  time  that  immunocompromised  patients  in  PEs  are  outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
8.Systematically  review  and  coordinate  infection-control  strategies  with  personnel  in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
10.  During  construction,  demolition,  or  renovation  activities,  construct  impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
11. Direct pedestrian traffic that come from construction areas away from patient-care
areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
a.Obtain  and  use  the  following  information  to  help  in  the  investigation:  background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local
 or
 state
 health
 department
 (IB).
 4.Use
 an
 antifungal
 biocide
 (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
 III. Chemoprophylaxis
A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
      
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus, Parainfluenza Virus, and Adenovirus Infections
 I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education and Monitoring
1.Staff education
a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
2.In acute-care facilities, establish mechanisms by which the infection-control staff can
monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
B. Surveillance
1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
a.Hand hygiene
1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
b.Gloving
1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
c.Gowning
1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
d.Masking and wearing eye protection
1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
1)Limit  to  essential  purposes  only  the  movement  or  transport  of  patients  from  their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
a.Staffing
1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB). b.Personnel cohorting
1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
1)No recommendation can be made for the use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal
antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Influenza
 I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
 II. Surveillance
A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
1.Determine the threshold incidence or prevalence of influenza or influenza-like illness
in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
 III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Vaccination
1.In acute-care settings (including acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, and walk-in
clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
a.Obtain  consent  for  influenza  vaccination  (if  such  is  required  by  local  or  state  law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
b.Routinely  vaccinate  all  residents,  except  those  with  medical  contraindication(s)  to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
3.Personnel
a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
b.Educate  health-care  personnel  about  the  benefits  of  vaccination  and  the  potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
c.Take measures to provide all health-care personnel convenient access to inactivated
influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
 IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
A.Droplet Precautions
1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
3.Wear  a  surgical  mask  upon  entering  the  patient's  room  or  when  working  within  3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
D. Standard Precautions
1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37).
E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
 V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
C. Antiviral Agent Administration
1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
e.No recommendation can be made about the prophylactic administration of zanamivir
to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel if
laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
          1.  Curtail or eliminate elective medical and surgical admissions (II) 
(416).
          2.  Restrict cardiovascular and pulmonary surgery to emergency cases only (II) 
(416).
          3.  Restrict persons with influenza or influenza-like illness from visiting patients in
the health-care facility (II) 
(416).
          4.  Restrict personnel with influenza or influenza-like illness from patient care (IB)
(416).
        
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 I. Staff Education and Involvement in Infection Prevention
  Educate  health-care  workers  about  the  epidemiology  of,  and  infection-control
procedures for, preventing 
health-care--associated bacterial pneumonia to ensure worker competency according to
the worker's level of responsibility in the health-care setting, and involve the workers in
the implementation of interventions to prevent 
health-care--associated pneumonia by using 
performance-improvement tools and techniques (IA) (4--11).
 II. Infection and Microbiologic Surveillance
 A.  Conduct  surveillance  for  bacterial  pneumonia  in  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  patients
who are at high risk for health-care--related bacterial pneumonia (e.g., patients 
with mechanically assisted ventilation or selected 
postoperative  patients)  to  determine  trends  and  help  identify  outbreaks  and  other
potential  infection-control  problems  (12,13).  The  use  of  the  new  National  Nosocomial
Infection  Surveillance  (NNIS)  system's  surveillance  definition  of  pneumonia  is
recommended (14). Include data on the causative 
microorganisms and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns 
(15). Express data as rates (e.g., number of infected patients or infections per 100 ICU
days  or  per  1,000  ventilator  days)  to  facilitate  intrahospital  comparisons  and  trend
determination (12,16,17). Link monitored rates and prevention efforts 
and return data to appropriate health-care personnel (IB) 
(18).
        B.In the absence of specific clinical, epidemiologic, or infection-control objectives,
do not routinely perform 
surveillance  cultures  of  patients  or  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for  respiratory
therapy, 
pulmonary-function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia (II) 
(19--22).
  III. Prevention of Transmission of Microorganisms
 A.Sterilization or Disinfection and Maintenance of Equipment and Devices
 1.General measures
 a.Thoroughly clean all equipment and devices to be sterilized or disinfected (IA) 
(23,24).
 b.Whenever  possible,  use  steam  sterilization  (by  autoclaving)  or  high-level
disinfection by wet heat 
pasteurization  at  >158  F  (>70°C)  for  30  minutes  for  reprocessing  semicritical
equipment or devices (i.e., items that come into direct or indirect contact with mucous
membranes of the lower respiratory tract) that are not sensitive to 
heat and moisture (Box. Use low-temperature sterilization methods (as 
approved by the Office of Device Evaluation, Center for Devices and Radiologic Health,
Food  and  Drug  Administration  [FDA])  for  equipment  or  devices  that  are  heat-  or
moisture-sensitive 
(24--28). After disinfection, proceed with appropriate 
rinsing, drying, and packaging, taking care not to contaminate the disinfected items in
the process (IA) (23,24).
 c.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing 
reusable semicritical respiratory equipment and devices when 
rinsing  is  needed  after  they  have  been  chemically  disinfected.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
rinse the device with filtered water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water, and then rinse with isopropyl alcohol and dry 
with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) 
(24).
 d.Adhere to provisions in FDA's enforcement document for single-use devices that are
reprocessed by third parties (IC) (24,29).
 2.Mechanical ventilators
  Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the internal machinery of mechanical ventilators
(II).
 3.Breathing circuits, humidifiers, and heat-and-moisture exchangers (HMEs)
 a.Breathing circuits with humidifiers
 1)Do not change routinely, on the basis of duration of use, the breathing circuit (i.e.,
ventilator tubing 
and  exhalation  valve  and  the  attached  humidifier)  that  is  in  use  on  an  individual
patient. Change the 
circuit when it is visibly soiled or mechanically malfunctioning (IA) 
(30--35).
 2)Breathing-circuit--tubing condensate
 a)Periodically  drain  and  discard  any  condensate  that  collects  in  the  tubing  of  a
mechanical 
ventilator, taking precautions not to allow condensate to drain toward the patient (IB) 
(36).
 b)Wear gloves to perform the previous procedure and/or when handling the fluid (IB) 
(37,38).
 c) Decontaminate hands with soap and water (if hands are visibly soiled) or with an
alcohol-based 
hand rub after performing the procedure or handling the fluid (IA) 
(38,39).
 3)No recommendation can be made for placing a filter or trap at the distal end of the
expiratory-phase 
tubing of the breathing circuit to collect condensate (Unresolved issue).
 4)Humidifier fluids
 a)Use sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) water to fill bubbling humidifiers (II) 
(36,40--43).
 b)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  preferential  use  of  a  closed,
continuous-feed 
humidification system (Unresolved issue).
 b.Ventilator breathing circuits with HMEs
 1)No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of either HMEs or heated
humidifiers to 
prevent pneumonia in patients receiving mechanically assisted ventilation (Unresolved
issue) (IB) 
(44--49).
 2)Changing HME
 a)Change  an  HME  that  is  in  use  on  a  patient  when  it  malfunctions  mechanically  or
becomes 
visibly soiled (II).
 b)Do not routinely change more frequently than every 48 hours an HME that is in use
on a patient 
(II) (50--52).
 3)Do not change routinely (in the absence of gross contamination or malfunction) the
breathing 
circuit attached to an HME while it is in use on a patient (II) 
(53).
 4.Oxygen humidifiers
 a.Follow manufacturers' instructions for use of oxygen humidifiers (II,C) 
(29;54--56).
 b.Change the humidifier-tubing (including any nasal prongs or mask) that is in use on
one patient when 
it malfunctions or becomes visibly contaminated (II).
 5.Small-volume medication nebulizers: in-line and hand-held nebulizers
 a.Between treatments on the same patient clean, disinfect, rinse with sterile water (if
rinsing is needed), and 
dry small-volume in-line or hand-held medication nebulizers (IB) 
(57--59).
 b.Use  only  sterile  fluid  for  nebulization,  and  dispense  the  fluid  into  the  nebulizer
aseptically (IA) 
(40--42,58,60--62).
 c.Whenever  possible,  use  aerosolized  medications  in  single-dose  vials.  If  multidose
medication vials are 
used,  follow  manufacturers'  instructions  for  handling,  storing,  and  dispensing  the
medications (IB) 
(60,62--67).
 6.Mist tents
 a.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  replace  mist  tents  and  their  nebulizers,
reservoirs, and tubings with those 
that have been subjected to sterilization or high-level disinfection (II) 
(68).
 b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing
mist-tent nebulizers, 
reservoirs, and tubings while in use on one patient (Unresolved issue).
 c.Subject  mist-tent  nebulizers,  reservoirs,  and  tubings  that  are  used  on  the  same
patient to daily 
low-level disinfection (e.g., with 2% acetic acid) or pasteurization followed by 
air-drying (II) (69).
 7.Other devices used in association with respiratory therapy
 a.Respirometer and ventilator thermometer: 
between their uses on different patients, sterilize or subject to 
high-level disinfection portable respirometers and ventilator thermometers (IB) 
(70--74).
 b.Resuscitation bags
 1)Between  their  uses  on  different  patients,  sterilize  or  subject  to  high-level
disinfection reusable 
hand-powered resuscitation bags (IB) 
(75--79).
 2)No recommendation can be made about the frequency of changing hydrophobic 
filters placed on the connection port of resuscitation 
bags (Unresolved issue).
 8.Anesthesia machines and breathing systems or patient circuits
 a.Do  not  routinely  sterilize  or  disinfect  the  internal  machinery  of  anesthesia
equipment (IB) 
(80).
 b.Between  uses  on  different  patients,  clean  reusable  components  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
(e.g., tracheal tube or face mask) inspiratory and expiratory breathing tubing, y-piece,
reservoir bag, humidifier, and 
tubing, and then sterilize or subject them to high-level liquid chemical disinfection or
pasteurization 
in accordance with the device manufacturers' instructions for their reprocessing (IB) 
(24,26).
 c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  cleaning  and
disinfecting 
unidirectional valves and carbon dioxide absorber chambers (Unresolved issue) 
(81).
 d.Follow
 published
 guidelines
 or
 manufacturers'
 instructions
 about
 in-use
maintenance, cleaning, 
and  disinfection  or  sterilization  of  other  components  or  attachments  of  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (IB) (82,83).
 e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  placing  a  bacterial  filter  in  the  breathing
system or patient circuit 
of anesthesia equipment (Unresolved issue) 
(4,84--89).
 9.Pulmonary-function testing equipment
 a.Do not routinely sterilize or disinfect the 
internal machinery of pulmonary-function testing machines 
between uses on different patients (II) 
(90,91).
 b.Change  the  mouthpiece  of  a  peak  flow  meter  or  the  mouthpiece  and  filter  of  a
spirometer between uses 
on different patients (II) (24,92).
 10. Room-air "humidifiers" and faucet aerators
 a.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk,  and  thus  actually  are  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to 
high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(40,93,94).
 b.Faucet aerators
 1)No recommendation can be made about the removal of faucet aerators from areas
for 
immunocompetent patients (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part II, Section
I-C-1-d)  (Unresolved  issue).   2)If  Legionella  spp.  are  detected  in  the  water  of  a
transplant unit and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in the unit (see also section on Legionnaires Disease, Part 
II, Section I-C-1-d) (II) (95).
 B. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission of Bacteria
 1.Standard Precautions
 a.Hand  hygiene:  Decontaminate  hands  by  washing  them  with  either  antimicrobial
soap and water or 
with nonantimicrobial soap and water (if hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with
proteinaceous material or are soiled with blood or body fluids) or by using an 
alcohol-based waterless antiseptic agent (e.g., hand rub) 
if  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  after  contact  with  mucous  membranes,  respiratory
secretions, or 
objects  contaminated  with  respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.
Decontaminate hands as 
described previously before and after contact with a 
patient who has an endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place, 
and before and after contact with any respiratory device that is used on the patient,
whether or not gloves are 
worn (IA) (37,39).
 b.Gloving
 1)Wear  gloves  for  handling  respiratory  secretions  or  objects  contaminated  with
respiratory secretions of 
any patient (IB) (37).
 2)Change gloves and decontaminate hands as described previously between contacts
with different patients; 
after handling respiratory secretions or objects contaminated with 
secretions  from  one  patient  and  before  contact  with  another  patient,  object,  or
environmental surface; and between contacts with a contaminated body site and the
respiratory tract of, or respiratory device on, the same patient (IA) 
(37,39,96--98).
 c.When soiling with respiratory secretions from a patient is anticipated, wear a gown
and change it after 
soiling occurs and before providing care to another patient (IB) 
(37,97).
 2.Care of patients with tracheostomy
 a.Perform tracheostomy under aseptic conditions (II).
 b.When  changing  a  tracheostomy  tube,  wear  a  gown,  use  aseptic  technique,  and
replace the tube with one 
that has undergone sterilization or high-level disinfection (IB) 
(23,24,37).
 c.No recommendation can be made for the daily application of topical antimicrobial
agent(s) at 
the tracheostoma (Unresolved issue) (99).
 3.Suctioning of respiratory tract secretions
    (See also Section IV-B-1-d)
 a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential 
use of either the multiuse closed-system suction catheter 
or  the  single-use  open-system  suction  catheter  for  prevention  of  pneumonia
(Unresolved issue) (44,100-102).
 b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  wearing  sterile  rather  than  clean  gloves
when 
performing endotracheal suctioning (Unresolved issue).
 c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  frequency  of  routinely  changing  the
in-line suction catheter of 
a closed-suction system in use on one patient (Unresolved issue) 
(103).
 d.If the open-system suction is employed, use a sterile, single-use catheter (II).
 e.Use only sterile fluid to remove secretions from the suction catheter if the catheter
is to be used for 
re-entry into the patient's lower respiratory tract (II).
  IV. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
 A.Increasing Host Defense Against Infection: 
Administration of immune modulators
 1.Pneumococcal vaccination. Vaccinate patients at high risk for severe pneumococcal
infections
 a.Administer the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine to persons aged 
>65  years;  persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  chronic  cardiovascular  disease  (e.g.,
congestive heart failure or cardiomyopathy), chronic pulmonary disease (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] or ermphysema, but not 
asthma),  diabetes  mellitus,  alcoholism,  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,  cirrhosis),  or
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks; 
persons  aged  5--64  years  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persons  aged
5--64
 years
 who
 are
 living
 in
 special
 environments
 or
 social
 settings;
immunocompromised persons aged 
>5 years with HIV infection, 
leukemia,  lymphoma,  Hodgkin's  disease,  multiple  myeloma,  generalized  malignancy,
chronic  renal  failure,  nephrotic  syndrome,  or  other  conditions  associated  with
immunosuppression (e.g., receipt of HSCT, 
solid-organ  transplant,  or  immunosuppressive  chemotherapy,  including  long-term
systemic corticosteroids); and persons in long-term--care facilities (IA) 
(104--109).
 b.Administer the 7-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide protein-conjugate vaccine to
all children aged <2 
years and to children aged 24--59 months who are at increased risk for pneumococcal
disease (e.g., children 
with sickle-cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies, or children who are functionally or
anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; children who have chronic disease,
including chronic cardiac or pulmonary disease [except asthma], diabetes mellitus, or
CSF  leak;  and  children  with  immunocompromising  conditions  including  malignancies,
chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, receipt of 
immunosuppressive chemotherapy, including long-term corticosteroids, and receipt of
solid-organ  transplant).  Consider  administering  the  vaccine  to  children  aged  24--59
months,  with  priority  to  children  aged  24--35  months,  children  who  are  American
Indians/Alaska Natives or black, and children who attend group child care centers (IB)
(104).
 c.In  nursing  homes  and  other  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  a  standing  order
program (SOP) for 
the administration of 23-valent vaccine to persons at high risk for acquiring 
severe pneumococcal infections, including pneumococcal pneumonia (IA) 
(105,110,111).
 2.No recommendation can be made for the routine administration of preparations of 
granulocyte-colony  stimulating  factor  (GCSF)  or  intravenous  gamma  globulin  for
prophylaxis against 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(112--117).
 3.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  routine  enteral  administration  of
glutamine for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(118,119).
 B. Precautions for prevention of aspiration 
    As soon as the clinical indications for their use are resolved, remove devices such as
endotracheal, tracheostomy, and/or enteral (i.e.,
    oro- or nasogastric or 
jejunal) tubes from patients (IB) (120--125).
 1.Prevention of aspiration associated with endotracheal intubation
 a.Use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) to reduce 
the need for and duration of endotracheal intubation
 1)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation 
delivered continuously by face or nose mask, instead of performing 
endotracheal intubation in patients who are in respiratory failure and are not needing
immediate intubation (e.g., those who are in hypercapneic respiratory failure secondary
to acute exacerbation of COPD or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) (II) 
(126--9).
 2)When feasible and not medically contraindicated, use NIV as part of the weaning
process 
(from  mechanically  assisted  ventilation)  to  shorten  the  period  of  endotracheal
intubation (II) (130).
 b.As  much  as  possible,  avoid  repeat  endotracheal  intubation  in  patients  who  have
received 
mechanically assisted ventilation (II) (131).
 c.Unless contraindicated by the patient's condition, 
perform orotracheal rather than nasotracheal intubation 
on patients (IB) (44,132,133).
 d.If feasible, use an endotracheal tube with a dorsal lumen above the endotracheal
cuff to 
allow  drainage  (by  continuous  or  frequent  intermittent  suctioning)  of  tracheal
secretions that accumulate in the patient's subglottic area (II) (44,134--137).
 e.Before deflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube in preparation for tube removal, or
before moving the tube, ensure that secretions are cleared from above the tube cuff
(II).
 2.Prevention of aspiration associated with enteral feeding
 a.In the absence of medical contraindication(s), elevate at an angle of 30--45 degrees
of the head of the bed of 
a patient at high risk for aspiration (e.g., a person receiving mechanically 
assisted ventilation and/or who has an enteral tube in place) (II) 
(138--140).
 b.Routinely verify appropriate placement of the feeding tube (IB) 
(141--143).
 c.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of small-bore tubes for
enteral feeding 
(Unresolved issue) (144).
 d.No recommendation can be made for preferentially administering enteral feedings
continuously 
or intermittently (Unresolved issue) 
(145--148).
 e.No recommendation can be made for preferentially placing the feeding tubes, (e.g.,
jejunal tubes) distal to 
the pylorus (Unresolved issue) (149--155).
 3.Prevention or modulation of oropharyngeal colonization
 a.Oropharyngeal cleaning and decontamination with an antiseptic agent: develop and
implement 
a  comprehensive  oral-hygiene  program  (that  might  include  the  use  of  an  antiseptic
agent) for patients in 
acute-care  settings  or  residents  in  long-term--care  facilities  who  are  at  high  risk  for
health-care--associated pneumonia (II) (156,157).
 b.Chlorhexidine oral rinse
 1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of an oral chlorhexidine rinse
for the prevention 
of health-care--associated pneumonia in all postoperative or critically ill patients and/or
other patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) (II) 
(158).
 2)Use an oral chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) rinse during the perioperative period
on adult patients 
who undergo cardiac survery (II) (158).
 c.Oral decontamination with topical antimicrobial agents.
 1)No recommendation can be made for the routine use of topical antimicrobial agents
for 
oral decontamination to prevent VAP (Unresolved issue) 
(159).
 4.Prevention of gastric colonization
 a.No recommendation can be made for the preferential use of sucralfate, 
H2-antagonists,  and/or  antacids  for  stress-bleeding  prophylaxis  in  patients  receiving
mechanically 
assisted ventilation (Unresolved issue) 
(160--167).
 b.No recommendation can be made for the routine selective decontamination of the
digestive tract (SDD) of 
all critically ill, mechanically ventilated, or ICU patients (Unresolved issue) 
(168--200).
 c.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  acidifying  gastric  feeding
(Unresolved issue) 
(201,202).
 C. Prevention of Postoperative Pneumonia
 1.Instruct  preoperative  patients,  especially  those  at  high  risk  for  contracting
pneumonia, about taking deep 
breaths  and  ambulating  as  soon  as  medically  indicated  in  the  postoperative  period.
Patients  at  high  risk  include  those  who  will  have  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm  repair,
thoracic surgery, or emergency surgery; those who will receive 
general  anesthesia;  those  who  are  aged  >60  years;  those  with  totally  dependent
functional  status;  those  who  have  had  a  weight  loss  >10%;  those  using  steroids  for
chronic conditions; those with recent history of alcohol use, history 
of  COPD,  or  smoking  during  the  preceding  year;  those  with  impaired  sensorium,  a
history of 
cerebrovascular  accident  with  residual  neurologic  deficit,  or  low  (<8mg/dL)  or  high
(>22 mg/dL) blood urea 
nitrogen level; and those who will have received >4 units of blood before surgery (IB) 
(203--206).
 2.Encourage  all  postoperative  patients  to  take  deep  breaths,  move  about  the  bed,
and ambulate unless 
medically contraindicated (IB) (205--207).
 3.Use incentive spirometry on postoperative patients at high risk for pneumonia (IB) 
(205--207).
 4.No recommendation can be made about the routine use of chest physiotherapy on
all postoperative patients 
at high risk for pneumonia (Unresolved issue) 
(205--207).
 D. Other Prophylactic Procedures for Pneumonia
 1.Administration of antimicrobial agents other than in SDD
 a.Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
            No recommendation can be made about the routine administration of systemic
antimicrobial agent(s) to 
prevent pneumonia in critically ill patients or in those receiving mechanically-assisted
ventilation (Unresolved issue) (200, 208).
 b.Scheduled changes in the class of antimicrobial agents used for empiric therapy
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  scheduled  changes  in  the  class  of
antimicrobial agents used routinely 
for  empiric  treatment  of  suspected  infections  in  a  particular  group  of  patients
(Unresolved issue) 
(209,210).
 2.Turning or rotational therapy
          No recommendation can be made for the routine use of turning or rotational
therapy, 
either by "kinetic" therapy or by continuous 
lateral rotational therapy (i.e., placing patients on beds that turn on their longitudinal 
axes intermittently or continuously) for prevention of 
health-care--associated pneumonia in critically ill and immobilized patients (Unresolved
issue) (44,211--216).
   
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
 I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
A.Staff Education
1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
b.In
 facilities
 with
 hemopoietic
 stem-cell-
 and/or
 solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
1.Nebulizers and other devices
a.Preferentially use sterile water for rinsing nebulization devices and other semicritical
respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
d.Faucet aerators
1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue). 2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
2.Cooling towers
a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
3.Water-distribution system
a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
d.Provide HSCT patients with sterile water for tooth brushing or drinking or for flushing
nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
 II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT or
Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
 When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
a)If the heated water system is implicated:
i.
 Decontaminate
 the
 heated
 water
 system
 either
 by
 superheating
 or
 by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pertussis
 I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287). II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of the
last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
 III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
C. Patient Placement and Management
1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
2.Patients with suspected pertussis
a.Place  a  patient  with  suspected  pertussis  in  a  private  room.  After  pertussis  and  no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
3.Restrict  symptomatic  pertussis-infected  health-care  workers  from  work  during  the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
H. Other measures
1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Pulmonary Aspergillosis
 I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
B. Surveillance
1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
2.Maintain surveillance for cases of health-care--associated pulmonary aspergillosis by
establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
3.Surveillance cultures
a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
4.In  facilities  with  PEs,  perform  surveillance  of  the  ventilation  status  of  these  areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
a.When  constructing  new  specialized-care  units  with  PE  for  HSCT  recipients,  ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
2)directed room airflow,
3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
4)well-sealed room, and 
5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
1.Placement of patients in PE
a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
7.Minimize  the  length  of  time  that  immunocompromised  patients  in  PEs  are  outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
8.Systematically  review  and  coordinate  infection-control  strategies  with  personnel  in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
10.  During  construction,  demolition,  or  renovation  activities,  construct  impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
11. Direct pedestrian traffic that come from construction areas away from patient-care
areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
a.Obtain  and  use  the  following  information  to  help  in  the  investigation:  background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local
 or
 state
 health
 department
 (IB).
 4.Use
 an
 antifungal
 biocide
 (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
 III. Chemoprophylaxis
A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
      
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus, Parainfluenza Virus, and Adenovirus Infections
 I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
A.Staff Education and Monitoring
1.Staff education
a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
2.In acute-care facilities, establish mechanisms by which the infection-control staff can
monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
B. Surveillance
1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
 II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
a.Hand hygiene
1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
b.Gloving
1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
c.Gowning
1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
d.Masking and wearing eye protection
1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
1)Limit  to  essential  purposes  only  the  movement  or  transport  of  patients  from  their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
a.Staffing
1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB). b.Personnel cohorting
1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
1)No recommendation can be made for the use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal
antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
            
Prevention and Control of Health-Care--Associated Influenza
 I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
 II. Surveillance
A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
1.Determine the threshold incidence or prevalence of influenza or influenza-like illness
in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
 III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
A.Vaccination
1.In acute-care settings (including acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, and walk-in
clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
a.Obtain  consent  for  influenza  vaccination  (if  such  is  required  by  local  or  state  law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
b.Routinely  vaccinate  all  residents,  except  those  with  medical  contraindication(s)  to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
3.Personnel
a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
b.Educate  health-care  personnel  about  the  benefits  of  vaccination  and  the  potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
c.Take measures to provide all health-care personnel convenient access to inactivated
influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
 IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
A.Droplet Precautions
1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
3.Wear  a  surgical  mask  upon  entering  the  patient's  room  or  when  working  within  3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
D. Standard Precautions
1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37).
E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
 V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
C. Antiviral Agent Administration
1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
e.No recommendation can be made about the prophylactic administration of zanamivir
to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel if
laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
          1.  Curtail or eliminate elective medical and surgical admissions (II) 
(416).
          2.  Restrict cardiovascular and pulmonary surgery to emergency cases only (II) 
(416).
          3.  Restrict persons with influenza or influenza-like illness from visiting patients in
the health-care facility (II) 
(416).
          4.  Restrict personnel with influenza or influenza-like illness from patient care (IB)
(416).
        
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
  I. Primary Prevention (Preventing health-care--associated Legionnaires disease when
no cases have been documented)
 A.Staff Education
 1.Educate physicians to heighten their suspicion for cases of health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and to 
use appropriate methods for its diagnosis (II).
 2.Educate patient-care, infection-control, and 
engineering personnel about measures to prevent and control 
health-care--associated legionellosis (II).
 B. Infection and Environmental Surveillance
 1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  the  diagnosis  of  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease and 
perform  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of  appropriate  respiratory  specimen
and the urine antigen test) for legionellosis on suspected cases, especially in patients
who
 are
 at
 high
 risk
 for
 acquiring
 the
 disease
 (e.g.,
 patients
 who
 are
immunosuppressed,  including  HSCT  or  solid-organ--transplant  recipients;  patients
receiving systemic steroids; patients aged >65 years; or patients 
who have chronic underlying disease such as diabetes 
mellitus, congestive heart failure, and COPD) (IA) 
(217--226).
 2.Periodically review the availability and clinicians' use of laboratory diagnostic tests
for Legionnaires disease in 
the facility, and if clinicians do not routinely use the tests on patients with diagnosed or
suspected 
pneumonia,  implement  measures  to  enhance  clinicians'  use  of  the  tests  (e.g.,  by
conducting educational programs) 
(II) (227,228).
 3.Routine culturing of water systems for 
Legionella spp.
 a.No recommendation can be made about routinely culturing water systems for 
Legionella  spp.  in  health-care  facilities  that  do  not  have  patient-care  areas  (i.e.,
transplant units) for persons at high risk for Legionella infection (Unresolved issue) 
(95,229--238).
 b.In  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell-  and/or  solid-organ--transplantation
programs, 
periodic  culturing  for  legionellae  in  water  samples  from  the  transplant  unit(s)  can  be
performed as part of a comprehensive 
strategy to prevent Legionnaires disease in transplant recipients (II) 
(95,239--241).
 c.If such culturing (as in b) is undertaken:
 1)No recommendation can be made about the optimal methods (i.e., 
frequency or number of sites) for environmental surveillance cultures in transplant units
(Unresolved 
issue).
 2)Perform corrective measures aimed at maintaining undetectable levels of 
Legionella spp. in the unit's water system (II).
 3)Maintain a high index of suspicion for legionellosis in transplant patients with 
health-care--associated pneumonia even when environmental surveillance cultures do
not yield legionellae (IB) (224,227).
 C. Use and Care of Medical Devices, Equipment, and Environment
 1.Nebulizers and other devices
 a.Preferentially  use  sterile  water  for  rinsing  nebulization  devices  and  other
semicritical respiratory-care 
equipment after they have been cleaned or disinfected 
(58,242). If this is not feasible, rinse the device with filtered 
water (i.e., water that has been through a 
0.2µ filter) or tap water and then rinse with isopropyl 
alcohol and dry with forced air or in a drying cabinet (IB) (24).
 b.Use only sterile (not distilled, nonsterile) 
water to fill reservoirs of devices used for nebulization (IA) (40,58,229,242,243).
 c.Do not use large-volume room-air humidifiers that create aerosols (e.g., by venturi
principle, ultrasound, 
or  spinning  disk  and  thus  are  really  nebulizers)  unless  they  can  be  sterilized  or
subjected to high-level disinfection at least daily and filled only with sterile water (II) 
(242,243)
 d.Faucet aerators
 1)No recommendation can be made for the removal of faucet aerators from areas for 
immunocompetent  patients  (see  also  Bacterial  Pneumonia,  Part  II,  section  III-A-10-b)
(Unresolved issue).  2)If Legionella spp. are detected in the water of a transplant unit
and until 
Legionella spp. are no longer detected by culture, 
remove faucet aerators in areas for severely immunocompromised patients (II) 
(95).
 2.Cooling towers
 a.When  a  new  building  is  constructed,  place  cooling  towers  in  such  a  way  that  the
tower drift is directed 
away from the facility's air-intake system, and design the cooling towers such that the
volume of aerosol drift is minimized (IB) (95,244--5).
 b.For  cooling  towers,  install  drift  eliminators,  regularly  use  an  effective  biocide,
maintain the tower according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, and keep adequate maintenance records (IB) 
(95,244--5).
 3.Water-distribution system
 a.Where practical and allowed by state law, maintain potable water at the outlet at 
>51°C (>124°F) or 
<20°C (<68°F), especially in facilities 
housing organ-transplant recipients or other patients at high-risk 
(244--248). If water is maintained at 
>51°C (>124°F), use thermostatic mixing valves to prevent scalding 
(II) (249).
 b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  treatment  of  water  with  chlorine
dioxide, heavy-metal ions, 
ozone,  or  ultraviolet  light  (250--266).  Hospitals  served  by  municipalities  with
monochloramine-treated  water  have  had  success  in  controlling  legionella  (Unresolved
issue) 
(267--8).
 4.Health-care  facilities  with  hemopoietic  stem-cell  or  solid-organ  transplantation
programs
          If legionellae are detected in the potable water supply of a transplant unit, and
until legionellae are no longer detected by culture:
 a.Decontaminate the water supply as per section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
 b.Restrict severely immunocompromised patients from taking showers (IB) 
(239,269).
 c.Use water that is not contaminated with 
Legionella spp. for HSCT patients' sponge baths (IB) 
(270,271).
 d.Provide  HSCT  patients  with  sterile  water  for  tooth  brushing  or  drinking  or  for
flushing nasogastric tubes 
(IB) (239,271).
 e.Do not use water from faucets with 
Legionella-contaminated water in patients' rooms to avoid creating infectious aerosols
(II) (269).
  II.  Secondary  Prevention  (Response  to  identification  of  laboratory-confirmed
health-care--associated Legionellosis)
 A.In Facilities with HSCT or Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients:
        When one inpatient of an HSCT or solid-organ transplant unit develops a case of
laboratory-confirmed definite 
(i.e., after >10 days of continuous inpatient stay) or possible (i.e., within 2--9 days of
inpatient  stay)  health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease,  or  when  two  or  more
patients  develop  laboratory-confirmed  Legionnaires  disease  within  6  months  of  each
other and after having visited an outpatient transplant unit during part of the 2--10 day
period before 
illness onset:
 1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
 2.In consultation with the facility's 
infection-control team, conduct a combined epidemiologic and 
environmental  investigation  (as  outlined  from  II-B-2-b-1)  through  II-B-2-b-5))  to
determine the source(s) of 
Legionella  spp.  (95,239).  Include  but  do  not  limit  the  investigation  to  such  potential
sources as showers, water faucets, cooling towers, hot-water tanks, and carpet-cleaner
water tanks 
(226,228,272). On its identification, decontaminate or remove the source of Legionella
spp (II).
 3.If the health-care facility's potable water system is found to be the source of 
Legionella spp., observe the measures outlined in Section I-C-4-b to e, about the nonuse
of  the  facility's  potable  water  by  recipients  of  HSCT  or  solid-organ  transplants  and
decontaminate the water supply as per Section 
II-B-2-b-3)-a)-i to v (IB).
 4.Do not conduct an extensive facility investigation when an isolated case of possible 
health-care--associated  Legionnaires  disease  occurs  in  a  patient  who  has  had  little
contact with the inpatient transplant unit during 
most of the incubation period of the disease (II).
 B. In Facilities That Do Not House Severely Immunocompromised Patients (e.g., HSCT
or Solid-Organ 
Transplant Recipients):
  When  a  single  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  definite  health-care--associated
Legionnaires disease is identified, or 
when  two  or  more  cases  of  laboratory-confirmed,  possible  health-care--associated
Legionnaires' disease occur within 6 
months of each other:
 1.Contact the local or state health department or CDC if the disease is reportable in
the state or if assistance 
is needed (II, IC).
 2.Conduct  an  epidemiologic  investigation  through  a  retrospective  review  of
microbiologic, serologic, 
and  postmortem  data  to  identify  previous  cases,  and  begin  an  intensive  prospective
surveillance for additional cases of health-care--associated Legionnaires disease (II).
 a.If no evidence of continued nosocomial transmission exists, continue the intensive
prospective surveillance 
for cases for >2 months after surveillance is begun (II).
 b.If evidence of continued transmission exists:
 1)Conduct an environmental investigation to determine the source(s) of 
Legionella spp. by collecting water samples from 
potential sources of aerosolized water and saving and subtyping isolates of 
Legionella spp. obtained from patients and the environment (IB) 
(40,58,270,273--282).
 2)If a source is not identified, continue surveillance for new cases for 
>2  months  and,  depending  on  the  scope  of  the  outbreak,  decide  to  either  defer
decontamination  pending  identification  of  the  source(s)  of  Legionella  spp.  or  proceed
with decontamination of the hospital's water distribution system, with 
special attention to the specific hospital areas involved 
in the outbreak (II).
 3)If  a  source  of  infection  is  identified  by  the  epidemiologic  and  environmental
investigations, 
promptly decontaminate the source (IB).
 a)If the heated water system is implicated:
 i.  Decontaminate  the  heated  water  system  either  by  superheating  or  by
hyperchlorination. 
To  superheat,  raise  the  hot  water  temperature  to  71°C--77°C  (160°F--170°F)  and
maintain at that 
level while progressively flushing each outlet around the system. A minimum flush time
of 5 minutes 
has been recommended; however, the optimal flush time is not known and longer flush
times might 
be required. Post warning signs at each outlet being flushed to prevent scald injury to
patients, staff, or visitors. If possible, perform flushing when the building has the fewest
occupants (e.g., nights 
and  weekends).  For  systems  on  which  thermal  shock  treatment  is  not  possible,  use
shock chlorination 
as an alternative. Add chlorine, preferably overnight, to achieve a free chlorine residual
of 
>2 mg/L (>2 ppm) throughout the system. This might require chlorination of the water
heater or tank to levels of 20--50 mg/L (20--50 ppm). Maintain the water pH 
between 7.0 and 8.0 (IB) (230,244, 246,248,277,283--285).
 ii. Depending on local and state regulations about potable water temperature in public 
buildings (247), circulate potable water at temperatures not conducive to amplification
of 
Legionella;  store  and  distribute  cold  water  at  <20°C  (<68°F);  and  store  hot  water  at
>60°C (>140°F) and circulate it at a minimum return temperature of 51°C (124°F) (II) 
(95,245--248).
 iii. If the methods described in 3a-i and 3a-ii are not successful in 
decontaminating  the  hospital's  water,  seek  expert  consultation  for  review  of
decontamination procedures and assistance with 
further efforts (II).
 iv. No recommendation can be made for the treatment of water with chlorine dioxide, 
heavy-metal ions, ozone, or ultraviolet light 
(250--266).  Hospitals  have  reported  successful  decontamination  using  each  of  these
methods (Unresolved issue). 
 v. Clean hot-water storage tanks and water heaters to remove accumulated scale and
sediment (IB) (95).
 b)  If  cooling  towers  or  evaporative  condensers  are  implicated,  decontaminate  the
cooling-tower system (IB) (95,244).
 4)Assess the efficacy of implemented measures in reducing or eliminating 
Legionella spp. by collecting specimens for culture at 2-week intervals for 3 months (II).
 a)  If  Legionella  spp.  are  not  detected  in  cultures  during  3  months  of  monitoring  at
2-week 
intervals, collect cultures monthly for another 3 months (II).
 b) If Legionella spp. are detected in one or more cultures, reassess the implemented
control 
measures, modify them accordingly, and repeat decontamination procedures. Options
for 
repeat decontamination include the intensive use of the same technique used for the
initial 
decontamination or a combination of superheating and hyperchlorination (II) 
(284).
 5)Keep adequate records of all infection-control 
measures, including maintenance procedures, and of environmental test 
results for cooling towers and potable-water systems (II).
              I. Staff Education 
        Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in
the health-care setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
pertussis (IB) 
(286,287).  II. Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and 
Case-Contact Notification
 A.Report  to  the  local  and/or  state  health  department  all  confirmed  and  suspected
cases of pertussis 
(II, IC) (286).
 B.Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 42 days after the onset of
the last pertussis case (II) 
(288).
 C.Notify  persons  who  have  had  close  contact  with  a  case  of  pertussis  in  the
health-care setting so that they can 
be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered 
appropriate chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes 
face-to-face  contact  with  a  patient  who  is  symptomatic  (e.g.,  in  the  catarrhal  or
paroxysmal period of illness); sharing 
a confined space in close proximity for a prolonged period of time (e.g., 
>1 hour) with a symptomatic patient; or 
direct 
contact with respiratory, oral, or nasal secretions from a symptomatic patient (e.g., an
explosive cough or sneeze on 
the face, sharing food, sharing eating utensils during a meal, kissing, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation, or performing a 
full medical examination of the nose and throat) (II) 
(288).
  III. Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
 A.Vaccination for Primary Prevention
 1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  vaccinating  adults,  including
health-care workers, with 
the  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  at  regular  intervals  (e.g.,  every  10  years)  (Unresolved
issue) 
(288--292).
 2.In  long-term--care  facilities  for  children  and  for  children  with  prolonged  stay  in
acute-care facilities, follow 
the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for
vaccinating 
children according to their chronologic age (IB) 
(288,293).
 B. Vaccination for Secondary Prevention
 1.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  vaccinating  adults,  including  health-care
workers, during an 
institutional outbreak of pertussis (Unresolved issue) 
(288,294).
 2.During an institutional outbreak of pertussis, 
accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged 
<7 years who have not completed their primary vaccinations, as follows:
 a.Infants aged <2 months who are receiving their initial vaccination:
              
              Administer the first dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis
(DTaP) vaccine as early as age 6 weeks and the second and third doses at a minimum
of 
4-week intervals between doses. Give the fourth 
dose on or after age 1 year and at least 6 months after the third dose (II) 
(288,295,296).
 b.Other children aged <7 years:
              Administer DTaP vaccine to all patients who are aged <7 years and are not
up-to-date with their 
pertussis vaccinations, as follows: administer a fourth dose of DTaP if the child has had
3 doses of DTaP or diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine, is 
>12 months old, and >6 months have passed since the third dose 
of DTaP or DTP; administer a fifth dose of DTaP if the child has had four doses of DTaP
or DTP, is aged 
4--6 years, and received the fourth vaccine dose before the fourth birthday (IB) 
(287,288,293,295).
 3.Vaccination of children with a history of well-documented pertussis disease
            No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  administering  additional  dose(s)  of
pertussis vaccine to children who have a history of well-documented pertussis disease
(i.e., pertussis illness with either a 
B.  pertussis-positive  culture  or  epidemiologic  linkage  to  a  culture-positive  case)
(Unresolved 
issue) (288,293).
 C. Patient Placement and Management
 1.Patients with confirmed pertussis
            Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to
have any other respiratory infection, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
after  the  first  5  days  of  a  full  course  of  antimicrobial  treatment  or  21  days  after  the
onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
 2.Patients with suspected pertussis
 a.Place a patient with suspected pertussis in a private room. After pertussis and no
other 
infection is confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) who
have pertussis until after the first 5 days of a 
full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to
take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis (IB) (37,288).
 b.Perform  diagnostic  laboratory  tests  (for  confirmation  or  exclusion  of  pertussis)  on
patients who are 
admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis to allow for the earliest
possible downgrading 
of  infection-control  precautions  to  the  minimum  required  for  each  patient's  specific
infection(s) (IB) (286,297--300).
 D. Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
 1.In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests
for pertussis in 
health-care  personnel  with  illness  suggestive  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  unexplained  cough
illness of >1 week duration and paroxysmal cough) (IB) 
(286,287,297--300).
 2.In  conjunction  with  employee-health  personnel,  treat  symptomatic  health-care
personnel who are proven to 
have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts, in F-1 to F-2
(IB) 
(286,301).
 3.Restrict symptomatic pertussis-infected health-care workers from work during the
first 5 days of their receipt 
of antimicrobial therapy (IB) (287,288,301).
 E. Masking
In addition to observing standard precautions, wear a surgical mask when within 3 feet
of a patient with confirmed 
or suspected pertussis, when performing procedures or patient-care activities that are
likely to generate sprays 
of  respiratory  secretions,  or  on  entering  the  room  of  a  patient  with  confirmed  or
suspected pertussis (IB) 
(37).
 F. Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
 1.Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with
pertussis and who does 
not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides (IB) 
(287,302).
 a.Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin (i.e., erythromycin estolate, 500
mg four times daily 
or  erythromycin  delayed-release  tablets,  333  mg  three  times  daily  for  adults,  and
40--50 mg/kg day for 
children) for 14 days (IB) (287,303--306).
 b.For patients who are intolerant to erythromycin or for infants aged 
<2  weeks,  use  any  of  the  following  regimens:  azithromycin  for  5--7  days  (at  10--12
mg/kg/day) or for 5 days (at 10 mg/kg on day one followed by 4 days at 5 mg/kg/day)
for infants and young children 
(307); or clarithromycin for 10--14 days (at 500 
mg twice a day for adults or 15--20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for children) (II) 
(287,308,309).
 2.For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have 
hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use (except in the case 
of  a  pregnant  woman  at  term,  a  nursing  mother,  or  an  infant  aged  <2  months)
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for 14 days (at one double-strength tablet twice a day for adults and 8 mg/kg/day TMP,
40 mg/kg/day SXT a day in 
2 divided doses for children) (II) (303,310).
 G. Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
 1.Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic
and is 
receiving  chemoprophylaxis  after  an  exposure  to  a  case  of  pertussis  (i.e.,  by  direct
contact of one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated
person who is in the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis) (II) (287).
 2.If mandated by state law or where feasible, 
exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is 
unable  to  receive  chemoprophylaxis  from  providing  care  to  a  child  aged  <4  years
during the period starting 7 days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days
after his last possible exposure to a case of pertussis (II, IC) (287).
 H. Other measures
 1.Limiting patient movement or transport
          Limit the movement and transport of a patient 
with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his room to those 
for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that
precautions are maintained 
to  minimize  the  risk  for  disease  transmission  to  other  patients  and  contamination  of
environmental surfaces 
or equipment (IB) (37).
 2.Limiting visitors 
        Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit pediatric,
immunosuppressed, 
or cardiac patients (IB) (37,286,311).
  I. Staff Education and Infection Surveillance
 A.Staff Education 
          Educate health-care personnel according to their level of responsibility about
infection-control  procedures  to  decrease  the  occurrence  of  health-care--associated
pulmonary aspergillosis (II).
 B. Surveillance
 1.Maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  health-care--associated  pulmonary
aspergillosis in 
severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 (i.e.,
 patients
 with
 severe,
 prolonged
neutropenia [ANC 
<500/mm3 for 2 weeks or 
<100/mm3  for  1  week],  most  notably  HSCT  recipients,  and  including  recipients  of
solid-organ  transplants  or  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  who  are  receiving
chemotherapy, when they are severely neutropenic 
as defined previously) and persons receiving prolonged high-dose steroids (IA) 
(312--319).
 2.Maintain  surveillance  for  cases  of  health-care--associated  pulmonary  aspergillosis
by establishing a system 
by which the facility's infection-control personnel are promptly informed when 
Aspergillus  sp.  is  isolated  from  cultures  of  specimens  from  patient's  respiratory  tract
and  by  periodically  reviewing  the  hospital's  microbiologic,  histopathologic,  and
postmortem data (II).
 3.Surveillance cultures
 a.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  the  nasopharynx  of  asymptomatic
patients at high risk 
(IB) (320,321).
 b.Do  not  perform  routine,  periodic  cultures  of  equipment  or  devices  used  for
respiratory therapy, 
pulmonary function testing, or delivery of inhalation anesthesia in the HSCT unit, nor of
dust in rooms of HSCT recipients (IB) (321).
 c.No recommendation can be made about routine microbiologic air sampling before,
during, or after 
facility  construction  or  renovation  or  before  or  during  occupancy  of  areas  housing
immunocompromised patients (Unresolved issue) (95,322).
 4.In facilities with PEs, perform surveillance of the ventilation status of these areas
either by continuous 
monitoring  or  periodic  analysis  of  the  following  parameters:  room  air  exchanges,
pressure  relations,  and  filtration  efficacy  to  ensure  that  appropriate  levels  are
maintained (IB) 
(95,323).
  II. Prevention of Transmission of 
Aspergillus spp. Spores
 A.Planning New Specialized-Care Units for High-Risk Patients
 1.PE for allogeneic HSCT recipients
 a.When constructing new specialized-care units with PE for HSCT recipients, ensure
that 
patient rooms have adequate capacity to minimize accumulation of fungal spores via
 1)HEPA filtration of incoming air 
(324),
 2)directed room airflow,
 3)positive air pressure in patient's room in relation to the corridor,
 4)well-sealed room, and 
 5)high (>12) air changes per hour (IB, IC) 
(95;325-327).
 b.Do not use LAF routinely in PE (IB) 
(95; 328-331).
 2.Units for autologous HSCT and solid-organ transplant recipients
          
          No recommendation can be made for constructing PE for recipients of autologous
HSCTs or 
solid-organ-transplants (e.g., heart, liver, lung, kidney) (Unresolved issue) 
(95;331).
 B.  In  Existing  Facilities  with  HSCT  Units,  and  No  Cases  of  Health-Care--Associated
Aspergillosis
 1.Placement of patients in PE
 a.Place  an  allogeneic  HSCT  recipient  in  a  PE  that  meets  the  conditions  outlined  in
Section II-A-1 (IB).
 b.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  placing  a  recipient  of  autologous
HSCT or 
solid-organ transplant in a PE. (Unresolved issue)
 2.Maintain air-handling systems in PE and other high-risk patient-care areas according
to previously 
published CDC recommendations (IB,IC) 
(95,325,327)
 3.Develop a water-damage response plan for 
immediate execution when water leaks, spills, and 
moisture  accumulation  occur  to  prevent  fungal  growth  in  the  involved  areas  (IB)
(95,332).
 4.Use proper dusting methods for patient-care 
areas designated for severely immunocompromised patients (e.g., HSCT recipients) (IB)
(95,325,327, 328,333).
 a.Wet-dust horizontal surfaces daily using cloth that has been moistened with an 
EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (IB) (334). 
 b.Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust (e.g., feather dusting) (IB) 
(334).
 c.Keep vacuums in good repair and equip them with HEPA filters for use in areas with
patients at high risk 
(IB) (333,334).
 d.Use vacuum cleaners that are equipped with HEPA filters in patient-care areas for 
the severely immunocompromised (IB) 
(333,334).
 5.Do not use carpeting in hallways and rooms 
occupied by severely immunocompromised patients 
(IB) (95,239,335)
 6.Avoid  using  upholstered  furniture  or  furnishings  in  rooms  occupied  by  severely
immunocompromised 
patients (II).
 7.Minimize the length of time that immunocompromised patients in PEs are outside
their rooms for 
diagnostic procedures and other activities (II).
 a.Instruct severely immunocompromised patients 
to wear a high-efficiency respiratory-protection device (e.g., 
an  N95  respirator)  when  they  leave  the  PE  during  periods  when  construction,
renovation, or other 
dust-generating activities are ongoing in and around the health-care facility (II) 
(336).
 b.No recommendation can be made about the specific type of respiratory-protection
device (e.g., surgical 
mask, N95 respirator) for use by a severely immunocompromised patient who leaves
the PE during periods 
when there is no construction, renovation, or other dust-generating activity in progress
in or around the health-care facility (Unresolved issue).
 8.Systematically review and coordinate infection-control strategies with personnel in
charge of the 
facility's  engineering,  maintenance,  central  supply  and  distribution,  and  catering
services (IB) (95,239,337,338).
 9.When planning construction, demolition, and renovation activities in and around the
facility, assess 
whether  patients  at  high-risk  for  aspergillosis  are  likely  to  be  exposed  to  high
ambient-air spore counts of 
Aspergillus spp. from construction, demolition, and renovation sites, and if so, develop a
plan to prevent such exposures (IA) (95,239,338).
 10. During construction, demolition, or renovation activities, construct impermeable
barriers between 
patient-care  and  construction  areas  to  prevent  dust  from  entering  the  patient-care
areas (IB) 
(95, 326,339).
 11.  Direct  pedestrian  traffic  that  come  from  construction  areas  away  from
patient-care areas to limit the opening 
and  closing  of  doors  or  other  barriers  that  might  cause  dust  dispersion,  entry  of
contaminated air, or tracking of dust into patient-care areas (IB) 
(95,239,338--340).
 12.  Do  not  allow  fresh  or  dried  flowers  or  potted  plants  in  patient-care  areas  for
severely 
immunocompromised patients (II) (341).
 C. When a Case of Aspergillosis Occurs
 1.Assess whether the infection is health-care--related or community-acquired.
 a.Obtain and use the following information to help in the investigation: background
rate of disease at 
the facility; presence of concurrent or recent cases, as determined by a review of the
facility's 
microbiologic, histopathologic, and postmortem records; length of patient's stay in the
facility before onset of 
aspergillosis; patient's stay at, visit of, or transfer from, other health-care facilities or
other locations within the facility; and the period the patient was exposed outside the
health-care facility after the onset of immunosuppression 
and before onset of aspergillosis (II).
 b.Determine if any ventilation deficiency exists in PEs (IB) 
(95).
 2.If  no  evidence  exists  that  the  patient's  aspergillosis  is  facility-acquired,  continue
routine maintenance procedures 
to prevent health-care-- associated 
aspergillosis, as in Section II-B-1 through II-B-12 (IB).
 3.If evidence of possible facility-acquired infection with 
Aspergillus spp. exists, conduct an 
epidemiologic  investigation  and  an  environmental  assessment  to  determine  and
eliminate the source of Aspergillus spp. (95) (IB). If assistance is needed, contact the
local  or  state  health  department  (IB).   4.Use  an  antifungal  biocide  (e.g.,
copper-8-quinolinolate) that is registered with the Environmental 
Protection Agency for decontamination of structural materials (IB) 
(95,329,342--344).
  III. Chemoprophylaxis
 A.No recommendation can be made for the routine 
administration of antifungal agents such as itraconazole oral 
solution  (5  mg/kg/day)  or  capsules  (500  mg  twice  a  day),  low-dose  parenteral
amphotericin  B  (0.1  mg/kg/day),  lipid-based  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  (1
mg/kg/day), or nebulized amphotericin B administered by inhalation as prophylaxis for
pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  at  high-risk  for  this  infection  (Unresolved  issue)
(239,345--356).
 B.No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  any  specific  strategy  (e.g.,  deferral  of
hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
for  a  particular  length  of  time  or  routine  prophylaxis  with  absorbable  or  intravenous
antifungal medications) to 
prevent  recurrence  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in  patients  undergoing  hematopoietic
stem-cell  transplantation  who  have  a  history  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  (Unresolved
issue) 
(357--363).
        I. Staff Education and Monitoring and Infection Surveillance
 A.Staff Education and Monitoring
 1.Staff education
 a.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the transmission of
respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) within health-care facilities (IB) 
(364).
 b.Educate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care
setting about 
the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of
parainfluenza virus 
and adenovirus within health-care facilities (II).
 2.In  acute-care  facilities,  establish  mechanisms  by  which  the  infection-control  staff
can monitor 
personnel compliance with the facility's infection-control policies about these viruses (II)
(364).
 B. Surveillance
 1.Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel are promptly
alerted to any increase in 
the activity of RSV, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, or other respiratory viruses in the 
local community. Establish mechanisms by which the appropriate health-care personnel
can promptly inform the local and state 
health  departments  of  any  increase  in  the  activity  of  the  above-named  viruses  or  of
influenza-like illness in their 
facility (IB).
 2.In acute-care facilities during periods of increased prevalence of symptoms of viral
respiratory illness in 
the community or health-care facility and during the RSV and influenza season (i.e., 
December--March), attempt prompt diagnosis of respiratory infections caused by RSV,
influenza, parainfliuenza, or other respiratory viruses. Use rapid diagnostic techniques
as clinically indicated in patients who are admitted to the health-care facility 
with  respiratory  illness  and  are  at  high  risk  for  serious  complications  from  viral
respiratory infections (e.g., 
pediatric patients, especially infants, and those with compromised cardiac, pulmonary,
or immune function) (IA) (364--368).
 3.No recommendation can be made for routinely conducting surveillance cultures for
RSV or other 
respiratory viruses in respiratory secretions of patients (including immunocompromised 
patients, such as recipients of HSCT) (Unresolved issue) 
(239).
 4.In  long-term--care  facilities,  establish  mechanism(s)  for  continuing  surveillance  to
allow rapid identification of 
a potential outbreak in the facility (II).
  II. Prevention of Transmission of RSV, Parainfluenza 
Virus, or Adenovirus
 A.Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
 1.Standard  and  contact  precautions  for  RSV  and  parainfluenza  virus  and  standard,
contact, and droplet 
precautions for adenovirus
 a.Hand hygiene
 1)Decontaminate  hands  after  contact  with  a  patient  or  after  touching  respiratory
secretions or 
fomites potentially contaminated with respiratory secretions, whether or not gloves are
worn. Use soap and water 
when hands are visibly dirty or contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly
soiled with 
blood or other body fluids, and use an alcohol-based hand rub if hands are not visibly
soiled (IA) (37,364,369--375).
 b.Gloving
 1)Wear gloves when entering the room of patients with confirmed or suspected RSV,
parainfluenza, 
or adenovirus infection, or before handling the patients or their respiratory secretions or
fomites potentially contaminated with the patients' secretions (IA) 
(37,97,364,368,371--373,376,377).
 2)Change gloves between patients or after handling respiratory secretions or fomites
contaminated 
with secretions from one patient before contact with another patient 
(37,96,97,364). Decontanimate hands after removing gloves (see II-A-1-a). (IA)
 3)After  glove  removal  and  hand  decontamination,  do  not  touch  potentially
contaminated 
environmental surfaces or items in the patient's room (IB) 
(37).
 c.Gowning
 1)Wear a gown when entering the room of a patient suspected or proven to have RSV,
parainfluenza virus, 
or adenovirus infection and when soiling with respiratory 
secretions from a patient is anticipated (e.g., 
when  handling  infants  with  suspected  or  proven  RSV,  parainfluenza,  or  adenovirus
infection). Change the 
gown after such contact and before giving care to another patient or when leaving the
patient's  room.  After  gown  removal,  ensure  that  clothing  does  not  come  into  contact
with potentially contaminated 
environmental surfaces (IB) (37,97).
 d.Masking and wearing eye protection
 1)Wear  a  surgical  mask  and  eye  protection  or  a  face  shield  when  performing
procedures or 
patient-care  activities  that  might  generate  sprays  of  respiratory  secretions  from  any
patient  whether  or  not  the  patient  has  confirmed  or  suspected  viral  respiratory  tract
infection (IB) 
(37).
 2)Wear a surgical mask and eye protection or a face shield when within 3 feet of a
patient with suspected 
or confirmed adenovirus infection (IB) (37).
 e.Patient placement in acute-care facilities
 1)Place  a  patient  with  diagnosed  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room when possible or in a room with other 
patients with the same infection and no other 
infection (IB) (37,367--369,
376,377).
 2)Place  a  patient  with  suspected  RSV,  parainfluenza,  adenovirus,  or  other  viral
respiratory tract infection in 
a private room (II).
 a) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  RSV  infection  after  admission  to  the
health-care facility to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the
minimum required for each patient's specific viral infection 
(IB) (364,376).
 b) Promptly perform rapid diagnostic laboratory tests on patients who are 
admitted  with  or  who  have  symptoms  of  parainfluenza  or  adenovirus  infection  after
admission to the health-care facility 
to facilitate early downgrading of infection-control precautions to the minimum required
for each 
patient's specific viral infection and early initiation of treatment when indicated (II).
 f.Limiting patient movement or transport in acute-care facilities
 1)Limit to essential purposes only the movement or transport of patients from their
rooms when they 
are diagnosed or suspected to be infected with RSV, parainfluenza virus, or adenovirus
(IB) 
(37).
 2)If transport or movement from the room is necessary
 a)For a patient with diagnosed or suspected RSV or parainfluenza virus 
infection, ensure that precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission
of the virus to other 
patients  and  contamination  of  environmental  surfaces  or  equipment  by  ensuring  that
the patient does not touch 
other  persons'  hands  or  environmental  surfaces  with  hands  that  have  been
contaminated with 
his/her respiratory secretions (IB) (37).
 b)  For  a  patient  with  diagnosed  or  suspected  adenovirus  infection,  minimize  patient
dispersal  of  droplets  by  having  the  patient  wear  a  surgical  mask,  and  ensure  that
contact precautions are maintained to minimize the risk for transmission of the virus to
other patients and contamination of 
environmental surfaces or equipment (IB) 
(37).
 2.Other measures in acute-care facilities
 a.Staffing
 1)Restrict  health-care  personnel  in  the  acute  stages  of  an  upper  respiratory  tract
infection from caring 
for infants and other patients at high risk for complications from viral respiratory tract
infections 
(e.g.,  children  with  severe  underlying  cardio-pulmonary  conditions,  children  receiving
chemotherapy 
for
 malignancy,
 premature
 infants,
 and
 patients
 who
 are
 otherwise
immunocompromised) (II) 
(37,239,364, 368,369).
 2)When  feasible,  perform  rapid  diagnostic  testing  on  health-care  personnel  with
symptoms of 
respiratory tract infection, especially those who provide care to 
patients  at  high-risk  for  acquiring  or  developing  severe  complications  from  RSV,
parainfluenza, or adenovirus infection, so that their 
work status can be determined promptly (II).
 b.Limiting visitors
            Do  not  allow  persons  who  have  symptoms  of  respiratory  infection  to  visit
pediatric, immunosuppressed, or cardiac patients (IB) 
(37,239,364,376,377).
 c.Use of monoclonal antibody (palivizumab) for attenuation of RSV infection
            
            Follow the recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics to consider
monthly administration 
of palivizumab, an RSV monoclonal-antibody preparation, to the following infants and
children aged 
<24 months:
 1)those
 born
 prematurely
 at
 <32
 weeks
 of
 gestational
 age
 that
 have
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and 
those born prematurely at <32 weeks gestation without chronic lung disease who will
be aged <6 months at 
the beginning of the RSV season.
 2)those born at 32--35 weeks gestation if two or more of the following risk factors are
present: 
child-care  attendance,  school-aged  siblings,  exposure  to  environmental  pollutants,
congenital 
abnormalities of the airways, or severe neuromuscular disease (II) 
(378--381).
 3.Control of outbreaks in acute-care facilities
 a.Perform  rapid  screening  diagnostic  tests  for  the  particular  virus(es)  known  or
suspected to be causing 
the outbreak on patients who are admitted with symptoms of viral respiratory illness.
Promptly cohort 
the  patients  (according  to  their  specific  infections)  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the
screening tests are available (364,365,367--369,376,377). In the 
interim, when possible, admit patients with symptoms of viral respiratory infections to
private rooms (IB).  b.Personnel cohorting
 1)During an outbreak of health-care--associated 
RSV infection, cohort personnel as much as practical 
(e.g.,  restrict  personnel  who  give  care  to  infected  patients  from  giving  care  to
uninfected patients) 
(II) (368,369,377).
 2)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  routinely  cohorting  personnel  during  an
outbreak of 
health-care--associated adenovirus or parainfluenza virus infection (Unresolved issue).
 c.Use of RSV immune globulin or monoclonal antibody
 1)No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  RSV  immune  globulin  or
monoclonal antibody to 
control outbreaks of RSV infection in the health-care setting (Unresolved issue) 
(378--386).
              I. Staff Education
Provide health-care personnel continuing education or access to continuing education
about the epidemiology, modes 
of  transmission,  diagnosis,  and  means  of  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza,  in
accordance with their level of 
responsibility in preventing health-care--associated 
influenza (II) (109,387--389).
  II. Surveillance
 A.Establish  mechanisms  by  which  facility  personnel  are  promptly  alerted  about
increased influenza activity in 
the community (II).
 B.Establish  protocols  for  intensifying  efforts  to  promptly  diagnose  cases  of
facility-acquired influenza
 1.Determine  the  threshold  incidence  or  prevalence  of  influenza  or  influenza-like
illness in the facility at 
which laboratory testing of patients with influenza-like illness is to be undertaken and
outbreak control measures are to be initiated (II) (390).
 2.Arrange  for  laboratory  tests  to  be  available  to  clinicians  for  prompt  diagnosis  of
influenza, especially 
during November--April (II) (391--394).
  III. Modifying Host Risk for Infection
 A.Vaccination
 1.In  acute-care  settings  (including  acute-care  hospitals,  emergency  rooms,  and
walk-in clinics) or 
ongoing-care facilities (including physicians' 
offices, public health clinics, employee health clinics, hemodialysis centers, 
hospital  specialty-care  clinics,  outpatient  rehabilitation  programs,  and  mobile  clinics),
offer vaccine to inpatients and outpatients at high risk for complications from influenza
beginning in September and throughout the 
influenza season (108,395--397). Groups at high risk for influenza-related complications
include  those  aged  >65  years;  residents  of  nursing  homes  and  other  chronic-care
facilities  that  house  persons  of  any  age  who  have  chronic  medical  conditions;  adults
and children aged >6 months who have chronic disorders of the pulmonary 
or  cardiovascular  system,  including  asthma;  adults  and  children  who  have  required
regular medical follow-up 
or  hospitalization  during  the  preceding  year  because  of  chronic  metabolic  diseases
(including
 diabetes
 mellitus),
 renal
 dysfunction,
 or
 hemoglobinopathies,
 or
immunosuppression (including immunosuppresssion caused 
by medications or HIV); children and adolescents (aged 6 months--18 years) who are 
receiving  long-term  aspirin  therapy;  and  women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third
trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the  influenza  season  (395,398--403).  In  addition,  offer
annual influenza vaccination to all persons aged 50--64 years, close contacts of children
aged <24 months, and healthy children aged 6--23 months (IA) 
(395).
 2.In nursing homes and other long-term--care 
facilities, establish an SOP for timely administration of 
the inactivated influenza vaccine to persons at high risk as identified in Section III-A-1
(IA) 
(109--111,395).
 a.Obtain consent for influenza vaccination (if such is required by local or state law)
from every resident (or 
his/her  guardian)  at  the  time  the  resident  is  admitted  to  the  facility  or  anytime
afterwards before the next 
influenza season (IB) (109,395,404).
 b.Routinely vaccinate all residents, except those with medical contraindication(s) to
receipt of influenza 
vaccine (under an SOP or with the concurrence of the residents' respective attending
physicians) at one time, annually, before the influenza season. To residents who are 
admitted during the winter months after completion of 
the facility's vaccination program, offer the vaccine at the time of their admission (IA) 
(395,402,404,405).
 c.In settings not included in sections II-A-1 and -2, where health care is given (e.g., in
homes visited 
by personnel from home health-care agencies), vaccinate patients for whom 
vaccination is indicated, as listed in section 
III-A-1, and refer patient's household members and care givers for vaccination, before
the 
influenza season (IA) (395).
 3.Personnel
 a.Beginning in October each year, provide inactivated 
influenza vaccine for all personnel including night 
and weekend staff (395,406--10). Throughout the influenza season, continue to make
the vaccine available 
to newly hired personnel and to those who initially refuse vaccination. If vaccine supply
is limited, give 
highest priority to staff caring for patients at greatest risk for severe complications from
influenza infection, as listed in section III-A-1 (IA) (395).
 b.Educate health-care personnel about the benefits of vaccination and the potential
health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients (IB) 
(395).
 c.Take  measures  to  provide  all  health-care  personnel  convenient  access  to
inactivated influenza vaccine at 
the work site, free of charge, as part of employee health program (IB) 
(395).
 B. Use of Antiviral Agents (See Section V-C)
  IV. Prevention of Person-to-Person Transmission
 A.Droplet Precautions
 1.Place a patient who is diagnosed with influenza in a private room or in a room with
other 
patients with confirmed influenza, unless medical contraindications exist (IB) 
(37).
 2.Place a patient who is suspected to have influenza in a private room, and promptly
perform rapid 
diagnostic  laboratory  tests  to  facilitate  early  downgrading  of  infection-control
precautions to the minimum required for the patient's infection (II) (37).
 3.Wear a surgical mask upon entering the patient's room or when working within 3
feet of the 
patient (IB) (37).
 4.Limit  the  movement  and  transport  of  the  patient  from  the  room  to  those  for
essential purposes only. If 
patient movement or transport is necessary, have the patient wear a surgical mask, if
possible, to minimize 
droplet dispersal by the patient (II) (37).
 B. Eye Protection 
        No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  wearing  an  eye-protective  device  upon
entering the room of a patient 
with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza  or  when  working  within  3  feet  of  the  patient
(Unresolved issue).
 C. Contact Precautions 
        No recommendation can be made for the observance of contact precautions (in
addition  to  droplet  precautions)  for  patients  with  confirmed  or  suspected  influenza
(Unresolved issue) 
(37,411).
 D. Standard Precautions
 1.Decontaminate hands before and after giving care to or touching a patient or after
touching a patient's 
respiratory  secretions,  whether  or  not  gloves  are  worn.  If  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or
contaminated with proteinaceous material or are visibly soiled with blood or body fluids,
wash them with either a nonantimicrobial soap and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water. If hands are not visibly soiled, use an alcohol-based hand rub for 
their decontamination (IA) (39).
 2.Wear gloves if hand contact with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II) 
(37,411).
 3.Wear a gown if soiling of clothes with patient's respiratory secretions is expected (II)
(37).
 E. Air Handling 
        No recommendation can be made for maintaining negative air pressure in rooms
of patients in whom influenza 
is suspected or diagnosed, or in placing together persons with influenza-like illness in a
hospital area with 
an independent air-supply and exhaust system (Unresolved issue) 
(412--414).
 F. Personnel Restrictions 
        In acute-care facilities, use the facility's employee health service or its equivalent
to evaluate personnel with influenza-like illness and determine whether they should be
removed from duties that involve direct patient contact. Use more stringent criteria for
personnel who work in certain patient-care areas (e.g., intensive care units, nurseries,
and  organ-transplant  [especially  HSCT])  where  patients  who  are  most  susceptible  to
influenza-related complications 
are located (IB) (415--417).
  V.  Control of Influenza Outbreaks
 A.Determining the Outbreak Strain
Early in the outbreak, perform rapid influenza virus testing on nasopharyngeal swab or
nasal-wash  specimens  from  patients  with  recent  onset  of  symptoms  suggestive  of
influenza. In addition, obtain viral cultures from a subset of patients to determine the
infecting virus type and subtype (IB) 
(391--394).
 B. Vaccination of Patients and Personnel 
        Administer  current  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  to  unvaccinated  patients  and
health-care personnel 
(IA) (395,402,406,408).
 C. Antiviral Agent Administration
 1.When a facility outbreak of influenza is suspected or recognized:
 a.Administer  amantadine,  rimantadine,  or  oseltamivir  as  prophylaxis  to  all  patients
without influenza illness 
in the involved unit for whom the antiviral agent is not contraindicated (regardless of
whether they 
received influenza vaccinations during the previous fall) for a minimum of 2 weeks or
until approximately 1 week after the end of the outbreak. Do not delay administration
of the antiviral agent(s) for prophylaxis unless the results of diagnostic tests to identify
the infecting strain(s) can be obtained within 12--24 hours after 
specimen collection (IA) (395,405,
418,419).
 b.Administer amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir to patients acutely ill
with influenza within 
48 hours of illness onset. Choose the agent appropriate for the type of influenza virus
circulating in 
the community (IA) (395,405,418--421).
 c.Offer antiviral agent(s) (amantadine, rimantadine, or oseltamivir) for prophylaxis to
unvaccinated 
personnel  for  whom  the  antiviral  agent  is  not  contraindicated  and  who  are  in  the
involved unit or taking care of patients at high risk (IB) 
(395,405,418,419,422).
 d.Consider  prophylaxis  for  all  health-care  personnel,  regardless  of  their  vaccination
status, if the outbreak 
is caused by a variant of influenza that is not well matched by the vaccine (IB) 
(395).
 e.No  recommendation  can  be  made  about  the  prophylactic  administration  of
zanamivir to patients or 
personnel (Unresolved issue) (395,423--425).
 f.Discontinue the administration of influenza antiviral agents to patients or personnel
if laboratory tests 
confirm or strongly suggest that influenza is not the cause of the facility outbreak (IA) 
(426).
 g.If the cause of the outbreak is confirmed or believed to be influenza and vaccine has
been administered 
only  recently  to  susceptible  patients  and  personnel,  continue  prophylaxis  with  an
antiviral agent until 2 weeks 
after the vaccination (IB) (395,427).
 2.To reduce the potential for transmission of drug-resistant virus, do not allow contact
between persons at high 
risk  for  complications  from  influenza  and  patients  or  personnel  who  are  taking  an
antiviral agent for treatment 
of confirmed or suspected influenza during and for 2 days after the latter discontinue
treatment (IB) 
(428--432).
 D. Other Measures in Acute-Care Facilities 
        When influenza outbreaks, especially those characterized by high attack rates and
severe illness, occur in 
the community and/or facility:
 Updated information about prevention and control of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome in health-care facilities is 
available in a separate publication (433).
Part III: Performance Indicators
To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
Monitor  rates  of  VAP;  can  use  established  benchmarks  and  definitions  of  pneumonia
(e.g., NNIS definitions and 
rates) (14). Provide feedback to the staff about the facility's VAP rates and reminders
about  the  need  for  personnel  to  adhere  to  infection-control  practices  that  reduce  the
incidence 
of VAP.
 
Establish  a  SOP  for  influenza  vaccination  and  monitor  the  percentage  of  eligible
patients in acute-care settings or patients 
or residents in long-term--care settings who receive the vaccine. 
 
Before  and  during  the  influenza  season,  monitor  and  record  the  number  of  eligible
health-care personnel who receive 
the influenza vaccine and determine the desired unit- and facility-specific vaccination
rates as recommended by ACIP.
 
Monitor  the  number  of  cases  of  health-care--associated  RSV  infections  by  geographic
location within the facility and 
give  prompt  feedback  to  appropriate  staff  members  to  improve  adherence  to
recommended 
infection-control precautions.
 
Periodically  review  clinicians'  use  of  laboratory  diagnostic  tests  (both  culture  of
appropriate respiratory specimen and 
the urine antigen test) for legionellosis, especially in patients who are at high risk for
acquiring the disease (e.g., patients who are immunosuppressed, including recipients of
HSCT or solid-organ transplant, or patients receiving systemic steroids; 
patients  aged  >65  years;  or  patients  who  have  chronic  underlying  disease  such  as
diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
and COPD). Provide feedback on the use of these tests to clinicians. 
 
During construction or renovation activities in the facility, monitor personnel adherence
to infection-control measures 
(e.g.,  use  of  barriers,  maintenance  of  negative  room  pressure)  that  are  aimed  at
minimizing dust dispersion in patient-care 
areas.  Review  all  cases  of  health-care--associated  aspergillosis  to  determine  the
presence of remediable environmental risks.
 
Periodically  monitor  the  frequency  of  diagnostic  testing  for  pertussis  and  the  time
interval between suspicion of the 
infection  and  initiation  of  isolation  precautions  for  patients  in  whom  pertussis  is
suspected.
          
References
1.CDC. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial pneumonia. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-1).
          
2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
8.Kelleghan SI, Salemi C, Padilla S, et al. An effective continuous quality improvement
approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
 10.Nicotra  D,  Ulrich  C.  Process  improvement  plan  for  the  reduction  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
 11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
 12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
 13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
 14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
 15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
 16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
 17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
 18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
19.American Hospital Association Committee on Infection within Hospitals. Statement
on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
23.Favero  MS,  Bond  WW.  Clinical  disinfection  of  medical  and  surgical  materials.  In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
25.Cefai C, Richards J, Gould FK, McPeake P. An outbreak of Acinetobacter respiratory
tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
27.McDonald WL, Welch HJ, Keet JE. Antisepsis of endotracheal tubes and face masks.
Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
37.Garner  JS.  Guideline  for  isolation  precautions  in  hospitals:  the  Hospital  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
52.Thomachot  L,  Vialet  R,  Viguier  JM,  Sidier  B,  Roulier  P,  Martin  C.  Efficacy  of  heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
54.Golar SD, Sutherland LLA, Ford GT. Multipatient use of prefilled disposable oxygen
humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors as
a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
82.American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. Infection control guide. 2nd ed, 1993.
Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce the
incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
99.Morar  P,  Makura  Z,  Jones  A,  et  al.  Topical  antibiotics  on  tracheostoma  prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
 100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
 101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
 102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
 103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
 104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
 105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
 106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
 107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
 108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
 109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
 110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
 111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
 112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
 113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
 114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
125.Treloar DM, Stechmiller J. Pulmonary aspiration of tube-fed patients with artificial
airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
127.Girou E, Schortgen F, Delcaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with
nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
130.Nava  S,  Ambrosino  N,  Clini  E,  et  al.  Noninvasive  mechanical  ventilation  in  the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
144.Ferrer  M,  Bauer  TT,  Torres  A,  Hernandez  C,  Piera  C.  Effect  of  nasogastric  tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
150.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  Dhaliwal  R,  Greenwood  J.  Optimizing  the  benefits  and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically  ill  patients.  Crit  Care  Med  2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain  DA,  DeWeese  RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
157.Yoneyama  T,  Yoshida  M,  Ohrui  T,  et  al.  Oral  care  reduces  pneumonia  in  older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
176.Ledingham IM, Alcock SR, Eastaway AT, McDonald JC, Mckay IC, Ramsay G. Triple
regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
183.Tetteroo  GWM,  Wagenvoort  JHT,  Castelein  A,  Tilanus  HW,  Ince  C,  Bruining  HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
190.Cockerill  FR,  Muller  SM,  Anhalt  JP,  et  al.  Prevention  of  infection  on  critically  ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
196.Selective Decontamination  of  the Digestive Tract  Trialists'  Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
 206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in a
medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect of
air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
214.Kirschenbaum  L,  Azzi  E,  Sfeir  T,  Tietjen  P,  Astiz  M.  Effect  of  continuous  lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
215.Summer  WR,  Curry  P,  Haponik  EF,  Nelson  S,  Elston  R.  Continuous  mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
219.Kirby  BD,  Snyder  KM,  Meyer  RD,  Finegold  SM.  Legionnaires'  disease:  report  of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
227.Fiore AE,  Butler JC,  Emori  TG,  Gaynes RP.  A survey  of methods used  to  detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
232.Johnson  JT,  Yu  VL,  Best  MG,  et  al.  Nosocomial  legionellosis  in  surgical  patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
247.Mandel  AS,  Sprauer  MA,  Sniadack  DH,  Ostroff  SM.  State  regulation  of  hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
266.Heffelfinger  JD,  Kool  JL,  Fridkin  S,  et  al.  Risk  of  hospital-acquired  Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
273.Breiman  RF,  Fields  BS,  Sanden  GN,  Volmer  L,  Meier  A,  Spika  JS.  Association  of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
283.Best  MG,  Goetz  A,  Yu  VL.  Heat  eradication  measures  for  control  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
284.CDC.  Sustained  transmission  of  nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease---Arizona  and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
290.Linnemann  CC,  Jr.,  Ramundo  N,  Perlstein  PH,  Minton  SD,  Englender  GS.  Use  of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
293.CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis vaccines among infants and
young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
294.Shefer  A,  Dales  L,  Nelson  M,  Werner  B,  Baron  R,  Jackson  R.  Use  and  safety  of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
297.Grimprel E, Begue P, Anjak I, Betsou F, Guiso N. Comparison of polymerase chain
reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
300.van der Zee A, Agterberg C, Peeters M, Mooi F, Schellekens J. A clinical validation
of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
307.Halperin SA. Pertussis control in Canada. Canad Med Assoc J 2003; 168:1389--90.
308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
318.Kramer MR, Marshall SE, Starnes VA, Gamberg P, Amitai Z, Theodore J. Infectious
complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
320.Riley DK, Pavia AT, Beatty PG, Denton D, Carroll KC. Surveillance cultures in bone
marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
353.Nucci  M,  Biasoli  I,  Akiti  T,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  randomized  placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
361.Michailov G, Laporte JP, Lesage S, et al. Autologous bone-marrow transplantation
is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT in
acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
371.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Modes  of  transmission  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of
respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
 383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison of
a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
398.Fraund  S,  Wagner  D,  Pethig  K,  Drescher  J,  Girgsdies  OE,  Haverich  A.  Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination in
HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival of
influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
425.Schilling
 M,
 Povinelli
 L,
 Krause
 P,
 et
 al.
 Efficacy
 of
 zanamivir
 for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
426.Tominack
 RL,
 Hayden
 FG.
 Rimantadine
 hydrochloride
 and
 amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
428.Hall  CB,  Dolin  R,  Gala  CL,  et  al.  Children  with  influenza  A  infection:  treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
431.Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and possible transmission
of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 To  assist  infection-control  personnel  in  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  the
recommendations, the following 
performance measures are suggested:
 1.CDC.  Guideline  for  prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia.  MMWR  1997;46(No.
RR-1).
          
 2.CDC. Guidelines for preventing health-care--associated pneumonia, 2003. Atlanta,
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Hman Services, 
CDC,2004.
 3.CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  tuberculosis  in  health-care
facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13).
          
 4.Brooks  K,  Whitten  S,  Quigley  D.  Reducing  the  incidence  of  ventilator-related
pneumonia. J Health Qual 1998;20:14--19.
 5.Halm EA, Atlas SJ, Borowsky LH, et al. Understanding physician adherence with a
pneumonia practice guideline: effects of patient, system, 
and physician factors. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:98--104.
 6.Katz  DA.  Barriers  between  guidelines  and  improved  patient  care:  an  analysis  of
AHCPR's Unstable Angina Clinical Practice Guideline. Health 
Serv Res 1999;34:377--89.
 7.Kaye J, Ashline V, Erickson D, et al. Critical care bug team: a multidisciplinary team
approach to reducing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:197--201.
 8.Kelleghan  SI,  Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  et  al.  An  effective  continuous  quality
improvement approach to the prevention of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:322--30.
 9.Joiner GA, Salisbury D, Bollin GE. Utilizing quality assurance as a tool for reducing
the risk of nosocomial ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am 
J Med Qual 1996;11:100--3.
  10.Nicotra D, Ulrich C. Process improvement plan for the reduction of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients on ventilators. J Nurs Care 
Qual 1996;10:18--23.
  11.Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, et al. Effect of an education program aimed at
reducing the occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2407--12.
  12.Haley RW, Culver DH, White J.W., et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and
control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in 
U.S. hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182--205.
  13.Haley  RW,  Morgan  WM,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Hospital  infection  control:  recent
progress and opportunities under prospective payment. Am J 
Infect Control 1985;13:97--108.
  14.CDC. NNIS criteria for determining nosocomial pneumonia. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2003.
  15.Horan  TC,  White  JW,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Nosocomial  infection  surveillance,  1984.
MMWR 1986;35(SS-1):17--29.
  16.Gaynes  RP,  Solomon  S.  Improving  hospital-acquired  infection  rates:  the  CDC
experience. Jt Comm J Qual Improv 1996;22:457--67.
  17.Josephson  A,  Karanfil  L,  Alonso  H,  Watson  A,  Blight  J.  Risk-specific  nosocomial
infection rates. Am J Med 1991;91:131--7.
  18.Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance data to prevent
hospital-acquired infections. Emerging Infect Dis 2001;7:295--8.
 19.American  Hospital  Association  Committee  on  Infection  within  Hospitals.
Statement on microbiologic sampling in the hospital. Hospitals 
1974; 48:125--6.
 20.Eickhoff TC. Microbiologic sampling. Hospitals 1970; 44:86--7.
 21.Finelli  L,  Livengood  JR,  Saiman  L.  Surveillance  of  pharyngeal  colonization:
detection and control of serious bacterial illness in low birth 
weight infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:854--9.
 22.Glupczynski  Y.  Usefuness  of  bacteriologic  surveillance  cultures  for  monitoring
infection in hospitalized patients. Acta Clin Belg 2001; 56:38-45.
 23.Favero MS, Bond WW. Clinical disinfection of medical and surgical materials. In:
Block S, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 
preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1991.
 24.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee:
guideline for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities. MMWR (in press).
 25.Cefai  C,  Richards  J,  Gould  FK,  McPeake  P.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter
respiratory tract infection resulting from incomplete disinfection 
of ventilatory equipment. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:177--82.
 26.Craig DB, Cowan SA, Forsyth W, Parker SE. Disinfection of anesthesia equipment
by a mechanized pasteurization method. Can Anaesth Soc 
J 1975;22:219--23.
 27.McDonald  WL,  Welch  HJ,  Keet  JE.  Antisepsis  of  endotracheal  tubes  and  face
masks. Anesthesiology 1955; 16:206--13.
 28.Spaulding EH. Studies on the chemical sterilization of surgical 
instruments. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1939;69:738--44.
 29.Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Enforcement  priorities  for  single-use  devices
reprocessed by third parties and hospitals. Rockville, MD: 
US DHHS, FDA, 2000.
 30.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Weber  P,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  nosocomial
pneumonia and of patient and circuit colonization 
during  mechanical  ventilation  with  circuit  changes  every  48  hours  versus  no  change.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143:738--43.
 31.Fink  JB,  Krause  SA,  Barrett  L,  Schaaff  D,  Alex  CG.  Extending  ventilator  circuit
change interval beyond 2 days reduces the likelihood of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest 1998;113:405--11.
 32.Hess D, Burns E, Romagnoli D, Kacmarek RM. Weekly ventilator circuit changes: a
strategy to reduce costs without affecting pneumonia 
rates. Anesthesiology 1995;82:903--11.
 33.Kollef MH, Shapiro D, Fraser VJ, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without 7-day
circuit changes: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;123:168--74.
 34.Kotilainen HR, Keroack MA. Cost analysis and clinical impact of weekly ventilator
circuit changes in patients in intensive care unit. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:117--20.
 35.Long MN, Wickstrom G, Grimes A, Benton CF, Belcher B, Stamm AM. Prospective,
randomised study of ventilator-associated pneumonia 
in  patients  with  one  versus  three  ventilator  circuit  changes  per  week.  Infect  Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:14--19.
 36.Craven  DE,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ.  Contaminated  condensate  in  mechanical
ventilator circuits: a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia? Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1984;129:625--8.
 37.Garner JS. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals: the Hospital Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53--80.
 38.Gorman  LJ,  Sanai  L,  Notman  AW,  Grant  IS,  Masterton  RG.  Cross  infection  in  an
intensive care unit by 
Klebsiella pneumoniae from ventilator condensate. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:27--34.
 39.CDC.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  health-care  settings.  MMWR  2002;51(No.
RR-16).
 40.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosocomial Legionnaires'
disease caused by aerosolized tap water from 
respiratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460--7.
 41.Carson  LA,  Favero  MS,  Bond  WW,  Petersen  NJ.  Morphological,  biochemical  and
growth characteristics of 
Pseudomonas cepacia from distilled water. Appl Microbiol 1973;25:476--83.
 42.Favero MS, Carson LA, Bond WW. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: growth in distilled water from hospitals. Science 1971;173:836--8.
 43.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  McComb  C,  Boyle  M.  Bubbling  humidifiers  produce
microaerosols which can carry bacteria. Infect Control 1986;7:403--7.
 44.Cook  D,  De  Jonghe  B,  Brochard  L,  Brun-Buisson  C.  Influence  of  airway
management on ventilator-associated pneumonia: evidence 
from randomized trials. JAMA 1998;279:781--7.
 45.Dreyfuss  D,  Djedaini  K,  Gros  I,  et  al.  Mechanical  ventilation  with  heated
humidifiers or heat and moisture exchangers: effects 
on patient colonization and incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995; 151:986--92.
 46.Hurni JM, Feihl F, Lazor R, Leuenberger P, Perret C. Safety of combined heat and
moisture exchanger filters in long-term mechanical 
ventilation. Chest 1997;111:686--91.
 47.Kirton OC, DeHaven B, Morgan J, Morejon O, Civetta J. A prospective, randomised
comparison of an in-line heat moisture exchange filter 
and
 heated
 wire
 humidifiers:
 rates
 of
 ventilator-associated
 early-onset
(community-acquired) or late-onset (hospital-acquired) pneumonia and 
incidence of endotracheal tube occlusion. Chest 1997;112:1055--9.
 48.Roustan JP, Kienlen J, Aubas P, Aubas S, du Cailar J. Comparison of hydrophobic
heat and moisture exchangers with heated humidifier 
during prolonged mechanical ventilation. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:97--100.
 49.Thomachot L, Viviand X, Arnaud S, Boisson C, Martin CD. Comparing two heat and
moisture exchangers, one hydrophobic and 
one hygroscopic, on humidifying efficacy and the rate of nosocomial pneumonia. Chest
1998;114:1383--9.
 50.Boisson  C,  Viviand  X,  Arnaud  S,  Thomachot  L,  Miliani  Y,  Martin  C.  Changing  a
hydrophobic heat and moisture exchanger after 48 hours 
rather  than  24  hours:  a  clinical  and  microbiologic  evaluation.  Intensive  Care  Med
1999;25:1237--43.
 51.Daumal  F,  Colpart  E,  Manoury  B,  Mariani  M,  Daumal  M.  Changing  heat  and
moisture exchangers every 48 hours does not increase the 
incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:347--9.
 52.Thomachot L, Vialet R, Viguier JM, Sidier B, Roulier P, Martin C. Efficacy of heat
and moisture exchangers after changing every 48 hours 
rather than 24 hours. Crit Care Med 1998;26:477--81.
 53.Salemi  C,  Padilla  S,  Canola  T,  Reynolds  D.  Heat-and-moisture  exchangers  used
with biweekly circuit tubing changes: effect on costs and 
pneumonia rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:737--9.
 54.Golar  SD,  Sutherland  LLA,  Ford  GT.  Multipatient  use  of  prefilled  disposable
oxygen humidifiers for up to 30 days: patient safety and cost 
analysis. Respir Care 1993;38:343--7.
 55.Henderson E, Ledgerwood D, Hope KM, et al. Prolonged and multipatient use of
prefilled disposable oxygen humidifier bottles: safety and 
cost. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:463--8.
 56.Seto WH, Ching TY, Yuen KY, Lam WK. Evaluating the sterility of disposable wall
oxygen humidifiers, during and between use on 
patients. Infect Control 1990;11:604--5.
 57.Craven  DE,  Lichtenberg  DA,  Goularte  TA,  Make  BJ,  McCabe  WR.  Contaminated
medication nebulizers in mechanical ventilation circuits. 
Source of bacterial aerosols. Am J Med 1984;77:834--8.
 58.Mastro TD, Fields BS, Breiman RF, Campbell J, Plikaytis BD, Spika JS. Nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease and use of medication nebulizers. 
J Infect Dis 1991;163:667--71.
 59.Reboli AC, Koshinski R, Arias K, Marks-Austin K, Stieritz D, Stull TL. An outbreak of
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory 
tract  infection  associated  with  contaminated  abuterol  nebulization  solution.  Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:741--3.
 60.Mertz  JJ,  Scharer  L,  McClement  JH.  A  hospital  outbreak  of  Klebsiella  pneumonia
from inhalation therapy with contaminated aerosol 
solutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967;95:454--60.
 61.Moffet  HL,  Williams  T.  Bacteria  recovered  from  distilled  water  and  inhalation
therapy equipment. Am J Dis Child 1967;114:7--12.
 62.Sanders CV Jr., Luby JP, Johanson WG Jr., Barnett JA, Sanford JP. 
Serratia marcescens infections from inhalation therapy medications: 
nosocomial outbreak. Ann Intern Med 1970;73:15--21.
 63.Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of 
Burkholderia (formerly 
Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract colonization 
and
 infection
 associated
 with
 nebulized
 albuterol
 therapy.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1995;122:762--6.
 64.Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of 
Enterobacter  cloacae  related  to  understaffing,  overcrowding,  and  poor  hygiene
practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598--603.
 65.Longfield R, Longfield J, Smith LP, Hyams KC, Strohmer ME. Multidose medication
vial sterility: an in-use study and a review of literature. 
Infect Control 1984;5:165--9.
 66.Ramsey AH, Skonieczny P, Coolidge DT, Kurzynski TA, Proctor ME, Davis JP. 
Burkholderia cepacia lower respiratory tract infection 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  respiratory  therapist.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2001;22:423--6.
 67.Sheth NK, Post GT, Wisniewski TR, Uttech BV. Multi-dose vials versus single-dose
vials: a study in sterility and cost-effectiveness. 
J Clin Microbiol 1983;17:377--9.
 68.Moffet  HL,  Allan  D.  Survival  and  dissemination  of  bacteria  in  nebulizers  and
incubators. Am J Dis Chil Child 1967;114:13--20
 69.Jakobsson  B,  Hjelte  L,  Nystrom  B.  Low  level  of  bacterial  contamination  of  mist
tents used in home treatment of cystic fibrosis patients. J 
Hosp Infect 2000;44:37--41.
 70.Cunha BA, Klimek JJ, Gracewski J, McLaughlin JC, Quintiliani R. A common source
outbreak of 
Acinetobacter  pulmonary  infection  traced  to  Wright  respirometers.  Postgrad  Med  J
1980;56:169--72.
 71.Irwin  RS,  Demers  RR,  Pratter  MR,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  Acinetobacter  infection
associated with the use of a ventilator spirometer. Respir 
Care 1980;25:232--7.
 72.Kaul R, Burt JA, Cork L, et al. Investigation of a multiyear multiple critical care unit
outbreak due to relatively drug-sensitive 
Acinetobacter  baumanii:  risk  factors  and  attributable  mortality.  J  Infect  Dis  1996;
174:1279--87.
 73.Rogues AM, Maugein J, Allery A, et al. Electronic ventilator temperature sensors
as a potential source of respiratory tract colonization 
with Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:289--92.
 74.Weems JJ, Jr. Nosocomial outbreak 
of Pseudomonas cepacia associated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator
temperature 
probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583--6.
 75.Fierer J, Taylor PM, Gezon HM. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
 epidemic
 traced
 to
 delivery-room
 resuscitators.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1967;276:991--6.
 76.Stone JW, Das BC. Investigation of an outbreak of infection with 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus in a special care baby unit. J Hosp Infect 1986;7:42--8. 
 77.Thompson  AC,  Wilder  BJ,  Powner  DJ.  Bedside  resuscitation  bags:  a  source  of
bacterial contamination. Infect Control 1985;6:231--2.
 78.Weber  DJ,  Wilson  MB,  Rutala  WA,  Thomann  CA.  Manual  ventilation  bags  as  a
source for bacterial colonization of intubated patients. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1990;142:892--4.
 79.Van Der Zwet WC, Parlevliet GA, Savelkoul PH, et al. Outbreak of 
Bacillus cereus infections in a neonatal intensive care unit traced to balloons used 
in manual ventilation. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:4131--6.
 80.Du Moulin GC, Sauberman AJ. The anesthesia machine and circle system are not
likely to be sources of bacterial contamination. 
Anesthesiology 1977;47:353--8.
 81.Bengtson  JP,  Brandberg  A,  Brinkhoff  B,  Sonander  H,  Stenqvist  O.  Low-flow
anesthesia does not increase the risk of microbial 
contamination through the circle absorber system. Acta Anaesth Scand 1989;33:89--92.
 82.American  Association  of  Nurse  Anesthetists.  Infection  control  guide.  2nd  ed,
1993. Chicago, Illinois, 1993.
 83.American  Society  for  Anesthesiologists.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  in
patients: recommendations for Infection Control for the Practice 
of Anesthesiology. Park Ridge, Illinois: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 1991.
 84.Berry  AJ,  Nolte  FS.  An  alternative  strategy  for  infection  control  of  anesthesia
breathing circuits: a laboratory assessment of the Pall HME 
Filter. Anesth Analg 1991;72:651--5.
 85.Feeley TW, Hamilton WK, Xavier B, Moyers J, Eger EI. Sterile anesthesia breathing
circuits do not prevent postoperative pulmonary 
infection. Anesthesiology 1981;54:369--72.
 86.Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, Webster C, Pace NL. Failure of bacterial filters to reduce
the incidence of pneumonia after inhalation 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1981;54:364--8.
 87.Luttropp  HH,  Berntman  L.  Bacterial  filters  protect  anaesthetic  equipment  in  a
low-flow system. Anaesthesia 1993;48:520--3.
 88.Ping FC, Oulton JL, Smith JA, Skidmore AG, Jenkins LC. Bacterial filters---are they
necessary on anesthetic machines? Anaesth Soc 
J 1979;26:415--9.
 89.Vezina  DP,  Trepanier  CA,  Lessard  MR,  Gourdeau  M,  Tremblay  C.  Anesthesia
breathing circuits protected by the DAR Barrierbac S breathing 
filter have a low bacterial contamination rate. Can J Anaesth 2001;48:748--54.
 90.Hiebert  T,  Miles  J,  Okeson  GC.  Contaminated  aerosol  recovery  from  pulmonary
function testing equipment. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1999;159:610--2.
 91.Rutala  DR,  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ,  Thomann  CA.  Infection  risks  associated  with
spirometry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12: 89--92.
 92.Ahmed J, Brutus A, D'Amato RF, Glatt AE. 
Acinetobacter  calcoaceticus  anitratus  outbreak  in  the  intensive  care  unit  traced  to  a
peak flow meter. 
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:319--21.
 93.Grieble HG, Colton FR, Thomas MS, et al. Fine-particle humidifiers: source of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in a 
respiratory-disease unit. N Engl J Med 1970;282:531--3.
 94.Smith PW, Massanari RM. Room humidifiers as the source 
of Acinetobacter infections. JAMA 1977;237:795--7.
 95.CDC.  Guidelines  for  environmental  control  in  health-care  facilities.  MMWR
2003;52(No. RR--10).
          
 96.Doebbeling  BN,  Pfaller  MA,  Houston  AK,  Wenzel  RP.  Removal  of  nosocomial
pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications for 
glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394--8.
 97.LeClair  JM,  Freeman  J,  Sullivan  BF,  Crowley  CM,  Goldmann  DA.  Prevention  of
nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections 
through  compliance  with  glove  and  gown  isolation  precautions.  N  Engl  J  Med
1987;317:329--34.
 98.Patterson  JE,  Vecchio  J,  Pantelick  EL,  et  al.  Association  of  contaminated  gloves
with transmission of 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. 
anitratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479--83.
 99.Morar P, Makura Z, Jones A, et al. Topical antibiotics on tracheostoma prevents
exogenous colonization and infection of lower airways in 
children. Chest 2000; 117(2):513--8.
  100.Combes  P,  Fauvage  B,  Oleyer  C.  Nosocomial  pnemonia  in  mechanically
ventilated patients: a prospective randomised evaluation of the Stericath 
closed suctioning system. Intensive Care Med 2000;26:878--82.
  101.Deppe  SA,  Kelly  JW,  Thoi  LL,  et  al.  Incidence  of  colonization,  nosocomial
pneumonia, and mortality in critically ill patients using a Trach 
Care  closed-suction  system  versus  open-suction  system:  prospective,  randomized
study. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1389--93.
  102.Johnson  KL,  Kearney  PA,  Johnson  SB,  Niblett  JB,  MacMillan  NL,  McClain  RE.
Closed versus open endotracheal suctioning: costs and 
physiologic consequences. Crit Care Med 1994;22:658--66.
  103.Kollef MH, Prentice D, Shapiro SD, et al. Mechanical ventilation with or without
daily changes of in-line suction catheters. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1997;156:466--72.
  104.CDC.  Preventing  pneumococcal  disease  among  infants  and  young  children.
MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
          
  105.CDC.  Prevention  of  pneumococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-8). 
  106.CDC. Outbreak of pneumococcal pneumonia among unvaccinated residents of a
nursing home---New Jersey, April 2001. MMWR 
2001;50:707--10. 
  107.Shapiro  ED,  Clemens  JD.  A  controlled  evaluation  of  the  protective  efficacy  of
pneumococcal vaccine for patients at high risk of 
serious pneumococcal infections. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:325--30.
  108.Williams  WW,  Hickson  MA,  Kane  MA,  Kendal  AP,  Spika  JS,  Hinman  AR.
Immunization policies and vaccine coverage among adults: the risk 
for missed opportunities. Ann Intern Med 1988;108:616--25.
  109.Nichol KL, Grimm MB, Peterson DC. Immunizations in long-term care facilities:
policies and practice. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:349--55.
  110.CDC.  Use  of  standing  orders  programs  to  increase  adult  vaccination  rates:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-1). 
  111.Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  H.  Medicare  and  Medicaid
programs; conditions of participation: immunization standards 
for hospitals, long-term care facilities, and home health agencies: 
final rule with comment period. Federal Register 2002;67:61808--14.
  112.Donta ST, Peduzzi P, Cross AS, et al. Immunoprophylaxis 
against Klebsiella and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa infections. J Infect Dis 1996;174:537--43.
  113.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Impact of colony-stimulating factor therapy
on clinical outcome and frequency rate of nosocomial 
infections in intensive care unit neutropenic patients. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:3155--60.
  114.Heard SO, Fink MP, Gamelli RL, et al. Effect of prophylactic 
administration of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor  (filgrastim)  on  the  frequency  of  nosocomial  infections  in  patients  with  acute
traumatic brain injury or cerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:748--54.
 115.Maher  DW,  Lieschke  GJ,  Green  M,  et  al.  Filgrastim  in  patients  with
chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:492--501.
 116.Mitchell PL, Morland B, Stevens MC, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
in established febrile neutropenia: a randomized study 
of pediatric patients. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:1163--70.
 117.The  Intravenous  Immunoglobulin  Collaborative  Study  Group.  Prophylactic
intravenous administration of standard immune globulin as 
compared with core-lipopolysaccharide immune globulin in 
patients at high risk of postsurgical infection. N Engl J Med 1992;327: 234--40.
 118.Houdijk
 APJ,
 Rijnsburger
 ER,
 Jansen
 J,
 et
 al.
 Randomised
 trial
 of
glutamine-enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in 
patients with multiple trauma. Lancet 1998;352:772--6.
 119.van der Hulst RRWJ, van Kreel BK, Von Meyenfeldt MF, et al. Glutamine and the
preservation of gut integrity. Lancet 1993;341: 1363--5.
 120.Celis  R,  Torres  A,  Gatell  JM,  Almela  M,  Rodriguez-Riosin  R,  Agusti-Vidal  A.
Nosocomial pneumonia: a multivariate analysis of risk and 
prognosis. Chest 1988;93:318--24.
 121.Craven DE, Kunches LM, Kilinsky V, Lichtenberg DA, Make BJ, McCabe WR. Risk
factors for pneumonia and fatality in 
patients
 receiving
 continuous
 mechanical
 ventilation.
 Am
 Rev
 Respir
 Dis
1986;133:792--6.
 122.Kingston  GW,  Phang  PT,  Leathley  MJ.  Increased  incidence  of  nosocomial
pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients with 
subclinical aspiration. Am J Surg 1991;161:589--92.
 123.Metheny NA, Eisenberg P, Spies M. Aspiration pneumonia in 
patients fed through nasoenteral tubes. Heart Lung 1986;15:256--61.
 124.Pingleton  SK,  Hinthorn  DR,  Liu  C.  Enteral  nutrition  in  patients  receiving
mechanical ventilation: multiple sources of tracheal 
colonization include the stomach. Am J Med 1986;80:827--32.
 125.Treloar  DM,  Stechmiller  J.  Pulmonary  aspiration  of  tube-fed  patients  with
artificial airways. Heart Lung 1984; 13:667--71.
 126.Brochard  L,  Mancebo  J,  Wysocki  M,  et  al.  Noninvasive  ventilation  for  acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
N Engl J Med 1995;333:817--22.
 127.Girou  E,  Schortgen  F,  Delcaux  C,  et  al.  Association  of  noninvasive  ventilation
with nosocomial infections and survival in critically ill 
patients. JAMA 2000;284:2361--7.
 128.Carlucci  A,  Richard  JC,  Wysock:  M,  Lopage  E,  Brochard  L.  Noninvasive  versus
conventional mechanical ventilation: an epidemiologic survey. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:874--80.
 129.Keenan SP. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
JAMA 2000;284:2376--8.
 130.Nava S, Ambrosino N, Clini E, et al. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation in the
weaning of patients with respiratory failure due to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128:721--8.
 131.Torres A, Gatell JM, Aznar E, et al. Re-intubation increases the risk of nosocomial
pneumonia in patients needing mechanical ventilation. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:137--41.
 132.Holzapfel  L,  Chevret  S,  Madinier  G,  et  al.  Influence  of  long-term  oro-  or
nasotracheal intubation on nosocomial maxillary sinusitis 
and  pneumonia:  results  of  a  prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial.  Crit  Care  Med
1993;21:1132--8.
 133.Rouby  JJ,  Laurent  P,  Gosnach  M,  et  al.  Risk  factors  and  clinical  relevance  of
nosocomial maxillary sinusitis in the critically ill. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1994;150:776--83.
 134.Kollef  MH,  Skubas  NJ,  Sundt  TM.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  of  continuous
aspiration of subglottic secretions in cardiac surgery 
patients. Chest 1999;116:1339--46.
 135.Mahul  P,  Auboyer  C,  Jospe  R,  et  al.  Prevention  of  nosocomial  pneumonia  in
intubated patients: respective role of mechanical subglottic drainage and 
stress ulcer prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1992;18:20--5.
 136.Smulders  K,  van  der  Hoeven  H,  Weers-Pothoff  I,  Vanderbroucke-Grauls  C.  A
randomized clinical trial of intermittent subglottic 
secretion drainage in patients receiving mechnical ventilation. Chest 2002;121:858--62.
 137.Valles J, Artigas A, Rello J, et al. Continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions in
preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann 
Intern Med 1995;122:179--86.
 138.Drakulovic MB, Torres A, Bauer TT, Nicolas JM, Nogue S, Ferrer M. Supine body
position as a risk factor for nosocomial pneumonia 
in
 mechanically
 ventilated
 patients:
 a
 randomised
 trial.
 Lancet
 1999;
354(9193):1851--58.
 139.Orozco-Levi M, Torres A, Ferrer M, et al. Semirecumbent position protects from
pulmonary aspiration but not completely from 
gastroesophageal reflux in mechanically ventilated patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1995;152:1387--90.
 140.Torres A, Serra-Batlles J, Ros E, et al. Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in
patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the effect of 
body position. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:540--3.
 141.Gharpure V, Meert KL, Sarnaik AP, Metheny NA. Indicators of postpyloric feeding
tube placement in children. Crit Care Med 2000;28:2962--6.
 142.Hand  RW,  Kempster  M,  Levy  JH,  Rogol  PR,  Spirn  P.  Inadvertent  transbronchial
insertion of narrow-bore feeding tubes into the pleural 
space. JAMA 1984;251:2396--7.
 143.McClave  SA,  DeMeo  MT,  DeLegge  MH,  et  al.  North  American  summit  on
aspiration in the critically ill patient: consensus statement. J 
Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:80--5.
 144.Ferrer M, Bauer TT, Torres A, Hernandez C, Piera C. Effect of nasogastric tube
size on gastroesophageal reflux and microaspiration in 
intubated patients. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:991--4.
 145.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Hulst R, et al. Intermittent enteral feeding: the
influence on respiratory and digestive tract colonization 
in  mechanically  ventilated  intensive-care-unit  patients.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1996;154:394--9.
 146.Jacobs  S,  Chang  RW,  Lee  B,  Bartlett  FW.  Continuous  enteral  feeding:  a  major
cause of pneumonia among ventilated intensive care unit patients. 
J Parenter Enter Nutr 1990;14:353--6.
 147.Lee  B,  Chang  RWS,  Jacobs  S.  Intermittent  nasogastric  feeding:  a  simple  and
effective method to reduce pneumonia among ventilated ICU 
patients. Clin Intensive Care 1990;1:100--2.
 148.Skiest  DJ,  Khan  N,  Feld  R,  Metersky  ML.  The  role  of  enteral  feeding  in  gastric
colonisation: a randomised controlled trial comparing 
continuous  to  intermittent  enteral  feeding  in  mechanically  ventilated  patients.  Clin
Intensive Care 1996;7:138--43.
 149.Heyland  DK,  Drover  JW,  MacDonald  S,  Novak  F,  Lam  M.  Effect  of  postpyloric
feeding on gastroesophageal regurgitation and 
pulmonary microaspiration. Crit Care Med 2001;29:1495--500.
 150.Heyland DK, Drover JW, Dhaliwal R, Greenwood J. Optimizing the benefits and
minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role 
of small bowel feeding. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2002;26:S51--7.
 151.Kearns PJ, Chin D, Mueller L, Wallace K, Jensen WA, Kirsch CM. The incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and success in 
nutrient delivery with gastric versus small intestinal feeding: a randomized clinical trial.
Crit Care Med 2000;28:1742--6.
 152.Montecalvo M, Steger KA, Farber HW, et al. Nutritional outcome and pneumonia
in critical care patients randomized to gastric versus jejunal 
tube feedings. Crit Care Med 1992;20:1377--87.
 153.Montejo  JC,  Grau  T,  Acosta  J,  et  al.  Multicenter,  prospective,  randomized,
single-blind study comparing the efficacy and 
gastrointestinal  complications  of  early  jejunal  feeding  with  early  gastric  feeding  in
critically ill patients. Crit Care Med 2002;30:796--800.  154.Spain DA, DeWeese RC,
Reynolds  MA,  Richardson  JD.  Transpyloric  passage  of  feeding  tubes  in  patients  with
head injuries does 
not decrease complications. J Trauma 1995;39:1000--2.
 155.Strong RM, Condon SC, Solinger MR, Namihas BN, Ito-Wong LA, Leuty JE. Equal
aspiration rates from postpylorus and 
intragastric-placed  small-bore  nasoenteric  feeding  tubes:  a  randomized,  prospective
study. J Parent Enter Nutr 1992;16:59--63.
 156.Schleder B, Stott K, Lloyd RC. The effect of a comprehensive oral care protocol
on patients at risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia. J 
Advocate Health Care 2002;4:27--30.
 157.Yoneyama T, Yoshida M, Ohrui T, et al. Oral care reduces pneumonia in older
patients in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 2002;50:430--3.
 158.DeRiso  AJII,  Ladowski  JS,  Dillon  TA,  Justice  JW,  Peterson  AC.  Chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12% oral rinse reduces the incidence of 
total  nosocomial  respiratory  infections  and  nonprophylactic  antibiotic  use  in  patients
undergoing heart surgery. Chest 1996;109:1556--61.
 159.Bergmans  D,  Bonten  M,  Gaillard  C,  et  al.  Prevention  of  ventilator-associated
pneumonia by oral decontamination: a prospective, 
randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
2001;164:382--8.
 160.Bonten MJM, Gaillard CA, van der Geest S, et al. The role of intragastric acidity
and stress ulcer prophylaxis on colonization and infection 
in  mechanically  ventilated  patients:  a  stratified,  ramdomized,  double-blind  study  of
sucralfate versus antacids. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995;152:1825--34.
 161.Cook D, Guyatt G, Marshall J, et al. A comparison of sucralfate and ranitidine for
the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients requiring mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 791--7.
 162.Cook  DJ,  Reeve  BK,  Guyatt  GH,  et  al.  Stress  ulcer  prophylaxis  in  critically  ill
patients: resolving discordant meta-analyses. JAMA 
1996;275:308--14.
 163.Messori A, Trippoli Sl, Vaiani M, Gorini M, Corrado A. Bleeding and pneumonia in
intensive care patients given ranitidine and sucralfate 
for prevention of stress ulcer: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J
2000;321:1103--6.
 164.Simms HH, DeMaria E, McDonald L, Peterson D, Robinson A, Burchard KW. Role
of gastric colonization in the development of pneumonia 
in  critically  ill  trauma  patients:  results  of  a  prospective  randomized  trial.  J  Trauma
1991;31:531--6.
 165.Thomason  MH,  Payseur  ES,  Hakenewerth  AM,  et  al.  Nosocomial  pneumonia  in
ventilated trauma patients during stress ulcer prophylaxis 
with sucralfate, antacid, and ranitidine. J Trauma-Injury Infect Crit Care 1996; 41:503--8.
 166.Tryba M. Risk of acute stress bleeding and nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated
intensive care unit patients: sucralfate versus antacids. Am J 
Med 1987;83:117--24.
 167.Yildizdas D, Yapicioglu H, Yilmaz HL. Occurrence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia in mechanically ventilated pediatric intensive care 
patients during stress ulcer propohylaxis with sucralfate, ranitidine, and omeprazole. J
Crit Care 2002;17:240--5.
 168.Abele-Horn  M,  Dauber  A,  Bauernfeind  A,  et  al.  Decrease  in  nosocomial
pneumonia in ventilated patients by selective 
oropharyngeal decontamination: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the 
effect of a novel regimen. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:187--95.
 169.D'Amico  R,  Pifferi  S,  Leonetti  C,  Torri  V,  Tinazzi  A,  Liberati  A.  Effectiveness  of
antibiotic prophylaxis in critically ill patients: systemic 
review of randomised controlled trials. Brit Med J 1998;316:1275--85.
 170.Langlois-Karaga A, Bues-Charbit M, Davignon A, et al. Selective 
digestive decontamination in multiple trauma patients: cost and 
efficacy. Pharmacy World and Science 1995;17:12--6.
 171.Nathens  AB,  Marshall  JC.  Selective  decontamination  of  the  digestive  tract  in
surgical patients: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg 1999;134:170--6.
 172.Quinio  B,  Albanese  J,  Bues-Charbit  M,  Viviand  X,  Martin  C.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in multiple trauma 
patients:  a  prospective  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study.  Chest
1996;109:765--72.
 173.Stoutenbeek  CP,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Miranda  DR,  Zandstra  DF.  The  effect  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract on colonisation 
and infection rate in multiple trauma patients. Intensive Care Med 1984;10:185--92.
 174.Unertl  K,  Ruckdeschel  G,  Selbmann  HK,  et  al.  Prevention  of  colonization  and
respiratory infections in long-term ventilated patients by 
local antimicrobial prophylaxis. Intensive Care Med 1987;13:106--13.
 175.Kerver JH, Rommes JH, Mevissen-Verhage EAE, et al. Prevention of colonization
and infection in critically ill patients: a prospective 
randomized study. Crit Care Med 1988;16:1087--93.
 176.Ledingham  IM,  Alcock  SR,  Eastaway  AT,  McDonald  JC,  Mckay  IC,  Ramsay  G.
Triple regimen of selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract, systemic cefotaxime, and microbiological surveillance for prevention of acquired
infection in intensive care. Lancet 1988;1:785--90.
 177.Brun-Buisson C, Legrand P, Rauss A, et al. Intestinal decontamination for control
of nosocomial multiresistant gram-negative bacilli: study of 
an outbreak in an intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:873--81.
 178.Ulrich  C,  Harinck-de  Weerd  JE,  Bakker  NC,  Jacz  K,  Doornbos  L,  de  Ridder  VA.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract with 
norfloxacin  in  the  prevention  of  ICU-acquired  infections:  a  prospective  randomized
study. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:424--31.
 179.Flaherty  J,  Nathan  C,  Kabins  SA,  Weinstein  RA.  Pilot  trial  of  selective
decontamination for prevention of bacterial infection in an intensive 
care unit. J Infect Dis 1990;162:1393--7.
 180.Godard  J,  Guillaume  C,  Reverdy  ME,  et  al.  Intestinal  decontamination  in  a
polyvalent ICU: a double-blind study. Intensive Care 
Med 1990;16:307--11.
 181.McClelland P, Murray AE, Williams PS, et al. Reducing sepsis in severe combined
acute renal and respiratory failure by selective 
decontamination of the digestive tract. Crit Care Med 1990;18:935--9.
 182.Rodriguez-Roldan JM, Altuna-Cuesta A, Lopez A, et al. Prevention of nosocomial
lung infection in ventilated patients: use of an 
antimicrobial pharyngeal non-absorbable paste. Crit Care Med 1990;18: 1239--42.
 183.Tetteroo GWM, Wagenvoort JHT, Castelein A, Tilanus HW, Ince C, Bruining HA.
Selective decontamination to reduce 
gram-negative  colonisation  and  infections  after  oesophageal  resection.  Lancet
1990;335:704--7.
 184.Aerdts  SJA,  van  Daelen  R,  Clasener  HAL,  Festen  J,  Van  Lier  HJJ,  Vollaard  EJ.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of respiratory tract infection in 
mechanically ventilated patients: a prospective, blinded, randomized trial of the effect
of a novel regimen. Chest 1991;100:783--91.
 185.Blair P, Rowlands BJ, Lowry K, Webb H, Armstrong P, Smilie J. 
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract: a stratified, 
randomized,  prospective  study  in  a  mixed  intensive  care  unit.  Surgery  1991;
110:303--10.
 186.Fox  MA,  Peterson  S,  Fabri  BM,  Van  Saene  HKF,  Williets  T.  Selective
decontamination of the digestive tract in cardiac surgical patients. Crit 
Care Med 1991;19:1486--90.
 187.Hartenauer U, Thulig B, Diemer W, et al. Effect of selective flora suppression on
colonization, infection and mortality in critically ill patients: 
a one-year, prospective, consecutive study. Crit Care Med 1991;19:463--73.
 188.Pugin  J,  Auckenthaler  R,  Lew  DP,  Suter  PM.  Oropharyngeal  decontamination
decreases incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. JAMA 1991;265:2704--10.
 189.Vandenbroucke-Grauls
 CMJE,
 Vandenbroucke
 JP.
 Effect
 of
 selective
decontamination of the digestive tract on respiratory tract infections 
and mortality in the intensive care unit. Lancet 1991;338:859--62.
 190.Cockerill FR, Muller SM, Anhalt JP, et al. Prevention of infection on critically ill
patients by selective decontamination of the digestive tract. 
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:545--53.
 191.Gastinne  H,  Wolff  M,  Delatour  F,  Faurisson  F,  Chevret  S.  A  controlled  trial  in
intensive care units of selective decontamination of the 
digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibiotics. N Engl J Med 1992;326:594--9.
 192.Hammond  JMJ,  Potgieter  PD,  Saunders  GL,  Forder  AA.  Double-blind  study  of
selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
intensive care. Lancet 1992;340:5--9.
 193.Rocha LA, Martin MJ, Pita S, et al. Prevention of nosocomial infection in critically
ill patients by selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Intensive  Care  Med
1992;18:398--404.
 194.Winter  R,  Humphreys  H,  Pick  A,  MacGowan  P,  Willatts  SM,  Speller  DCE.  A
controlled trial of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  intensive  care  and  its  effect  on  nosocomial  infection.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother
1992;30:73--87.
 195.Korinek  AM,  Laisne  MJ,  Nicolas  MH,  Raskine  L,  Deroin  V,  Sanson-Lepors  MJ.
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract in 
neurosurgical
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients:
 a
 double-blind,
 randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Crit Care Med 1993;21:1466--73.
 196.Selective Decontamination of the Digestive Tract Trialists' Collaborative Group.
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials of 
selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Brit Med J 1993;307: 525--32.
 197.Ferrer  M,  Torres  A,  Gonzalez  J,  et  al.  Utility  of  selective  digestive
decontamination in mechanically ventilated patients. Ann Intern 
Med 1994;120:389--95.
 198.Nau  R,  Ruchel  R,  Mergerian  H,  Wegener  U,  Winkelmann  T,  Prange  HW.
Emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria during 
selective
 decontamination
 of
 the
 digestive
 tract.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother
1990;25:881--3.
 199.Sanchez Garcia M, Cambronero Galache JA, Lopez Diaz J, et al. 
Effectiveness and cost of selective decontamination of the digestive tract 
in  crltically  ill  intubated  patients.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,
multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;158:908--16.
 200.Krueger WA, Lenhart FP, Neeser G, Ruckdeschel G, Schreckhase H, Eissner HJ et
al. Influence of combined intravenous and topical 
antibiotic prophylaxis on the incidences of infections, organ dysfunction, and mortality
in  critically  ill  surgical  patients:  a  prospective,  stratified,  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166:1029--37.
 201.Heyland DK, Bradley C, Mandell LA. Effect of acidified enteral feedings on gastric
colonization in the critically ill patient. Crit Care 
Med 1992;20:1388--94.
 202.Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Schoenfeld PS, Frietag A, Varon J, Wood G. The effect of
acidified enteral feeds on gastric colonization in critically 
ill patients: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1999;27:2399--406.
 203.Arozullah  AM,  Khuri  SF,  Henderson  WG,  Daley  J,  Participants  in  the  National
Veterans Affairs Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program:  development  and  validation  of  a  multifactorial  risk  index  for  predicting
postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac surgery. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;135:847--57.
 204.Brooks-Brunn JA. Predictors of postoperative pulmonary complications following
abdominal surgery. Chest 1997;111:564--71.
 205.Chumillas  S,  Ponce  JL,  Delgado  F,  Viciano  V,  Mateu  M.  Prevention  of
postoperative pulmonary complications through respiratory rehabilitation: 
a controlled clinical study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 1998;79:5--9.
  206Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in 
the prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications after 
upper abdominal surgery? A systematic overview and meta-analysis. Physical 
Therapy 1994;74:3--10.
 207.Hall JC, Tarala RA, Tapper J, Hall JL. Prevention of respiratory complications after
abdominal surgery: a randomised clinical trial. Br Med 
J 1996;312:148--52.
 208.Sirvent JM, Torres A, El-ebiary M, Castro P, de Batlle J, Bonet A. Protective effect
of intravenously administered cefuroxime against 
nosocomial  pneumonia  in  patients  with  structural  coma.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med
1997;155:1729--34.
 209.Gruson D, Hilbert G, Vargas F, et al. Rotation and restricted use of antibiotics in
a medical intensive care unit: impact on the incidence of 
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:837--43.
 210.Kollef  MH,  Vlasnik  J,  Sharpless  L,  Pasque  C,  Murphy  D,  Fraser  V.  Scheduled
change of antibiotic classes: a strategy to decrease the incidence 
of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1040--8.
 211.deBoisblanc BP, Castro M, Everret B, Grender J, Walker CD, Summer WR. Effect
of air-supported, continuous, postural oscillation on the risk 
of early ICU pneumonia in nontraumatic critical illness. Chest 1993;103:1543--7.
 212.Fink  MP,  Helsmoortel  CM,  Stein  KL,  Lee  PC,  Cohn  SM.  The  efficacy  of  an
oscillating bed in the prevention of lower respiratory tract infection 
in critically ill victims of blunt trauma: a prospective study. Chest 1990;97:132--7.
 213.Gentilello L, Thompson DA, Tonnesen AS, et al. Effect of a rotating bed on the
incidence of pulmonary complications in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care Med 1988;16:783--6.
 214.Kirschenbaum L, Azzi E, Sfeir T, Tietjen P, Astiz M. Effect of continuous lateral
rotational therapy on the prevalence of 
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  in  patients  requiring  long  term  ventilatory  care.  Crit
Care Med 2002;30:1983--6.
 215.Summer WR, Curry P, Haponik EF, Nelson S, Elston R. Continuous mechanical
turning of intensive care unit patients shortens length of stay 
in some diagnostic-related groups. J Crit Care 1989;4:45--53.
 216.Whiteman K, Nachtmann L, Kramer D, Sereika S, Bierman M. 
Effects  of  continuous  lateral  rotation  therapy  on  pulmonary  complications  in  liver
transplant patients. Am J Crit Care 1995;4:133--9.
 217.Le Saux NM, Sekla L, McLeod J, et al. Epidemic of nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease in renal transplant recipients: a case-control 
and environmental study. Can Med Assoc J 1989;140:1047--53.
 218.Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for Legionnaires' disease: risk
factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern 
Med 1994;154:2417--22.
 219.Kirby BD, Snyder KM, Meyer RD, Finegold SM. Legionnaires' disease: report of
sixty-five nosocomially acquired cases and review of the 
literature. Medicine 1980;59:188--205.
 220.Haley  CE,  Cohen  ML,  Halter  J,  Meyer  RD.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:  a
continuing common-source epidemic at Wadsworth 
Medical Center. Ann Int Med 1979;90:583--6.
 221.Bock BV, Kirby BD, Edelstein PH, et al. Legionnaires' disease in 
renal transplant recipients. Lancet 1978;1:410--3.
 222.Brady  MT.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease  in  a  children's  hospital.  J  Pediatr
1989;115:46--50.
 223.Jimenez  ML,  Aspa  J,  Padilla  B,  et  al.  Fiberoptic  bronchoscopic  diagnosis  of
pulmonary disease in 151 HIV-infected patients with pneumonitis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10:491--7.
 224.Chow  JW,  Yu  VL.  Legionella:  a  major  opportunistic  pathogen  in  transplant
recipients. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:132--9.
 225.Brennen C, Vickers RM, Yu VL, Puntereri A, Yee YC. Discovery of occult legionella
pneumonia in a long-stay hospital: results of 
prospective serologic survey. Br Med J 1987;295:306--7.
 226.Lepine  LA,  Jernigan  DB,  Butler  JC,  et  al.  A  recurrent  outbreak  of  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease detected by urinary antigen testing: evidence 
for long-term colonization of a hospital plumbing system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:905--10.
 227.Fiore AE, Butler JC, Emori TG, Gaynes RP. A survey of methods used to detect
nosocomial legionellosis among participants in the 
National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  System.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:412--6.
 228.Kool  JL,  Fiore  AE,  Kioski  CM,  et  al.  More  than  10  years  of  unrecognized
nosocomial transmission of Legionnaires' disease among 
transplant patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:898--904.
 229.Alary  MA,  Joly  JR.  Factors  contributing  to  the  contamination  of  hospital  water
distribution systems by 
Legionellae. J Infect Dis 1992;165:565--9.
 230.Best MG, Yu VL, Stout J, Goetz A, Muder RR, Taylor F. 
Legionellaceae in the hospital water supply: epidemiologic link with disease and 
evaluation of a method for control of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease and Pittsburgh
pneumonia. Lancet 1983;2:307--10.
 231.Goetz AM, Yu VL. Screening for nosocomial legionellosis by culture of the water
supply and targeting of high risk patients for 
specialized laboratory testing. Am J Infect Control 1991;19:63--6.
 232.Johnson JT, Yu VL, Best MG, et al. Nosocomial legionellosis in surgical patients
with head and neck cancer: implications for 
epidemiological reservoir and mode of transmission. Lancet 1985;2:298--300.
 233.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  Bezanson  G,  Peppard  R.  Each  water  outlet  is  a  unique
ecologic niche for 
Legionella pneumophila. Epidemiol Infect 1992;108:261--70.
 234.Marrie TJ, MacDonald S, Clarke K, Haldane D. Nosocomial 
Legionnaires' disease: lessons from a four year prospective study. Am J Infect 
Control 1991;19:79--85.
 235.Redd  SC,  Cohen  ML.  Legionella  in  water:  what  should  be  done?  JAMA
1987;257:1221--2.
 236.Tobin JO, Swann RA, Bartlett CLR. Isolation of 
Legionella pneumophila from water systems: methods and preliminary results. Br Med 
J 1981;282:515--7.
 237.Yu VL. Nosocomial legionellosis: current epidemiologic issues. In: Remington JS,
Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious 
Diseases. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
 238.Yu VL, Beam TR, Jr., Lumish RM, et al. Routine culturing for 
Legionella in the hospital environment may be a good idea: a three-hospital prospective
study. Am J Med Sci 1987;294:97--9.
 239.CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients. 
MMWR 2000;49:(No. RR-10). 
 240.Pannuti  CS.  Hospital  environment  for  high-risk  patients.  In:  Wenzel  RP,  ed.
Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. Baltimore, Maryland: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
 241.Patterson WJ, Hay J, Seal DV, McLuckie JC. Colonization of transplant unit water
supplies with Legionella and protozoa: precautions required to 
reduce the risk of legionellosis. J Hosp Infect 1997;37:7--17.
 242.Woo AH, Yu VL, Goetz A. Potential in-hospital modes of transmission of 
Legionella pneumophila. Demonstration experiments for dissemination 
by  showers,  humidifiers,  and  rinsing  of  ventilation  bag  apparatus.  Am  J  Med
1986;80:567--73.
 243.Zuravleff JJ, Yu VL, Shonnard JW, Rihs JD, Best M. 
Legionella pneumophila contamination of a hospital humidifier: demonstration of 
aerosol transmission and subsequent subclinical infection in 
exposed guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:657--61.
 244.American  Society  for  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ASHRAE Guideline 12-2000: minimizing the risk of 
legionellosis associated with building water systems. Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc, 2000.
 245.Department of Health and Social Security and the Welsh Office. The control of 
Legionellae in health care premises: a code of practice. 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office. London, HMSO, 1991.
 246.Ezzeddine H, Van Ossel C, Delmee M, Wauters G. 
Legionella spp. in a hospital hot water system: effect of control measures. J Hosp 
Infect 1989;13:121--31.
 247.Mandel AS, Sprauer MA, Sniadack DH, Ostroff SM. State regulation of hospital
water temperature. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1993;14:642--5.
 248.Snyder MB, Siwicki M, Wireman J, et al. Reduction 
of Legionella pneumophila through heat flushing followed by continuous 
supplemental chlorination of hospital hot water. J Infect Dis 1990;162:127--32.
 249.Health and Safety Commission. Legionnaires' disease: the control of Legionella
bacteria in water systems. Approved code of practice and 
guidance. 3rd ed. United Kingdom: HSA Books, 2000.
 250.Biurrun A, Caballero M, Pelaz C, Leon E, Gago A. Treatment of a 
Legionella pneumophila-colonized water distribution system using 
copper-silver  ionization  and  continuous  chlorination.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:426--8.
 251.Domingue EL, Tyndall RL, Mayberry WR, Pancorbo OC. Effects of three oxidizing
biocides of 
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 1988;54:741--7.
 252.Edelstein  PH,  Whittaker  RE,  Kreiling  RL,  Howell  CL.  Efficacy  of  ozone  in
eradication 
of Legionella pneumophila from hospital plumbing 
fixtures. Appl Environ Microbiol 1982;44:1330--3.
 253.Goetz  AM,  Yu  VL.  Copper-silver  ionization:  cautious  optimism  for  Legionella
disinfection and implications for environmental culturing. Am 
J Infect Control 1997;25:449--51.
 254.Hall  KK,  Giannetta  ET,  Getchell-White  SI,  Durbin  LJ,  Farr  BM.  Ultraviolet  light
disinfection of hospital water for preventing 
nosocomial  Legionella  infection:  a  13-year  follow-up.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:580--3.
 255.Landeen LK, Yahya MT, Gerba CP. Efficacy of copper and silver ions and reduced
levels of free chlorine in inactivation of 
Legionella pneumophila. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989; 55(12):3045--50.
 256.Lin YS, Stout JE, Yu VL, Vidic RD. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella. Seminars Respir Infect 1998;13:147--59.
 257.Liu Z, Stout JE, Tedesco L, et al. Controlled evaluation of copper-silver ionization
in eradicating 
Legionella pneumophila from a hospital 
water distribution system. J Infect Dis 1994;169:919--22.
 258.Matulonis U, Rosenfield CS, Shadduck RK. Prevention of 
Legionella  infections  in  a  bone  marrow  transplant  unit:  multifaceted  approach  to
decontamination of a water system. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:571--5. 
 259.Mietzner  S,  Schwille  RC,  Farley  A,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  thermal  treatment  and
copper-silver ionization for controlling 
Legionella pneumophila in high-volume hot water plumbing systems in hospitals. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:452--7.
 260.Muraca P, Stout JE, Yu VL. Comparative assessment of chlorine, heat, ozone, and
UV light for killing 
Legionella  pneumophila  within  a  model  plumbing  system.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol
1987;53:447--53.
 261.Muraca PW, Yu VL, Goetz A. Disinfection of water distribution systems for 
Legionella: a review of application procedures and 
methodologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:79--88.
 262.Rohr U, Senger M, Selenka F, Turley R, Wilhelm M. Four years of experience with
silver-copper ionization for control of 
Legionella in a German university hospital hot water plumbing system. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1507--11.
 263.Srinivasan A, Bova G, Ross T, et al. A 17-month evaluation of a chlorine dioxide
water treatment system to control 
Legionella  species  in  a  hospital  water  supply.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2003;24:575--9.
 264.Stout JE, Lin YS, Goetz AM, Muder RR. Controlling 
Legionella in hospital water systems: experience with the superheat-and-flush method 
and copper-silver ionization. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:911--4.
 265.Stout J, Yu VL. Experiences of the first 16 hospitals using copper-silver ionization
for 
Legionella control: implications for the evaluation of 
other disinfection modalities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:563--8.
 266.Heffelfinger JD, Kool JL, Fridkin S, et al. Risk of hospital-acquired Legionnaires'
disease in cities using monochloramine versus 
other water disinfectants. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:569--74.
 267.Walker JT, Mackerness C.W., Mallon D, Makin T, Williets T, Keevil CW. Control of 
Legionella pneumophila in a hospital water system by 
chlorine dioxide. J Indust Microbiol 1995;15:384--90.
 268.Kool  JL,  Carpenter  JC,  Fields  BS.  Effect  of  monochloramine  disinfection  of
municipal drinking water on risk of nosocomial Legionnaires' 
disease. Lancet 1999; 353(9149):272--7.
 269.Bollin GE, Plouffe JF, Para MF, Hackman B. Aerosols containing 
Legionella pneumophila generated by shower heads and hot-water faucets. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1985;50:1128--31.
 270.Breiman  RF,  VanLoock  FL,  Sion  JP,  et  al.  Association  of  "sink  bathing"  and
Legionnaires' disease. Abstracts of the 91st Meeting of the 
American Society for Microbiology 1991.
 271.Marrie  TJ,  Haldane  D,  MacDonald  S,  et  al.  Control  of  endemic  nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease by using sterile potable water for high 
risk patients. Epidemiol Infect 1991;107:591--605.
 272.Fiore AE, Nuorti JP, Levine OS, et al. Epidemic Legionnaires' disease two decades
later: old sources, new diagnostic methods. Clin Infect 
Dis 1998;26:426--33.
 273.Breiman RF, Fields BS, Sanden GN, Volmer L, Meier A, Spika JS. Association of
shower use with Legionnaires' disease: possible role of 
amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924--6.
 274.Dondero TJ, Rendtorff RC, Mallison GF, et al. An outbreak of 
Legionnaires' disease associated with a contaminated air-conditioning 
cooling tower. N Engl J Med 1980;302:365--70.
 275.Garbe  PL,  Davis  BJ,  Weisfeld  JS,  et  al.  Nosocomial  Legionnaires'  disease:
epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. 
JAMA 1985;254:521--4.
 276.Hanrahan  JP,  Morse  DL,  Scharf  VB,  et  al.  A  community  hospital  outbreak  of
legionellosis: transmission by potable hot water. Am J 
Epidemiol 1987; 125:639--49.
 277.Johnston JM, Latham RH, Meier FA, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of Legionnaires'
disease: molecular epidemiology and disease control 
measures. Infect Control 1987;8:53--8.
 278.O'Mahony  MC,  Stanwell-Smith  RE,  Tillett  HE,  et  al.  The  Stafford  outbreak  of
Legionnaires' disease. Epidemiol Infect 1990;104:361--80.
 279.Pruckler JM, Mermel LA, Benson RF, et al. Comparison of 
Legionella pneumophila isolates by arbitrarily primed PCR and 
pulsed-field  electrophoresis:  analysis  from  seven  epidemic  investigations.  J  Clin
Microbiol 1995;33:2872--5.
 280.Schoonmaker  D,  Heimberger  T,  Birkhead  G.  Comparison  of  ribotyping  and
restriction enzyme analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
for  distinguishing  Legionella  pneumophila  isolates  obtained  during  a  nosocomial
outbreak. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:1491--8.
 281.Struelens MJ, Maes N, Rost F, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic methods for the
investigation of a nosocomial 
Legionella  pneumophila  outbreak  and  efficacy  of  control  measures.  J  Infect  Dis
1992;166:22--30.
 282.Whitney CG, Hofmann J, Pruckler JM, et al. The role of arbitrarily primed PCR in
identifying the source of an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease. 
J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:1800--4.
 283.Best MG, Goetz A, Yu VL. Heat eradication measures for control of nosocomial
Legionnaires' disease. Implementation, education and 
cost analysis. Infect Control 1984;12:26--30.
 284.CDC. Sustained transmission of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease---Arizona and
Ohio. MMWR 1997;46:416--21.
          
 285.Helms CM, Massanari RM, Wenzel RP, Pfaller MA, Moyer NP, Hall N. Legionnaires'
disease associated with a hospital water system: a 
five-year progress report on continuous hyperchlorination. JAMA 1988;259:2423--7.
 286.Christie  CD,  Glover  AM,  Willke  MJ,  Marx  ML,  Reising  SF,  Hutchinson  NM.
Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital 
during  the  Greater  Cincinnati  epidemic  of  1993.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1995;16:556--63.
 287.Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized management of
patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861--4.
 288.CDC. Guidelines for the control of pertussis outbreaks. 2002. 
Atlanta, GA: US DHHS, CDC, 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mip/publications/pertussis/guide.htm.
 289.Gardner  P.  Indications  for  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  in  adults:  the  case  for
selective, rather than universal, recommendations. Clin 
Infect Dis 1999;28:S131--5.
 290.Linnemann CC, Jr., Ramundo N, Perlstein PH, Minton SD, Englender GS. Use of
pertussis vaccine in an epidemic involving hospital staff. 
Lancet 1975;2:540--3.
 291.Orenstein  WA.  Pertussis  in  adults:  epidemiology,  signs,  symptoms,  and
implications for vaccination. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:S147--50.
 292.Wright  SW,  Decker  MD,  Edwards  KM.  Incidence  of  pertussis  infection  in
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:120--3.
 293.CDC.  Pertussis  vaccination:  use  of  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  among  infants
and young children: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committtee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-7). 
 294.Shefer A, Dales L, Nelson M, Werner B, Baron R, Jackson R. Use and safety of
acellular Pertussis vaccine among adult hospital staff during 
an outbreak of pertussis. J Infect Dis 1995;171:1053--6.
 295. CDC. Recommended childhood immunization 
          schedule---United States, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:574. 
 296.Halsey  N,  Galazka  A.  The  efficacy  of  DPT  and  oral  poliomyelitis  immunization
schedules initiated from birth to 12 weeks of age. Bull 
WHO 1985;63:1151--69.
 297.Grimprel  E,  Begue  P,  Anjak  I,  Betsou  F,  Guiso  N.  Comparison  of  polymerase
chain reaction, culture, and western immunoblot serology 
for diagnosis of Bordetella pertussis infection. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:2745--50.
 298.Mastrantonio  P,  Stefanelli  P,  Giuliano  M.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  for  the
detection of 
Bordetella pertussis in clinical nasopharyngeal 
aspirates. J Med Microbiol 1996;44:261--6.
 299.Matlow  AG,  Nelson  S,  Wray  R,  Cox  P.  Nosocomial  acquisition  of  pertussis
diagnosed by polymerase chain reaction. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:715--6.
 300.van  der  Zee  A,  Agterberg  C,  Peeters  M,  Mooi  F,  Schellekens  J.  A  clinical
validation of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis  polymerase  chain  reaction:  comparison  with  culture  and  serology  using
samples from patients with suspected whooping cough from a highly 
immunized population. J Infect Dis 1996;174:89--96.
 301.Gehanno  JF,  Pestel-Caron  M,  Nouvellon  M,  Caillard  JF.  Nosocomial  pertussis  in
healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in 
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549--52.
 302.Halperin SA, Bortolussi R, Langley JM, Eastwood BJ, De Serres G. A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin 
estolate chemoprophylaxis for household contacts of children with 
culture-positive Bordetella pertussis infection. [Abstract] Pediatrics 1999;104:953.
 303.CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for vaccine and other
preventive measures: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-10). 
 304.Cooper WO, Griffin MR, Arbogast P, Hickson GB, Gautam S, Ray WA. Very early
exposures to erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic 
pyloric stenosis. Arch Ped Adol Med 2002;156:647--50.
 305.Halperin  SA,  Bortolussi  R,  Langley  JM,  Miller  B,  Eastwood  BJ.  Seven  days  of
erythromycin estolate is as effective as fourteen days for the treatment 
of Bordetella pertussis infection. Pediatrics 1997;100:65--71.
 306.Honein  MA,  Paulozzi  LJ,  Himelright  IM,  et  al.  Infantile  hypertrophic  pyloric
stenosis after pertussis prophylaxis with erythromycin: a case 
review and cohort study. Lancet 1999;354:2101--5.
 307.Halperin  SA.  Pertussis  control  in  Canada.  Canad  Med  Assoc  J  2003;
168:1389--90.
 308.Aoyama  T,  Sumakawa  K,  Iwata  S,  Takeuchi  Y,  Fuji  R.  Efficacy  of  short-term
treatment of pertussis with clarithromycin and azithromycin. J 
Pediatr 1996;129:761--4.
 309.Hoppe JE, Bryskier A. In vitro susceptibilities of 
Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella 
parapertussis to two ketolides (HMR 3004 and HMR 3647), 
four macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin A, and roxithromycin), and
two ansamycins (rifampin and rifapentine). 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998;42:965--6.
 310.Hoppe  JE,  Halm  U,  Hagedorn  HJ,  Kraminer-Hagedorn  A.  Comparison  of
erythromycin ethylsuccinate and co-trimoxazole for treatment 
of pertussis. Infection 1989;17:227--31.
 311.Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possible spread by a
hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520--1.
 312.Gerson  SL,  Talbot  GH,  Hurwitz  S,  Strom  BL,  Lusk  EJ,  Cassileth  PA.  Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive 
pulmonary
 aspergillosis
 in
 patients
 with
 acute
 leukemia.
 Ann
 Intern
 Med
1984;100:345--51.
 313.Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive 
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell tansplant recipients: changes in epidemiology 
and risk factors. Blood 2002;100:4358--66.
 314.Pannuti CS, Gingrich R, Pfaller MA, Kao C, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial pneumonia in
patients having bone marrow transplant: attributable 
mortality and risk factors. Cancer 1992;69:2653--62.
 315.Paterson  DL,  Singh  N.  Invasive  aspergillosis  in  transplant  recipients.  Medicine
1999;78:123--38.
 316.Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology 
of  Aspergillus  infections  in  a  large  cohort  of  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow
transplantation. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1459--66.
 317.Wingard JR, Beals SU, Santos GW, Mertz WG, Saral R. 
Aspergillus  infections  in  bone  marrow  transplant  recipients.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1987;2:175--81.
 318.Kramer  MR,  Marshall  SE,  Starnes  VA,  Gamberg  P,  Amitai  Z,  Theodore  J.
Infectious complications in heart-lung transplantation: analysis of 
200 episodes. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:2010--6.
 319.Gustafson TL, Schaffner W, Lavely GB, Stratton CW, Johnson HK, Hutcheson RH,
Jr. Invasive aspergillosis in renal transplant 
recipients: correlation with corticosteroid therapy. J Infect Dis 1983;148: 230--8.
 320.Riley  DK,  Pavia  AT,  Beatty  PG,  Denton  D,  Carroll  KC.  Surveillance  cultures  in
bone marrow transplant recipients: worthwhile or wasteful? 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1995;15:469--73.
 321.Walsh  TJ.  Role  of  surveillance  cultures  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  fungal
infections. NCI Monogr 1990;9:43--5.
 322.Richardson  MD,  Rennie  S,  Marshall  I,  et  al.  Fungal  surveillance  of  an  open
haematology ward. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:288--92.
 323.Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayhall CG, 
ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 1999.
 324.Oren  I,  Haddad  N,  Finkelstein  R,  Rowe  JM.  Invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis  in
neutropenic patients during hospital construction: before 
and  after  chemoprophylaxis  and  institution  of  HEPA  filters.  Am  J  Hematol  2001;
66:257--62.
 325.Rice  N,  Streifel  A,  Vesley  D.  An  evaluation  of  hospital  special-ventilation-room
pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19--23.
 326.Sherertz  RJ,  Belani  A,  Kramer  BS,  et  al.  Impact  of  air  filtration  on  nosocomial
Aspergillus infections: unique risk of bone marrow 
transplant recipients. Am J Med 1987;83:709--18.
 327.Thio  CL,  Smith  D,  Merz  WG,  et  al.  Refinements  of  environmental  assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in 
a  leukemia  and  bone  marrow  transplant  unit.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:18--23.
 328.Buckner  CD,  Clift  RA,  Sanders  JE,  et  al.  Protective  environment  for  marrow
transplant recipients: a prospective study. Ann Intern 
Med 1978;89:893--901.
 329.Loo VG, Bertrand C, Dixon C, et al. Control of 
construction-associated  nosocomial  aspergillosis  in  an  antiquated  hematology  unit.
Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:360--4.
 330.Walter EA, Bowden RA. Infection in the bone marrow transplant recipient. Infect
Dis Clin N Am 1995;9:823--47.
 331.Walsh  TR,  Guttendorf  J,  Dummer  S,  et  al.  The  value  of  protective  isolation
procedures in cardiac transplant recipients. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1989;47:539--44.
 332.Vesley  D,  Streifel  AJ.  Environmental  Services.  In:  Mayhall  CG,  ed.  Hospital
epidemiology and infection control. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
 333.Anderson  K,  Morris  G,  Kennedy  H,  et  al.  Aspergillosis  in  immunocompromised
paediatric patients: associations with building hygiene, design, 
and indoor air. Thorax 1996;51:256--61.
 334.Rhame  FS,  Streifel  A,  Kersey  JH,  Jr.,  McGlave  PB.  Extrinsic  risk  factors  for
pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection. Am J 
Med 1984;76:42--52.
 335.Gerson  SL,  Parker  P,  Jacobs  MR,  Creger  R,  Lazarus  HM.  Aspergillosis  due  to
carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994;15:221--3.
 336.Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on transport
from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in 
nosocomial
 aspergillosis
 during
 construction.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
2002;23:41--3.
 337.Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental 
microbiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J 
Epidemiol 1989;5:131--42.
 338.Weems JJ, Jr., Davis BJ, Tablan OC, Kaufman L, Martone WJ. Construction activity:
an independent risk factor for invasive aspergillosis 
and zygomycosis in patients with hematologic malignancy. Infect Control 1987;8:71--5.
 339.Arnow PM, Anderson RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pulmonary 
aspergillosis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49--53.
 340.Krasinski  K,  Holzman  RS,  Hanna  B,  Greco  MA,  Graff  M,  Bhogal  M.  Nosocomial
fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect 
Control 1985;6:278--82.
 341.Lass-Flörl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. 
Aspergillus terreus infections in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology 
suggests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31--5.
 342.Aisner J, Schimpff SC, Bennett JE, Young VM, Wiernik PH. 
Aspergillus infections in cancer patients. Association with fireproofing materials in 
a new hospital. JAMA 1976;235:411--2.
 343.Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Jr., Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG. Efficacy of
infection control measures during a nosocomial outbreak 
of  disseminated  aspergillosis  associated  with  hospital  construction.  J  Infect  Dis
1986;153:634--7.
 344.Streifel AJ, Vesley D, Rhame FS, Murray B. Control of airborne fungal spores in a
university hospital. Environment International 1989;12:441--4.
 345.Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy 
recipients:
 a
 meta
 analysis
 of
 randomized-controlled
 clinical
 trials.
 Cancer
2002;94:3230--46.
 346.Conneally  E,  Cafferkey  MT,  Daly  PA,  Keane  CT,  McCann  SR.  Nebulized
amphotericin B as prophylaxis against invasive aspergillosis 
in granulocytopenic patients. Bone Marrow Transpl 1990;5:403--6.
 347.Gotzsche  PC,  Krogh  Johansen  H.  Meta-analysis  of  prophylactic  or  empirical
antifungal treatment versus placebo or no treatment in 
patients with cancer complicated by neutropenia. Brit Med J 1997;314:1238--44.
 348.Gubbins PO, Bowman JL, Penzak SR. Antifungal prophylaxis to prevent invasive
mycoses among bone marrow transplantation 
recipients. Pharmacotherapy 1998;18:549--64.
 349.Harousseau  JL,  Dekker  AW,  Stamatoullas-Bastard  A,  et  al.  Itraconazole  oral
solution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients 
with hematological malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind,
double-placebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole 
and amphoteticin B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;44:1887--93.
 350.Kelsey SM, Goldman JM, McCann S, et al. Liposomal amphotericin (AmBisome) in
the prophylaxis of fungal infection in neutropenic patients: 
a  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study.  Bone  Marrow  Transplant
1999;23:163--8.
 351.Minari A, Husni R, Avery RK, et al. The incidence of invasive aspergillosis among
solid organ transplant recipients and implications for prophylaxis 
in lung transplants. Transplant Infect Dis 2002;4:195--200.
 352.Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW. A
randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus 
fluconazole  for  the  prevention  of  fungal  infections  in  patients  with  haematological
malignancies. Br J Haematol 1999;105:901--11.
 353.Nucci M, Biasoli I, Akiti T, et al. A double-blind, randomized placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis 
for neutropenic patients. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:300--5.
 354.Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive 
Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J Med 1991;91:484--92.
 355.Schwartz S, Behre G, Heinemann V, et al. Aerosolized amphotericin B inhalations
as prophylaxis of invasive 
Aspergillus  infections  during  prolonged  neutropenia:  results  of  a  prospective
randomized multicenter trial. Blood 1999;93:3654--61.
 356.Tsourounis  C,  Guglielmo  BJ.  Aerosolized  amphotericin  B  in  prophylaxis  of
pulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Pharmacother 1996;30: 1175--6.
 357.Karp JE, Burch PA, Merz WG. An approach to intensive antileukemia therapy in
patients with previous invasive aspergillosis. Am J 
Med 1988;85:203--6.
 358.Lupinetti  FM,  Behrendt  DM,  Giller  RH,  Trigg  ME,  de  Alarcon  P.  Pulmonary
resection for fungal infection in children undergoing bone 
marrow transplantation. J Thoracic Cardiovasc Surg 1992;104:684--7.
 359.Martino R, Lopez R, Sureda A, Brunet S, Domingo-Albos A. Risk of reactivation of
a recent invasive fungal infection in patients 
with hematological malignancies undergoing further intensive 
chemo-radiotherapy:  a  single-center  experience  and  review  of  the  literature.
Haematologica 1997;82:297--304.
 360.McWhinney  PHM,  Kibbler  CC,  Hamon  MD,  et  al.  Progress  in  the  diagnosis  and
management of aspergillosis in bone marrow 
transplantations: 13 years' experience. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:397--404.
 361.Michailov  G,  Laporte  JP,  Lesage  S,  et  al.  Autologous  bone-marrow
transplantation is feasible in patients with prior history of invasive 
pulmonary aspergillosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 1996;17:569--72.
 362.Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous 
aspergillosis on the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1098--103.
 363.Richard C, Romon I, Baro J, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis prior to BMT
in acute leukemia patients does not predict a poor 
outcome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1993;12:237--41.
 364.Macartney  KK,  Gorelick  MH,  Manning  ML,  Hodinka  RL,  Bell  LM.  Nosocomial
respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effectiveness and 
cost-benefit of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:520--6.
 365.Beekmann SE, Engler HD, Collins AS, Canosa J, Henderson DK, Freifeld A. Rapid
identification of respiratory viruses: impact on 
isolation practices and transmission among immunocompromised 
pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:581--6.
 366.Glezen WP, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Piedra PA, Couch RB. Impact of respiratory
virus infections on persons with chronic underlying 
conditions. JAMA 2000;283:499--505.
 367.Krasinski K, LaCouture R, Holzman RS, Waithe E, Bonk S, Hanna B. Screening for
respiratory syncytial virus and assignment to a 
cohort at admission to reduce nosocomial transmission. J Pediatr 1990;116:894--8.
 368.Madge  P,  Paton  JY,  McColl  JH,  Mackie  PL.  Prospective  controlled  study  of  four
infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079--83.
 369.Hall  CB,  Geiman  JM,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Meagher  MP.  Control  of  nosocomial
respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978; 62:728--32.
 370.Hall  CB,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.,  Schnabel  KC,  Geiman  JM.  Infectivity  of  respiratory
syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect 
Immun 1981;33:779--83.
 371.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr. Modes of transmission of respiratory syncytial virus. J
Pediatr 1981;99:100--3.
 372.Hall CB, Douglas RG, Jr., Geiman JM. Possible transmission by 
fomites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98--102.
 373.Hall CB. The nosocomial spread of respiratory syncytial viral infections. Ann Rev
Med 1983;34:311--9.
 374.Korniewicz  DM,  Laughon  BE,  Cyr  WH,  Lytle  CD,  Larson  E.  Leakage  of  virus
through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin 
Microbiol 1990;28:787--8.
 375.Lowbury  EJL,  Lilly  HA,  Bull  JP.  Disinfection  of  hands:  removal  of  transient
organisms. Br Med J 1964;2:230--3.
 376.Garcia  R,  Raad  I,  Abi-said  D,  et  al.  Nosocomial  respiratory  syncytial  virus
infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412--6.
 377.Snydman  DR,  Greer  C,  Meissner  HC,  McIntosh  K.  Prevention  of  nosocomial
transmission of respiratory syncytial virus in a newborn 
nursery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:105--8.
 378.American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus.  In:  Pickeing  LK,
editor. The red book 2003 report of the Committee on 
Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2003: 523--8.
 379.Groothuis JR, Simoes EA, Levin MJ, et al. Prophylactic administration of RSVIG to
high risk infants and young children. N Engl J 
Med 1993;329:1524--30.
 380.Anonymous.  Palivizumab,  a  humanized  respiratory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal
antibody, reduces hospitalization from respiratory syncytial 
virus infection in high-risk infants. Pediatrics 1998;102:531--7.
 381.Anonymous.  Reduction  of  RSV  hospitalization  among  premature  infants  and
infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia using respiratory 
syncytial virus immune globulin prophylaxis. Pediatrics 1997;99:93--9.
 382.American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention
of respiratory syncytial virus infections: indications for the use 
of palivizumab and update on the use of RSV-IGIV. Pediatrics 1998;102:1211--6.
  383Clark  SJ,  Beresford  MW,  Subhedar  NV,  Shaw  NJ.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus
infection in high-risk infants and the potential impact of 
prophylaxis in a United Kingdom cohort. Arch Dis Child 2000; 83:313--6.
 384.Kamal-Bahl  S,  Doshi  J,  Campbell  J.  Economic  analyses  of  respiratory  syncytial
virus immunoprophylaxis in high-risk infants: a systematic 
review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002;156:1034--41.
 385.Lofland  JH,  O'Connor  JP,  Chatterton  ML,  et  al.  Palivizumab  for  respiratory
syncytial virus prophylaxis in high-risk infants: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Clin Therapeutics 2000;22:1357--69.
 386.Robbins  JM,  Tilford  JM,  Jacobs  RF,  Wheeler  JG,  Gillaspy  SR,  Schutze  GE.  A
number-needed-to-treat analysis of the use of respiratory 
syncytial  virus  immune  globulin  to  prevent  hospitalization.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med
1998;152:358--66.
 387.Kim CS, Kristopaitis RJ, Stone E, Pelter M, Sandhu M, Weingarten SR. Physician
education and report cards: do they make the grade? Results from 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Med 1999;107:556--60.
 388.Nichol  KL.  Preventing  influenza:  the  physician's  role.  Seminars  Respir  Infect
1992;7:71--7.
 389.Pachucki  CT,  Lentino  JR,  Jackson  GG.  Attitudes  and  behavior  of  health  care
personnel regarding the use and efficacy of influenza vaccine. J 
Infect Dis 1985;151:1170--1.
 390.Weingarten S, Friedlander M, Rascon D, Ault M, Morgan M, Meyer RD. Influenza
surveillance in an acute-care hospital. Arch Intern 
Med 1988;148:113--6.
 391.Anonymous.  Rapid  diagnostic  tests  for  influenza.  Medical  Letter  on  Drugs  &
Therapeutics 1999; 41:121--2.
 392.Covalciuc KA, Webb KH, Carlson CA. Comparison of four clinical specimen types
for detection of influenza A and B viruses by 
optical  immunoassay  (FLU  OIA  test)  and  cell  culture  methods.  J  Clin  Microbiol
1999;37:3971--4.
 393.Leonardi GP, Leib H, Birkhead GS, Smith C, Costello P, Conron W. Comparison of
rapid detection methods for influenza 
A  virus  and  their  value  in  health-care  management  of  institutionalized  geriatric
patients. J Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:70--4.
 394.Noyola DE, Clark B, O'Donnell FT, Atmar RL, Greer J, Demmler. G.J. Comparison
of a new neuraminidase detection assay with an 
enzyme  immunoassay,  immunofluorescence,  and  culture  for  rapid  detection  of
Influenza A and B viruses in nasal wash specimens. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1161--5.
 395.CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  influenza:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-8). 
 396.Arden  N,  Patriarca  PA,  Kendal  AP.  Experiences  in  the  use  and  efficacy  of
inactivated vaccines in nursing homes. In: Kendal AP, Patriarca PA, 
ed. Options for the Control Of Influenza. New York, New York: Alan Liss, 1985.
 397.Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients in hospitals. In:
Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of nosocomial 
infection. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987.
 398.Fraund S, Wagner D, Pethig K, Drescher J, Girgsdies OE, Haverich A. Influenza
vaccination in heart transplant recipients. J Heart 
Lung Trransplantation 1999;18:220--5.
 399.Gross  PA,  Hermogenes  AW,  Sacks  HS,  Lau  J,  Levandowski  RA.  The  efficacy  of
influenza vaccine in elderly persons: a meta-analysis and review 
of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:518--27.
 400.Neuzil KM, Reed GW, Mitchel EF, Simonsen L, Griffin MR. Impact of influenza on
acute cardiopulmonary hospitalizations in pregnant 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;148:1094--1102.
 401.Nichol  KL,  Baken  L,  Nelson  A.  Relation  between  influenza  vaccination  and
outpatient visits, hospitalization, and mortality in elderly persons 
with chronic lung disease. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:397--403.
 402.Ohmit  SE,  Arden  NH,  Monto  AS.  Effectiveness  of  inactivated  influenza  vaccine
among nursing home residents during an influenza type 
A (H3N2) epidemic. J Am Geriat Soc 1999;47:165--71.
 403.Tasker SA, Treanor JJ, Paxton WB, Wallace MR. Efficacy of influenza vaccination
in HIV-infected persons: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:430--3.
 404.McArthur  MA,  Simor  AE,  Campbell  B,  McGreer  A.  Influenza  vaccination  in
long-term care facilities: structuring programs for success. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:499--503.
 405.Libow  LS,  Neufeld  RR,  Olson  E,  Breuer  B,  Starer  P.  Sequential  outbreak  of
influenza A and B in a nursing home: efficacy of vaccine 
and amantadine. J Am Geriat Soc 1996;44:1153--7.
 406.Carman  WF,  Elder  AG,  Wallace  LA,  et  al.  Effects  of  influenza  vaccination  of
health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-term care: 
a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93--7.
 407.Nichol  KL,  Lind  A,  Margolis  KL,  et  al.  The  effectiveness  of  vaccination  against
influenza in healthy, working adults. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:889--93.
 408.Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination of health care workers
in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality of 
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1--6.
 409.Saxen H, Virtanen M. Randomized placebo-controlled double blind study on the
efficacy of influenza immunization on absenteeism of health 
care workers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:779--83.
 410.Wilde  JA,  McMillan  JA,  Serwint  J,  Butta  J,  O'Riordan  MA,  Steinhoff  MC.
Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in health care professionals: 
a randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908--13.
 411.Bean B, Moore BM, Sterner B, Peterson LR, Gerding DN, Balfour HH, Jr. Survival
of influenza viruses on environmental surfaces. J Infect 
Dis 1982;146:47--51.
 412.Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human influenza resulting from aerosol
inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800--4.
 413.Blumenfeld  HL,  Kilbourne  ED,  Louria  DB,  et  al.  Studies  on  influenza  in  the
pandemic of 1957--1958: an epidemiologic, clinical, and 
serologic investigation of an intra-hospital epidemic, with a note on vaccine efficacy. J
Clin Invest 1959;38:199--212.
 414.Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak
of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J 
Epidemiol 1979;110:1--6.
 415.Berlinberg CD, Weingarten SR, Bolton LB, Waterman SH. Occupational exposure
to influenza---introduction of an index case to a hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:70--3.
 416.Valenti  WM,  Betts  RF,  Hall  CB,  Hruska  JF,  Douglas  RG,  Jr.  Nosocomial  viral
infections: II: guidelines for prevention and control of 
respiratory viruses, herpesviruses and hepatitis viruses. Infect Control 1980;1:165--78.
 417.Whimbey E, Elting LS, Couch RB, et al. Influenza 
A virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant recipients. Bone 
Marrow Transpl 1994;13:437--40.
 418.Dolin  R,  Reichman  RC,  Madore  HP,  Maynard  R,  Linton  PN,  Webber-Jones  J.  A
controlled trial of amantadine and rimantadine prophylaxis 
of influenza A infection. N Engl J Med 1982;307:580--4.
 419.Welliver  R,  Monto  AS,  Carewicz  O,  Oseltamivir  Post  Exposure  Prophylaxis
Investigator Group. Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing 
influenza in household contacts: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:748--54.
 420.Hayden FG, Treanor JJ, Fritz RS, et al. Use of oral neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir in experimental human influenza: randomized controlled 
trials for prevention and treatment. JAMA 1999;282:1240--6.
 421.The MIST (Management of influenza in the Southern Hemisphere Trialists) Study
Group. Randomized trial of efficacy and safety of 
inhaled  zanamivir  in  teatment  of  influenza  A  and  B  virus  infections.  Lancet
1998;352:1877--81.
 422.Hayden FG, Atmar RL, Schilling M, et al. Use of the selective oral neuraminidase
inhibitor oseltamivir to prevent influenza. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1336--43.
 423.Lee  C,  Loeb  M,  Phillips  A,  et  al.  Zanamivir  use  during  transmission  of
amantadine-resistant influenza A in a nursing home. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:700--4.
 424.Monto  AS,  Robinson  DP,  Herlocher  ML,  Hinson  JM,  Jr.,  Elliott  MJ,  Crisp  A.
Zanamivir in the prevention of influenza among healthy adults: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;282:31--5.
 425.Schilling  M,  Povinelli  L,  Krause  P,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  zanamivir  for
chemoprophylaxis of nursing home influenza outbreaks. Vaccine 
1998;16:1771--4.
 426.Tominack  RL,  Hayden  FG.  Rimantadine  hydrochloride  and  amantadine
hydrochloride use in influenza 
A virus infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 1987;1:459--78.
 427.Askonas  BA,  McMichael  AJ,  Webster  RG.  The  immune  response  to  influenza
viruses and the problem of protection against infection. In: Beare 
AS, ed. Basic and applied influenza research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1982.
 428.Hall CB, Dolin R, Gala CL, et al. Children with influenza A infection: treatment
with rimantadine. Pediatrics 1987;80:275--82.
 429.Hayden  FG,  Couch  RB.  Clinical  and  epidemiological  importance  of  influenza  A
viruses resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. Rev Med 
Virol 1992;2:89--96.
 430.Hayden  FG,  Sperber  SJ,  Belshe  RB,  Clover  RD,  Hay  AJ,  Pyke  S.  Recovery  of
drug-resistant influenza A virus during therapeutic use 
of rimantadine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991;35:1741--7.
 431.Mast  EE,  Harmon  MW,  Gravenstein  S,  et  al.  Emergence  and  possible
transmission of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing home 
outbreaks of influenza A(H3N2). Am J Epidemiol 1991;134: 988--97.
 432.Monto AS, Arden NH. Implications of viral resistance to amantadine in control of
influenza 
A. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:362--7.
 433.CDC. Update: outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome---worldwide, 2003.
MMWR 2003;52:241--6.
          
 
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
Co-Chairman:  Jane  D.  Siegel,  M.D.,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center,
Dallas, Texas.
Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
Box
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 Chair: Robert A. Weinstein, M.D., Cook County Hospital Chicago, Illinois.
 Co-Chairman: Jane D. Siegel, M.D., University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas.
 Execcutive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
 Members:  Alfred  DeMaria,  Jr.,  M.D.,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D., 
Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California; Elaine L. Larson, R.N., Ph.D., Columbia
University School of Nursing, New York, New York; James T. 
Lee.,  M.D.,  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota; Ramon E. Moncada, M.D., Coronado Physician's Medical Center, Coronado,
California; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University 
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; William E. Scheckler,
M.D., University of Wisconsin Medical School, 
Madison,  Wisconsin;  Beth  H.  Stover,  Kosair  Children's  Hospital,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Marjorie A. Underwood, Mt. Diablo Medical Center, Concord, California.
 Liason Representatives: Loretta L. Fauerbach, M.S., CIC, Association for Professionals of
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc., Shands 
Hospital at University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Sandra L. Fitzler, R.N., American
Healthcare  Association,  Washington,  D.C.;  Dorothy  M.  Fogg,  R.N.,  B.S.N.,  M.A.,
Association of Peri-Operative Registered Nurses, Denver, Colorado; Stephen F. Jencks,
M.D., M.P.H., Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Chiu S.
Lin,  Ph.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  James  P.  Steinberg,
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., Crawford Long Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Michael  L.  Tapper,  M.D.,  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis, Lennox Hill Hospital, New York, New York.
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 3/16/2004
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 3/16/2004 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 3/16/2004
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5303a1.htm
