Please note: 
An 
      erratum has been published for this article. To view the erratum, please 
      click  here.  Persons  using  assistive  technology  might  not  be  able  to  fully  access
information  in  this  file.  For  assistance,  please  send  e-mail  to:  mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Type
508 Accommodation and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
      Lynne Sehulster, Ph.D.1 
      Raymond Y.W. Chinn, M.D.2 
1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion 
      National Center for Infectious Diseases 
2HICPAC member 
      Sharp Memorial Hospital 
      San Diego, California
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,
James  M.  Hughes,  M.D.,  Director;  and  the  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,
Steven L. Solomon, M.D., Acting Director.
Summary
 The  health-care  facility  environment  is  rarely  implicated  in  disease  transmission,
except among patients who 
are  immunocompromised.  Nonetheless,  inadvertent  exposures  to  environmental
pathogens (e.g., 
Aspergillus spp. and Legionella spp.) or airborne pathogens (e.g., 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and varicella-zoster virus) can result in adverse 
patient  outcomes  and  cause  illness  among  health-care  workers.  Environmental
infection-control  strategies  and  engineering  controls  can  effectively  prevent  these
infections.  The  incidence  of  health-care--associated  infections  and  pseudo-outbreaks
can be minimized by 1) appropriate use of cleaners and disinfectants; 2) appropriate
maintenance of medical equipment (e.g., 
automated  endoscope  reprocessors  or  hydrotherapy  equipment);  3)  adherence  to
water-quality  standards  for  hemodialysis,  and  to  ventilation  standards  for  specialized
care environments (e.g., airborne infection isolation rooms, protective environments, or
operating  rooms);  and  4)  prompt  management  of  water  intrusion  into  the  facility.
Routine environmental sampling is not 
usually advised, except for water quality determinations in hemodialysis settings and
other situations where sampling is directed by epidemiologic principles, and results can
be applied directly to infection-control decisions.
 This
 report
 reviews
 previous
 guidelines
 and
 strategies
 for
 preventing
environment-associated infections in health-care facilities and offers recommendations.
These  include  1)  evidence-based  recommendations  supported  by  studies;  2)
requirements  of  federal  agencies  (e.g.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Department of 
Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and U.S. Department of Justice);
3) guidelines and standards from 
building  and  equipment  professional  organizations  (e.g.,  American  Institute  of
Architects, Association for the Advancement of 
Medical  Instrumentation,  and  American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigeration,  and
Air-Conditioning Engineers); 4) 
recommendations  derived  from  scientific  theory  or  rationale;  and  5)  experienced
opinions  based  upon  infection-control  and  engineering  practices.  The  report  also
suggests  a  series  of  performance  measurements  as  a  means  to  evaluate
infection-control efforts.
Introduction
Parameters of the Report
 This  report,  which  contains  the  complete  list  of  recommendations  with  pertinent
references,  is  Part  II  of  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care
Facilities. 
The full four-part guidelines will be available on CDC's Division 
of Healthcare Quality Promotion (DHQP) website. Relative to previous CDC guidelines,
this report
 In the full guidelines, Part I, Background Information: Environmental Infection Control in
Health-Care Facilities, provides 
a  comprehensive  review  of  the  relevant  scientific  literature.  Attention  is  given  to
engineering and infection-control 
concerns  during  construction,  demolition,  renovation,  and  repair  of  health-care
facilities. Use of an infection-control risk assessment is strongly supported before the
start of these or any other activities expected to generate dust or water aerosols. Also
reviewed 
in Part I are infection-control measures used to recover from catastrophic events (e.g.,
flooding, sewage spills, loss of electricity and ventilation, or disruption of water supply)
and the limited effects of environmental surfaces, laundry, plants, 
animals,  medical  wastes,  cloth  furnishings,  and  carpeting  on  disease  transmission  in
health-care facilities. Part III and Part IV of the full guidelines provide references (for the
complete guideline) and appendices, respectively.
 Part  II  (this  report)  contains  recommendations  for  environmental  infection  control  in
health-care facilities, 
describing  control  measures  for  preventing  infections  associated  with  air,  water,  or
other  elements  of  the  environment.  These  recommendations  represent  the  views  of
different  divisions  within  CDC's  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases  and  the
Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC),  a  12-member
group that advises CDC on 
concerns related to the surveillance, prevention, and control of health-care--associated
infections,  primarily  in  U.S.  health-care  facilities.  In  1999,  HICPAC's  infection-control
focus was expanded from acute-care hospitals to all venues where health care is 
provided  (e.g.,  outpatient  surgical  centers,  urgent  care  centers,  clinics,  outpatient
dialysis centers, physicians' offices, and skilled nursing facilities). The topics addressed
in this report are applicable to the majority of health-care facilities in the United States.
This
 report
 is
 intended
 for
 use
 primarily
 by
 infection-control
 practitioners,
epidemiologists, employee health and safety 
personnel,
 engineers,
 facility
 managers,
 information
 systems
 professionals,
administrators,
 environmental
 service
 professionals,
 and
 architects.
 Key
recommendations include
 Topics outside the scope of this report include 1) noninfectious adverse events (e.g.,
sick building syndrome), 
2)  environmental  concerns  in  the  home,  3)  home  health  care,  4)  terrorism,  and  5)
health-care--associated foodborne illness.  Wherever possible, the recommendations in
this report are based on data from well-designed scientific studies. 
However,  certain  of  these  studies  were  conducted  by  using  narrowly  defined  patient
populations  or  specific  health-care  settings  (e.g.,  hospitals  versus  long-term  care
facilities), making generalization of findings potentially problematic. Construction 
standards  for  hospitals  or  other  health-care  facilities  may  not  apply  to  residential
home-care units. Similarly, infection-control measures indicated for immunosuppressed
patient  care  are  usually  not  necessary  in  those  facilities  where  such  patients  are  not
present. 
 Other recommendations were derived from knowledge gained during infectious disease
investigations in 
health-care facilities, where successful termination of the outbreak was often the result
of multiple interventions, the majority of which cannot be independently and rigorously
evaluated.  This  is  especially  true  for  construction  situations  involving  air  or  water.  
Other  recommendations  were  derived  from  empiric  engineering  concepts  and  may
reflect industry standards rather 
than evidence-based conclusions. Where recommendations refer to guidance from the
American Institute of Architects (AIA), 
the statements reflect standards intended for new construction or renovation. Existing
structures  and  engineered  systems  are  expected  to  be  in  continued  compliance  with
those standards in effect at the time of construction or renovation. 
 Also,
 in
 the
 absence
 of
 scientific
 confirmation,
 certain
 infection-control
recommendations that cannot be 
rigorously evaluated are based on strong theoretic rationale and suggestive evidence.
Finally, certain recommendations are derived from existing federal regulations. 
Performance Measurements
 Infections caused by the microorganisms described in this guideline are rare events,
and the effect of these 
recommendations  on  infection  rates  in  a  facility  may  not  be  readily  measurable.
Therefore, the following steps to measure performance are suggested to evaluate these
recommendations:
 Contributors to this report reviewed primarily English-language manuscripts identified
from reference searches using 
the  National  Library  of  Medicine's  MEDLINE,  bibliographies  of  published  articles,  and
infection-control textbooks. All 
the recommendations may not reflect the opinions of all reviewers. This report updates
the following published guidelines and recommendations:
 CDC.  Guideline  for  handwashing  and  hospital  environmental  control.  MMWR
1998;37(No. 24). Replaces sections 
on microbiologic sampling, laundry, infective waste, and housekeeping.
 Tablan OC, Anderson LJ, Arden NH, et al., Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee. Guideline 
for
 prevention
 of
 nosocomial
 pneumonia.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol
1994;15:587--627. Updates and 
expands environmental infection-control information for aspergillosis and Legionnaires 
disease; online version incorporates Appendices B, C, and D addressing environmental
control  and  detection  of  Legionella  spp.   CDC.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the
transmission of 
mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care facilities. 
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR13). Provides supplemental information on engineering controls.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance:
recommendations  of  the  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee
(HICPAC).  MMWR  1995;44(No.  RR12).  Supplements  environmental  infection-control
information  from  the  section,  Hospitals  with  Endemic  VRE  or  Continued  VRE
Transmission. 
 Garner  JS,  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Guideline  for
isolation  precautions  in  hospitals.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol  1996;17:53--80.
Supplements  and  updates  topics  in  Part  II  ---  Recommendations  for  Isolation
Precautions  in  Hospitals  (linen  and  laundry,  routine  and  terminal  cleaning,  airborne
precautions).
 Mangram  AJ,  Horan  TC,  Pearson  ML,  Silver  LC,  Jarvis  WR,  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices Advisory 
Committee.  Guideline  for  prevention  of  surgical  site  infection.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol
 1999;4:250--78.
 Updates
 operating
 room
 ventilation
 and
 surface
cleaning/disinfection  recommendations  from  the  section,  Intraoperative  Issues:
Operating 
Room Environment.
 U.S.  Public  Health  Service,  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America,  Prevention  of
Opportunistic Infections Working 
Group. USPHS/IDSA guidelines for the prevention of opportunistic infections in persons
infected with human 
immunodeficiency  virus.  Infect  Dis  Obstet  Gynecol  2002;  10:3--64.  Supplements
information regarding patient interaction with pets and animals in the home.
 CDC,  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America,  American  Society  of  Blood  and  Marrow
Transplantation. Guidelines 
for  preventing  opportunistic  infections  among  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant
recipients. Cytotherapy 
2001;3:41--54. Supplements and updates the section, Hospital Infection Control.
Key Terms
 Airborne  infection  isolation  (AII)   refers  to  the  isolation  of  patients  infected  with
organisms spread via airborne 
droplet  nuclei  <5  µm  in  diameter.  This  isolation  area  receives  numerous  air  changes
per hour (ACH) (>12 ACH for new construction as of 2001; 
>6 ACH for construction before 2001), and is under negative pressure, such that the
direction of the air flow is from the outside adjacent space (e.g., the corridor) into the
room. The air in an AII room is preferably exhausted to 
the outside, but may be recirculated provided that the return air is filtered through a
high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter. The use of personal respiratory protection is
also indicated for persons entering these rooms when caring for TB or 
smallpox  patients  and  for  staff  who  lack  immunity  to  airborne  viral  diseases  (e.g.,
measles  or  varicella  zoster  virus  [VZV]  infection).   Protective  environment  (PE)
Immunocompromised  patients    AAMIAssociation  for  the  Advancement  of  Medical
Instrumentation
 ACHair changes per hour
 AERautomated endoscope reprocessor
 AHJauthority having jurisdiction
 AIAAmerican Institute of Architects
 AIIairborne infection isolation
 ANSIAmerican National Standards Institute
 ASHRAE  American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning Engineers
 BMBLBiosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories  (CDC/National
Institutes of Health) 
 CFRCode of Federal Regulations
 CJDCreutzfeldt-Jakob disease
 CPLcompliance document (OSHA)
 DFAdirect fluorescence assay
 DHHSU.S. Department of Health and Human Services
 DOTU.S. Department of Transportation
 EC environment of care
 EPAU. S. Environmental Protection Agency
 FDAU.S. Food and Drug Administration
 HBVhepatitis B virus
 HEPAhigh efficiency particulate air
 HIVhuman immunodeficiency virus
 HSCThematopoietic stem cell transplant
 HVACheating, ventilation, air conditioning
 ICRAinfection-control risk assessment
 JCAHO Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
 NaOHsodium hydroxide
 NTMnontuberculous mycobacteria
 OSHAOccupational Safety and Health Administration
 PE protective environment
 PPEpersonal protective equipment
 TB tuberculosis
 USCUnited States Code
 USDAU.S. Department of Agriculture
 UV ultraviolet
 UVGIultraviolet germicidal irradiation
 VHFviral hemorrhagic fever
 VREvancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
 VRSAvancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
 VZVvaricella zoster virus
Recommendations for Environmental Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities
Rationale for Recommendations
 As  in  previous  CDC  guidelines,  each  recommendation  is  categorized  on  the  basis  of
existing scientific data, 
theoretic  rationale,  applicability,  and  possible  economic  effect.  The  recommendations
are evidence-based wherever possible. However, certain recommendations are derived
from  empiric  infection-control  or  engineering  principles,  theoretic  rationale,  or  from
experience gained from events that cannot be readily studied (e.g., floods).
 The HICPAC system for categorizing recommendations has been modified to include a
category for engineering 
standards  and  actions  required  by  state  or  federal  regulations.  Guidelines  and
standards  published  by  the  AIA,  American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigeration,  and
Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), and the Association for the Advancement of 
Medical  Instrumentation  (AAMI)  form  the  basis  of  certain  recommendations.  These
standards  reflect  a  consensus  of  expert  opinions  and  extensive  consultation  with
agencies of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Compliance with 
these  standards  is  usually  voluntary.  However,  state  and  federal  governments  often
adopt these standards as regulations. For example, the standards from AIA regarding
construction and design of new or renovated health-care facilities, have been adopted
by reference by >40 states. Certain recommendations have two category ratings (e.g.,
Categories  IA  and  IC  or  Categories  IB  and  IC),  indicating  the  recommendation  is
evidence-based as well as a standard or regulation.
Rating Categories
 Recommendations are rated according to the following categories:
 Category  IA.    Category  IB.    Category  IC.    Category  II.   Unresolved  issue.     I.
Air-Handling Systems in Health-Care Facilities 
  II. Construction, Renovation, Remediation, Repair, and Demolition
  III. Infection Control and Ventilation Requirements for PE rooms
  IV. Infection-Control and Ventilation Requirements for AII Rooms
  V.  Infection-Control and Ventilation Requirements for Operating Rooms
  VI. Other Potential Infectious Aerosol Hazards in Health-Care Facilities
  I. Controlling the Spread of Waterborne Microorganisms
  II. Routine Prevention of Waterborne Microbial 
Contamination Within the Distribution System
  III. Remediation Strategies for Distribution System Repair or Emergencies
  IV.  Additional Engineering Measures as Indicated by Epidemiologic Investigation for
Controlling Waterborne, Health-Care--Associated Legionnaires Disease
  V.  General Infection-Control Strategies for Preventing Legionnaires Disease
  VI. Preventing Legionnaires Disease in Protective Environments and Transplant Units
  VII.  Cooling Towers and Evaporative Condensers
  VIII.  Dialysis Water Quality and Dialysate
  IX.  Ice Machines and Ice
  X.  Hydrotherapy Tanks and Pools
  XI.  Miscellaneous Medical Equipment Connected to Water Systems
  I.   Cleaning  and  Disinfecting  Strategies  for  Environmental  Surfaces  in  Patient-Care
Areas
  II.  Cleaning Spills of Blood and Body Substances
  III.  Carpeting and Cloth Furnishings
  IV.  Flowers and Plants in Patient-Care Areas
  V.  Pest Control
  VI.  Special Pathogens
  I.  General Information
  II.  Air, Water, and Environmental Surface Sampling
  I.  Employer Responsibilities
  II.  Laundry Facilities and Equipment
  III.  Routine Handling of Contaminated Laundry
  IV.  Laundry Process
  V.  Microbiologic Sampling of Textiles 
  VI.  Special Laundry Situations
  VII.  Mattresses and Pillows
  VIII.  Air-Fluidized Beds
  I.  General Infection-Control Measures for Animal Encounters
  II.  Animal-Assisted Activities and Resident Animal Programs
  III.  Protective Measures for Immunocompromised Patients
  IV.  Service Animals
  V.  Animals as Patients in Human Health-Care Facilities
  VI.  Research Animals in Health-Care Facilities
  I.  Categories of Regulated Medical Waste
  II.  Disposal Plan for Regulated Medical Wastes
  III.  Handling, Transporting, and Storing Regulated Medical Wastes
  IV.  Treatment and Disposal of Regulated Medical Wastes
  V.   Special  Precautions  for  Wastes  Generated  During  Care  of  Patients  with  Rare
Diseases
              
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 5/27/2003 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/27/2003
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5210a1.htm
