A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  This  guidance  addresses  the  event  of  a
commercial  passenger  aircraft  traveler  exhibiting  symptoms  consistent  with  Ebola
disease  or  another  viral  hemorrhagic  fever  (VHF,  e.g.,  Marburg  virus  disease,  Lassa
fever, Rift Valley fever, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever). The guidance only applies
to travelers with identified exposures or laboratory-confirmed infection.  To date, there
is  no  documented  evidence  of  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses  being  transmitted  on  an
aircraft1. What aircraft this applies to: This guidance applies to commercial passenger
aircraft located in the United States. Who this is for: Airlines and contract companies
whose staff may clean, disinfect, or remove contaminated waste from an aircraft. How
to use: Use these recommendations 1) to guide personnel in cleaning, disinfection, and
waste disposal procedures after a flight, 2) to select effective disinfectants, and 3) as a
reference  for  relevant  federal  regulations.  Disclaimer:  This  guidance  does  not  relieve
any  person  of  the  obligation  to  comply  with  all  applicable  Federal  Aviation
Administration  (FAA)  regulations  for  issues  related  to  the  aircraft  and  Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations for those workers conducting the
decontamination of the aircraft or handling and disposing waste. Airlines should direct
the airline personnel and/or designated cleaning crew to clean the passenger aircraft
using airline-specified detergents and disinfectants and/or refer to the Guide to Hygiene
and  Sanitation  in  Aviation  developed  by  the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO).  As
certain detergents or disinfectants may be incompatible with aircraft components, any
detergent or disinfectant used on board an aircraft should be approved by the aircraft
manufacturer. The approach for cleaning and disinfecting the aircraft depends on the
symptoms  of  the  ill  traveler  at  the  time  they  were  on  the  passenger  aircraft.  The
following are approaches for an ill traveler who was symptomatic during a flight and is
suspected of having a VHF but does not yet have a laboratory-confirmed diagnosis. A
company hired to complete a needed task. Regarding cleaning and disinfecting aircraft
of  ebolaviruses  or  other  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses,  the  contract  company  should  be
specialized  in  disinfecting,  handling,  and  discarding  of  toxic  chemicals,  infectious
agents,  and  other  hazardous  materials  with  experience  in  cleaning  biohazard  and
aircraft interiors. Making an item safe to handle or an area safe to occupy.  The process
may include cleaning and disinfection to remove and kill pathogens. A surfactant or a
mixture of surfactants with cleaning properties in dilute solutions to assist in removing
soil and dirt from surfaces or items. Chemical products that will make certain biological
agents  inactive.  Specific  to  ebolaviruses  and  other  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses,  use  a
disinfectant included in EPA List L: Disinfectants for Use Against the Ebola Virus or List
Q:  Disinfectants  for  Emerging  Viral  Pathogens  (EVPs).  Always  use  disinfectants
according  to  manufacturer's  instructions.  Any  disinfectant  used  on  board  an  aircraft
should be approved by the aircraft manufacturer. Equipment worn to prevent exposure
to  hazardous  substances  (e.g.,  chemicals,  infectious  agents,  particles).  Viral
hemorrhagic fevers are rare, but serious viral diseases. Learn how to care for patients
and  control  and  prevent  outbreaks.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/viral-hemorrhagic-fevers/php/partners/decontamination-and-waste-disposal-commer
cial-passenger-aircraft.html
