Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Samuel W. Dooley, Jr., M.D.
Kenneth G. Castro, M.D.
Mary D. Hutton, B.S.N., M.P.H.
Robert J. Mullan, M.D.
Jacquelyn A. Polder, B.S.N., M.P.H.
Dixie  E.  Snider,  Jr.,  M.D.,  M.P.H.   Summary   The  transmission  of  tuberculosis  is  a
recognized risk in
health-care settings. Several recent outbreaks of tuberculosis in
health-care settings, including outbreaks involving
multidrug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, have
heightened concern about nosocomial transmission. In addition,
increases in tuberculosis cases in many areas are related to the
high risk of tuberculosis among persons infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Transmission of tuberculosis to
persons with HIV infection is of particular concern because they
are at high risk of developing active tuberculosis if infected.
Health-care workers should be particularly alert to the need for
preventing tuberculosis transmission in settings in which persons
with HIV infection receive care, especially settings in which
cough-inducing procedures (e.g., sputum induction and aerosolized
pentamidine  (AP)  treatments)  are  being  performed.   Transmission  is  most  likely  to
occur from patients with
unrecognized pulmonary or laryngeal tuberculosis who are not on
effective antituberculosis therapy and have not been placed in
tuberculosis (acid-fast bacilli (AFB)) isolation. Health-care
facilities in which persons at high risk for tuberculosis work or
receive care should periodically review their tuberculosis
policies and procedures, and determine the actions necessary to
minimize the risk of tuberculosis transmission in their
particular settings.  The prevention of tuberculosis transmission in health-care
settings requires that all of the following basic approaches be
used: a) prevention of the generation of infectious airborne
particles (droplet nuclei) by early identification and treatment
of persons with tuberculous infection and active tuberculosis, b)
prevention of the spread of infectious droplet nuclei into the
general air circulation by applying source-control methods, c)
reduction of the number of infectious droplet nuclei in air
contaminated with them, and d) surveillance of
health-care-facility personnel for tuberculosis and tuberculous
infection. Experience has shown that when inadequate attention is
given to any of these approaches, the probability of tuberculosis
transmission is increased.  Specific actions to reduce the risk of tuberculosis
transmission should include a) screening patients for active
tuberculosis and tuberculous infection, b) providing rapid
diagnostic services, c) prescribing appropriate curative and
preventive therapy, d) maintaining physical measures to reduce
microbial contamination of the air, e) providing isolation rooms
for persons with, or suspected of having, infectious
tuberculosis, f) screening health-care-facility personnel for
tuberculous infection and tuberculosis, and g) promptly
investigating  and  controlling  outbreaks.   Although  completely  eliminating  the  risk  of
tuberculosis
transmission in all health-care settings may be impossible,
adhering to these guidelines should minimize the risk to persons
in these settings.
This document was prepared in consultation with experts in
tuberculosis, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome,
infection-control and hospital epidemiology, microbiology,
ventilation and industrial hygiene, respiratory therapy, nursing,
and emergency medical services.  
    INTRODUCTION  
        Purpose of Document
        The purpose of this document is to review the mode and risk of
        tuberculosis transmission in health-care settings and to make
        recommendations for reducing the risk of transmission to persons
        in health-care settings--including workers, patients, volunteers,
        and visitors. The document may also serve as a useful resource
        for educating health-care workers about tuberculosis. Several
        outbreaks of tuberculosis in health-care settings, including
        outbreaks involving multidrug-resistant strains of M.
        tuberculosis, have been reported to CDC during the past 2 years
        (1; CDC, unpublished data). In addition, CDC has recently
        received numerous requests for information about reducing
        tuberculosis transmission in health-care settings. Much of the
        increased concern is due to the occurrence of tuberculosis among
        persons infected with HIV (2), who are at increased risk of
        contracting tuberculosis both from reactivation of a latent
        tuberculous infection (3) and from a new infection (4).
        Therefore, in this document, emphasis is given to the
        transmission of tuberculosis among persons with HIV infection,
        although the majority of patients with tuberculosis in most areas
        of the country do not have HIV infection.  These recommendations consolidate and
update previously
published CDC recommendations (5-10). The recommendations are
applicable to all settings in which health care is provided. In
this document, the term "tuberculosis," in the absence of
modifiers, refers to a clinically apparent active disease process
caused by M. tuberculosis (or, rarely, M. Bovis or M. africanum).
The terms "health-care-facility personnel" and
"health-care-facility workers" refer to all persons working in a
health-care setting--including physicians, nurses, aides, and
persons not directly involved in patient care (e.g., dietary,
housekeeping, maintenance, clerical, and janitorial staff, and
volunteers).
B.  Epidemiology,  Transmission,  and  Pathogenesis  of  Tuberculosis   Tuberculosis  is  not
evenly distributed throughout all segments
of the population of the United States. Groups known to have a
high incidence of tuberculosis include blacks, Asians and Pacific
Islanders, American Indians and Alaskan Natives, Hispanics,
current or past prison inmates, alcoholics, intravenous (IV) drug
users, the elderly, foreign-born persons from areas of the world
with a high prevalence of tuberculosis (e.g., Asia, Africa, the
Caribbean, and Latin America), and persons living in the same
household  as  members  of  these  groups  (5).   M.  tuberculosis  is  carried  in  airborne
particles, known as
droplet nuclei, that can be generated when persons with pulmonary
or laryngeal tuberculosis sneeze, cough, speak, or sing (11). The
particles are so small (1-5 microns) that normal air currents
keep them airborne and can spread them throughout a room or
building (12). Infection occurs when a susceptible person inhales
droplet nuclei containing M. tuberculosis, and bacilli become
established in the alveoli of the lungs and spread throughout the
body. Two to ten weeks after initial human infection with M.
tuberculosis, the immune response usually limits further
multiplication and spread of the tuberculosis bacilli. For a
small proportion of newly infected persons (usually less than
1%), initial infection rapidly progresses to clinical illness.
However, for another group (approximately 5%-10%), illness
develops after an interval of months, years, or decades, when the
bacteria begin to replicate and produce disease (11). The risk of
progression to active disease is markedly increased for persons
with HIV infection (3).  The probability that a susceptible person will become infected
depends upon the concentration of infectious droplet nuclei in
the air. Patient factors that enhance transmission are discussed
more fully in section II.B.3. Environmental factors that enhance
transmission include a) contact between susceptible persons and
an infectious patient in relatively small, enclosed spaces, b)
inadequate ventilation that results in insufficient dilution or
removal of infectious droplet nuclei, and c) recirculation of air
containing infectious droplet nuclei.  Tuberculosis transmission is a recognized risk in
health-care
settings (13-21). The magnitude of the risk varies considerably
by type of health-care setting, patient population served, job
category, and the area of the facility in which a person works.
The risk may be higher in areas where patients with tuberculosis
are provided care before diagnosis (e.g., clinic waiting areas
and emergency rooms) or where diagnostic or treatment procedures
that stimulate patient coughing are performed. Nosocomial
transmission of tuberculosis has been associated with close
contact with infectious patients, as well as procedures such as
bronchoscopy (16), endotracheal intubation and suctioning with
mechanical ventilation (17,18), open abscess irrigation (19), and
autopsy (20,21). Sputum induction and aerosol treatments that
induce cough may also increase the potential for tuberculosis
transmission (22). Health-care workers should be particularly
alert to the need for preventing tuberculosis transmission in
health-care settings in which persons with HIV infection receive
care, especially if cough-inducing procedures such as sputum
induction and AP treatments are being performed.
II. General Principles of Tuberculosis Control in Health-Care
Settings  
    Approaches to Tuberculosis Control
    An effective tuberculosis-control program requires the early
    identification, isolation, and treatment of persons with active
    tuberculosis. Health-care facilities in which persons at high
    risk for tuberculosis work or receive care should periodically
    review their tuberculosis policies and procedures, and determine
    the actions necessary to minimize the risk of tuberculosis
    transmission in their particular settings. The prevention of
    tuberculosis transmission in health-care settings requires that
    all of the following basic approaches be used: a) preventing the
    generation of infectious droplet nuclei, b) preventing the spread
    of infectious droplet nuclei into the general air circulation, c)
    reducing the number of infectious droplet nuclei in air
    contaminated with them, d) following guidelines for cleaning,
    disinfecting, and sterilizing contaminated items, and e)
    conducting surveillance for tuberculosis transmission to
    health-care-facility personnel. Experience has shown that when
    inadequate attention is given to any of these measures, the
    probability of tuberculosis transmission is increased.  Specific actions to reduce the
risk of tuberculosis
transmission should include the following:
--Screening patients for active tuberculosis and tuberculous
infection.
--Providing rapid diagnostic services.
--Prescribing appropriate curative and preventive therapy.
--Maintaining physical measures to reduce microbial contamination
of the air.
--Providing isolation rooms for persons with, or suspected of
having, infectious tuberculosis.
--Screening health-care-facility personnel for tuberculous
infection and tuberculosis.
--Promptly  investigating  and  controlling  outbreaks.   B.  Preventing  Generation  of
Infectious Droplet Nuclei  
    Early identification and treatment of persons with tuberculous
    infection  Early identification of persons with tuberculous infection and
application of preventive therapy are effective in preventing the
development of tuberculosis (5). Persons at increased risk of
tuberculosis (see section I.B.), or for whom the consequences of
tuberculosis may be especially severe, should be screened for
tuberculous infection to identify those for whom preventive
treatment is indicated. The tuberculin skin test is the only
method currently available that demonstrates infection with M.
tuberculosis in the absence of active tuberculosis (11).
2. Early identification and treatment of persons with active
tuberculosis  An effective means of preventing tuberculosis transmission is
preventing the generation of infectious droplet nuclei by persons
with infectious tuberculosis. This can be accomplished by early
identification, isolation, and treatment of persons with active
tuberculosis. Tuberculosis may be more difficult to diagnose
among persons with HIV infection; the diagnosis may be overlooked
because of an atypical clinical or radiographic presentation
and/or the simultaneous occurrence of other pulmonary infections
(e.g., Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP)). Among persons with
HIV infection, the difficulty in making a diagnosis may be
further compounded by impaired responses to tuberculin skin tests
(23,24), low sensitivity of sputum smears for detecting AFB (25),
or overgrowth of cultures with Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)
among  patients  with  both  MAC  and  M.  tuberculosis  infections  (26).   A  diagnosis  of
tuberculosis should be considered for any
patient with persistent cough or other symptoms compatible with
tuberculosis, such as weight loss, anorexia, or fever. Diagnostic
measures for identifying tuberculosis should be instituted among
such patients. These measures include history, physical
examination, tuberculin skin test, chest radiograph, and
microscopic examination and culture of sputum or other
appropriate specimens (11,27). Other diagnostic methods, such as
bronchoscopy or biopsy, may be indicated in some cases (28,29).
The probability of tuberculosis is increased by finding a
positive reaction to a tuberculin skin test or a history of a
positive skin test, a history of previous tuberculosis,
membership in a group at high risk for tuberculosis (see section
I.B.), or a history of exposure to tuberculosis. Active
tuberculosis is strongly suggested if the diagnostic evaluation
reveals AFB in sputum, a chest radiograph is suggestive of
tuberculosis, or the person has symptoms highly suggestive of
tuberculosis (e.g., productive cough, night sweats, anorexia, and
weight loss). Tuberculosis may occur simultaneously with other
pulmonary infections, such as PCP.  
    Tuberculin skin test.
    The Mantoux technique (intradermal injection of 0.1 ml of
    purified protein derivative (PPD) containing 5 tuberculin units
    (TU)) should be used as a diagnostic aid to detect tuberculous
    infection. Although tuberculin skin tests are less than 100%
    sensitive and specific for detection of infection with M.
    tuberculosis, no better diagnostic method has been devised.
    Tuberculin skin tests should be interpreted according to current
    guidelines (5,11). For persons with HIV infection, a reaction of
    greater than or equal to 5 mm is considered positive.  A negative skin test does not
rule out tuberculosis disease or
infection. Because of the possibility of a false-negative result,
the tuberculin skin test should never be used to exclude the
possibility of active tuberculosis among persons for whom the
diagnosis is being considered, even if reactions to other
skin-test antigens are positive. Persons with HIV infection are
more likely to have false-negative skin tests than are persons
without HIV infection (23,24,30). The likelihood of a
false-negative skin test increases as the stage of HIV infection
advances (CDC/Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative
Services/New York City Department of Health, unpublished data).
For this reason, a history of a positive tuberculin reaction is
meaningful, even if the current skin-test result is negative.  b. Chest radiograph.  The
radiographic presentation of pulmonary tuberculosis among
patients with HIV infection may be unusual (31). Typical apical
cavitary disease is less common among persons with HIV infection.
They may have infiltrates in any lung zone, often associated with
mediastinal and/or hilar adenopathy, or they may have a normal
chest  radiograph.   c.  Bacteriology.   Smear  and  culture  examination  of  three  to  five
sputum specimens
collected on different days is the main diagnostic procedure for
pulmonary tuberculosis (11). Sputum smears that fail to
demonstrate AFB do not exclude the diagnosis of tuberculosis.
Studies indicate that 50%-80% of patients with pulmonary
tuberculosis have positive sputum smears. Sputum smears from
patients with HIV infection and pulmonary tuberculosis may be
less likely to reveal AFB than those from immunocompetent
patients, a finding believed to be consistent with the lower
frequency of cavitary pulmonary disease observed among
HIV-infected persons (23,25).  A positive sputum culture, with organisms identified as
M.
tuberculosis, provides a definitive diagnosis of tuberculosis.
Conventional laboratory methods may require 4-8 weeks for species
identification; however, the use of radiometric culture
techniques and genetic probes facilitates more rapid detection
and identification of mycobacteria (32,33). Mixed mycobacterial
infection (either simultaneous or sequential) may occur and may
obscure the recognition of M. tuberculosis clinically and in the
laboratory (26). The use of genetic probes for both MAC and M.
tuberculosis may be useful for identifying mixed mycobacterial
infections in clinical specimens.  3. Determining infectiousness of tuberculosis patients 
The infectiousness of a person with tuberculosis correlates
with the number of organisms that are expelled into the air,
which, in turn, correlates with the following factors: a)
anatomic site of disease, b) presence of cough or other forceful
expirational maneuvers, c) presence of AFB in the sputum smear,
d) willingness or ability of the patient to cover his or her
mouth when coughing, e) presence of cavitation on chest
radiograph, f) length of time the patient has been on adequate
chemotherapy, g) duration of symptoms, and h) administration of
procedures that can enhance coughing (e.g., sputum induction).  The most infectious
persons are those with pulmonary or
laryngeal tuberculosis. Those with extrapulmonary tuberculosis
are usually not infectious, with the following exceptions: a)
nonpulmonary disease located in the respiratory tract or oral
cavity, or b) extrapulmonary disease that includes an open
abscess or lesion in which the concentration of organisms is
high, especially if drainage from the abscess or lesion is
extensive (19). Although the data are limited, findings suggest
that tuberculosis patients with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS), if smear positive, have infectiousness similar
to that of tuberculosis patients without AIDS (CDC/New York City
Department  of  Health,  unpublished  data).   Infectiousness  is  greatest  among  patients
who have a productive
cough, pulmonary cavitation on chest radiograph, and AFB on
sputum smear (6). Infection is more likely to result from
exposure to a person who has unsuspected pulmonary tuberculosis
and who is not receiving antituberculosis therapy or from a
person with diagnosed tuberculosis who is not receiving adequate
therapy, because of patient noncompliance or the presence of
drug-resistant organisms. Administering effective
antituberculosis medications has been shown to be strongly
associated with a decrease in infectiousness among persons with
tuberculosis (34). Effective chemotherapy reduces coughing, the
amount of sputum, and the number of organisms in the sputum.
However, the length of time a patient must be on effective
medication before becoming noninfectious varies (35); some
patients are never infectious, whereas those with unrecognized or
inadequately treated drug-resistant disease may remain infectious
for weeks or months. Thus, decisions about terminating isolation
precautions should be made on a case-by-case basis.  In general, persons suspected of
having active tuberculosis and
persons with confirmed tuberculosis should be considered
infectious if cough is present, if cough-inducing procedures are
performed, or if sputum smears are known to contain AFB, and if
these patients are not on chemotherapy, have just started
chemotherapy, or have a poor clinical or bacteriologic response
to chemotherapy. A person with tuberculosis who has been on
adequate chemotherapy for at least 2-3 weeks and has had a
definite clinical and bacteriologic response to therapy
(reduction in cough, resolution of fever, and progressively
decreasing quantity of bacilli on smear) is probably no longer
infectious. Most tuberculosis experts agree that
noninfectiousness in pulmonary tuberculosis can be established by
finding sputum free of bacilli by smear examination on three
consecutive days for a patient on effective chemotherapy. Even
after isolation precautions have been discontinued, caution
should be exercised when a patient with tuberculosis is placed in
a room with another patient, especially if the other patient is
immunocompromised.  C. Preventing Spread of Infectious Droplet Nuclei via
Source-Control Methods  In high-risk settings, certain techniques can be applied to
prevent or to reduce the spread of infectious droplet nuclei into
the general air circulation. The application of these techniques,
which are called source-control methods because they entrap
infectious droplet nuclei as they are emitted by the patient, or
"source" (36), is especially important during performance of
medical procedures likely to generate aerosols containing
infectious particles.  
    Local exhaust ventilation
    Local exhaust ventilation is a source-control technique that
    removes airborne contaminants at or near their sources (37). The
    use of booths for sputum induction or administration of
    aerosolized medications (e.g., AP) is an example of local exhaust
    ventilation for preventing the spread of infectious droplet
    nuclei generated by these procedures into the general air
    circulation. Booths used for source control should be equipped
    with exhaust fans that remove nearly 100% of airborne particles
    during the time interval between the departure of one patient and
    the arrival of the next. The time required for removing a given
    percentage of airborne particles from an enclosed space depends
    upon the number of air exchanges per hour (Table 1, page 26),
    which is determined by the capacity of the exhaust fan in cubic
    feet per minute (cfm), the number of cubic feet of air in the
    room or booth, and the rate at which air is entering the room or
    booth at the intake source.  The exhaust fan should maintain negative pressure in
the booth
with respect to adjacent areas, so that air flows into the booth.
Maintaining negative pressure in the booth minimizes the
possibility that infectious droplet nuclei in the booth will move
into adjacent rooms or hallways. Ideally, the air from these
booths should be exhausted directly to the outside of the
building (away from air-intake vents, people, and animals, in
accordance with federal, state, and local regulations concerning
environmental discharges). If direct exhaust to the outside is
impossible, the air from the booth could be exhausted through a
properly designed, installed, and maintained high-efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) filter; however, the efficacy of this
method has not been demonstrated in clinical settings (see
section II.D.2.a.).
2. Other source-control methods  A simple but important source-control technique is for
infectious patients to cover all coughs and sneezes with a
tissue, thus containing most liquid drops and droplets before
evaporation can occur (38). A patient's use of a properly fitted
surgical mask or disposable, valveless particulate respirator
(PR) (see section II.D.2.c.) also may reduce the spread of
infectious particles. However, since the device would need to be
worn constantly for the protection of others, it would be
practical in only very limited circumstances (e.g., when a
patient is being transported within a medical facility or between
facilities).  D. Reducing Microbial Contamination of Air  Once infectious droplet nuclei
have been released into room
air, they should be eliminated or reduced in number by
ventilation, which may be supplemented by additional measures
(e.g., trapping organisms by high-efficiency filtration or
killing organisms with germicidal ultraviolet (UV) irradiation
(100-290 nanometers)). Health-care-facility workers may also
reduce the risk of inhaling contaminated air by using PRs.  Although for the past 2-3
decades ventilation and, to a lesser
extent, UV lamps and face masks have been used in health-care
settings to prevent tuberculosis transmission, few published data
exist on which to evaluate their effectiveness and liabilities or
to draw conclusions about the role each method should play. From
a theoretical standpoint, none of the four methods (ventilation,
UV irradiation, high-efficiency filtration, and face masks)
appears to be ideal. None of the methods used alone or in
combination can completely eliminate the risk of tuberculosis
transmission; however, when used with the other infection-control
measures outlined in this document, they can substantially reduce
the risk.  
    General ventilation
    Ventilation standards for indoor air quality have been
    published by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and
    Air Conditioning Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE) (39). Specific
    recommendations for health-care facilities have been published by
    ASHRAE (40) and by the Federal Health Resources and Services
    Administration (41). Meeting these standards should reduce the
    probability of tuberculosis transmission in clinical settings;
    however, some highly infectious patients may transmit infection
    even if these ventilation standards are met.  
        Dilution and removal of airborne contaminants.
        Appropriate ventilation maintains air quality by two
        processes--dilution and removal of airborne contaminants (42).
        Dilution reduces the concentration of contaminants in a room by
        introducing air that does not contain those contaminants into the
        room. Air is then removed from the room by exhaust directly to
        the outside or by recirculation into the general ventilation
        system of the building. Continuously recirculating air in a room
        or in a building may result in the accumulation or concentration
        of infectious droplet nuclei. Air that is likely contaminated
        with infectious droplet nuclei should be exhausted to the
        outside, away from intake vents, people, and animals, in
        accordance with federal, state, and local regulations for
        environmental discharges.  
        Air mixing.
        Proper ventilation requires that within-room mixing of air
        (ventilation efficiency) must be adequate (42). Air mixing is
        enhanced by locating air-supply outlets at ceiling level and
        exhaust inlets near the floor, thus providing downward movement
        of clean air through the breathing zone to the floor area for
        exhaust.  
        Direction of air flow.
        For control of tuberculosis transmission, the direction of air
        flow is as important as dilution. The direction of air flow is
        determined by the differences in air pressure between adjacent
        areas, with air flowing from higher pressure areas to lower
        pressure areas.  In an area occupied by a patient with infectious tuberculosis,
air should flow into the potentially contaminated area (the
patient's room) from adjacent areas. The patient's room is said
to  be  under  lower  or  negative  pressure.   Proper  air  flow  and  pressure  differentials
between areas of a
health-care facility are difficult to control because of open
doors, movement of patients and staff, temperature, and the
effect of vertical openings (e.g., stairwells and elevator
shafts) (40). Air-pressure differentials can best be maintained
in completely closed rooms. An open door between two areas may
reduce any existing pressure differential and could reduce or
eliminate the desired effect. Therefore, doors should remain
closed, and the close fit of all doors and other closures of
openings between pressurized areas should be maintained. For
critical areas in which the direction of air flow must be
maintained while allowing for patient or staff movement between
adjacent areas, an appropriately pressurized anteroom may be
indicated.  Examples of factors that can change the direction of air flow
include the following: a) dust in exhaust fans, filters, or
ducts, b) malfunctioning fans, c) adjustments made to the
ventilation system elsewhere in the building, or d) or automatic
shut down of outside air introduction during cold weather. In
areas where the direction of air flow is important, trained
personnel should monitor air flow frequently to ensure that
appropriate conditions are maintained.  Each area to which an infectious tuberculosis
patient might be
admitted should be evaluated for its potential for the spread of
tuberculosis bacilli. Modifications to the ventilation system, if
needed, should be made by a qualified ventilation engineer.
Individual evaluations should address factors such as the risk of
tuberculosis among the patient population served, special
procedures that may be performed, and ability to make the
necessary changes.  Too much ventilation in an area can create problems. In
addition to incurring additional expense at marginal benefits,
occupants bothered by the drafts may elect to shut down the
system entirely. Furthermore, if the concentration of infectious
droplet nuclei in an area is high, the levels of ventilation that
are practical to achieve may be inadequate to completely remove
the contaminants (43).
2. Potential supplemental approaches  
    HEPA filtration.
    For general-use areas (e.g., emergency rooms and waiting areas)
    of health-care facilities, recirculating the air is an
    alternative to using large percentages of outside air for general
    ventilation. If air is recirculated, care must be taken to ensure
    that infection is not transmitted in the process. Although they
    can be expensive, HEPA filters, which remove at least 99.97% of
    particles greater than 0.3 microns in diameter, have been shown
    to be effective in clearing the air of Aspergillus spores, which
    are in the size range of 1.5-6 microns (44-46). The ability of
    HEPA filters to remove tuberculosis bacilli from the air has not
    been studied, but tuberculosis-containing droplet nuclei are
    approximately 1-5 microns in diameter, about the same size as
    Aspergillus spores; therefore, HEPA filters theoretically should
    remove infectious droplet nuclei. HEPA filters may be used in
    general-use areas, but should not be used to recirculate air from
    a  tuberculosis  isolation  room  back  into  the  general  circulation.   Applications  in
preventing nosocomial Aspergillus infection
have included using HEPA filters in centralized air-handling
units and using whole-wall HEPA filtration units with laminar air
flow in patient rooms. In addition, portable HEPA filtration
units, which filter the air in a room rather than filtering
incoming air, have been effective in reducing nosocomial
Aspergillus infections (45,46). Such units have been used as an
interim solution for retrofitting old areas of hospitals.
Although these units should not be substituted for other accepted
tuberculosis isolation procedures, they may be useful in
general-use areas (e.g., waiting rooms and emergency rooms) where
an increased risk of exposure to tuberculosis may exist, but
where other methods of air control may be inadequate.  When HEPA filters are to be
installed at a facility, qualified
personnel must assess and design the air-handling system to
assure adequate supply and exhaust capacity. Proper installation,
testing, and meticulous maintenance are critical if a HEPA filter
system is used (40). Improper design, installation, or
maintenance could permit infectious particles to circumvent
filtration and escape into the ventilation (42). The filters
should be installed to prevent leakage between filter segments
and between the filter bed and its frame. A regular maintenance
program is required to monitor HEPA filters for possible leakage
and for filter loading. A manometer should be installed in the
filter system to provide an accurate means of objectively
determining the need for filter replacement. Installation should
allow for maintenance without contaminating the delivery system
or the area served.  HEPA-filtered, recirculated air should not be used if the
contaminants contain carcinogenic agents. Qualified personnel
should maintain, decontaminate, and dispose of HEPA filters.
b.  Germicidal  UV  irradiation.   The  use  of  germicidal  UV  lamps  (wavelengths  100-290
nm) to
prevent tuberculosis transmission in occupied spaces is
controversial. UV lamps installed in the exhaust air ducts from
the rooms of patients with infectious tuberculosis were shown to
prevent infection of guinea pigs, which are highly susceptible to
tuberculosis (34). On the basis of this finding, other studies
(47-50), and the experience of tuberculosis clinicians and
mycobacteriologists during the past 2-3 decades, CDC has
continued to recommend UV lamps (with appropriate safeguards to
prevent short-term overexposure) as a supplement to ventilation
in settings where the risk of tuberculosis transmission is high
(6,8,11,51-54). Their efficacy in clinical settings has not been
demonstrated under controlled conditions, but there is a
theoretical and experiential basis for believing they are
effective (43,55,56). Thus, individual health-care facilities may
need to consider, on a case-by-case basis, using these lamps in
settings with a high risk of tuberculosis transmission (see
section I.B.). UV lamps are less effective in areas with a
relative humidity of greater than 70% (57). The potential for
serious adverse effects of short- and long-term exposure to
germicidal UV has been identified as a major concern (58; NIOSH,
unpublished report (Health Hazard Evaluation Report, HETA
90-122-L2073)).  The two most common types of UV installation are wall- or
ceiling-mounted room fixtures for disinfecting the air within a
room and irradiation units for disinfecting air in supply ducts.
Wall- or ceiling-mounted fixtures act by disinfecting upper room
air, and their effectiveness depends in part upon the mixing of
air in the room. Organisms must be carried by air currents from
the lower portion of the room to within the range of the UV
radiation from the fixtures. These fixtures are most likely to be
effective in locations where ceilings are high, but some
protection may be afforded in areas with ceilings as low as 8
feet. To be maximally effective, lamps should be left on day and
night (59).  Installing UV lamps in ventilation ducts may be beneficial in
facilities that recirculate the air. UV exposure of air in ducts
can be direct and more intense than that provided by room
fixtures and may be effective in disinfecting exhaust air. Duct
installations provide no protection against tuberculosis
transmission to any person who is in the room with an infectious
patient. As with HEPA filters, UV installations in ducts may be
used in general-use areas but should not be used to recirculate
air from a tuberculosis isolation room back into the general
circulation.  The main concern about UV lamps is safety. Short-term
overexposure to UV irradiation can cause keratoconjunctivitis and
erythema of the skin (60). However, with proper installation and
maintenance, the risk of short-term overexposure is low.
Long-term exposure to UV irradiation is associated with increased
risk of basal cell carcinoma of the skin and with cataracts (58).
To prevent overexposure of health-care-facility personnel and
patients, UV lamp configurations should meet applicable safety
guidelines (60).  When UV lamps are used in air-supply ducts, a warning sign
should be placed on doors that permit access to the duct lamps.
The sign should indicate that looking at the lamps is a safety
hazard. In addition, warning lights outside doors permitting
access to duct lamps should indicate whether the lamps are on or
off. The duct system should be engineered to prevent UV emissions
from  the  duct  from  radiating  into  potentially  occupied  spaces.   Consultation  from  a
qualified expert should be obtained before
and after UV lamps are installed. After installation, the safety
and effectiveness of UV irradiation must be checked with a UV
meter and fixtures adjusted as necessary. Bulbs should be
periodically checked for dust, cleaned as needed, and replaced at
the end of the rated life of the bulb. Maintenance personnel
should be cautioned that fixtures should be turned off before
inspection or servicing. A timing device that turns on a red
light at the end of the rated life of the lamp is available to
alert maintenance personnel that the lamp needs to be replaced.
c. Disposable PRs for filtration of inhaled air.
1.)  For  persons  exposed  to  tuberculosis  patients.   Appropriate  masks,  when  worn  by
health-care providers or other
persons who must share air space with a patient who has
infectious tuberculosis, may provide additional protection
against tuberculosis transmission. Standard surgical masks may
not be effective in preventing inhalation of droplet nuclei (61),
because some are not designed to provide a tight face seal and to
filter out particulates in the droplet nucleus size range (1-5
microns). A better alternative is the disposable PR. PRs were
originally developed for industrial use to protect workers.
Although the appearance and comfort of PRs may be similar to that
of cup-shaped surgical masks, they provide a better facial fit
and better filtration capability. However, the efficacy of PRs in
protecting susceptible persons from infection with tuberculosis
has not been demonstrated.  PRs may be most beneficial in the following situations: a)
when
appropriate ventilation is not available and the patient's signs
and symptoms suggest a high potential for infectiousness, b) when
the patient is potentially infectious and is undergoing a
procedure that is likely to produce bursts of aerosolized
infectious particles or to result in copious coughing or sputum
production, regardless of whether appropriate ventilation is in
place, and c) when the patient is potentially infectious, has a
productive cough, and is unable or unwilling to cover coughs.  Comfort influences the
acceptability of PRs. Generally, the
more efficient the PRs, the greater is the work of breathing
through them and the greater the perceived discomfort. A proper
fit is vital to protect against inhaling droplet nuclei. When
gaps are present, air will preferentially flow through the gaps,
allowing the PR to function more like a funnel than a filter,
thus providing virtually no protection (61).
2.)  For  tuberculosis  patients.   Masks  or  PRs  worn  by  patients  with  suspected  or
confirmed
tuberculosis may be useful in selected circumstances (see section
II.C.2.). PRs used by patients should be valveless. Some PRs have
valves to release expired air, and these would not be appropriate
for patients to use.
E.  Decontamination:  Cleaning,  Disinfecting,  and  Sterilizing   Guidelines  for  cleaning,
disinfecting, and sterilizing
equipment have been published (10,62,63). The rationale for
cleaning, disinfecting, or sterilizing patient-care equipment can
be understood more readily if medical devices, equipment, and
surgical materials are divided into three general categories
(critical items, semi-critical items, and noncritical items)
based  on  the  potential  risk  of  infection  involved  in  their  use.   Critical  items  are
instruments such as needles, surgical
instruments, cardiac catheters, or implants that are introduced
directly into the bloodstream or into other normally sterile
areas of the body. These items should be sterile at the time of
use.  Semi-critical items are items such as noninvasive flexible and
rigid fiberoptic endoscopes or bronchoscopes, endotracheal tubes,
or anesthesia breathing circuits that may come in contact with
mucous membranes but do not ordinarily penetrate body surfaces.
Although sterilization is preferred for these instruments, a
high-level disinfection procedure that destroys vegetative
microorganisms, most fungal spores, tubercle bacilli, and small,
nonlipid viruses may be used. Meticulous physical cleaning before
sterilization  or  high-level  disinfection  is  essential.   Noncritical  items  are  those  that
either do not ordinarily touch
the patient or touch only intact skin. Such items include
crutches, bedboards, blood pressure cuffs, and various other
medical accessories. These items do not transmit tuberculous
infection. Consequently, washing with a detergent is usually
sufficient.  Facility policies should identify whether cleaning,
disinfecting, or sterilizing an item is indicated to decrease the
risk of infection. Procedures for each item depend on its
intended use. Generally, critical items should be sterilized,
semi-critical items should be sterilized or cleaned with
high-level disinfectants, and noncritical items need only be
cleaned with detergents or low-level disinfectants. Decisions
about decontamination processes should be based on the intended
use of the item and not on the diagnosis of the patient for whom
the item was used. Selection of chemical disinfectants depends on
the intended use, the level of disinfection required, and the
structure  and  material  of  the  item  to  be  disinfected.   Although  microorganisms  are
normally found on walls, floors,
and other surfaces, these environmental surfaces are rarely
associated with transmission of infections to patients or
health-care-facility personnel. This is particularly true with
organisms such as tubercle bacilli, which generally require
inhalation by the host for infection to occur. Therefore,
extraordinary attempts to disinfect or sterilize environmental
surfaces are rarely indicated. However, routine cleaning (which
can be achieved with a hospital-grade, Environmental Protection
Agency-approved germicide divided by isinfectant) is recommended
(63). The same routine daily cleaning procedures used in other
hospital or facility rooms should be used to clean rooms of
patients who are on AFB isolation precautions.
F. Conducting Surveillance for Tuberculosis Transmission to
Health-Care-Facility Personnel  A tuberculosis screening and prevention program for
health-care-facility personnel should be established for
protecting both health-care-facility personnel and patients.
Personnel with tuberculous infection without evidence of current
(active) disease should be identified, because preventive
treatment with isoniazid may be indicated (5). In addition, the
screening program will enable public health personnel to evaluate
the effectiveness of current infection-control practices.
Recommendations for screening and surveillance are detailed in
section III.A.7.
III. Recommendations  The following recommendations are divided into two categories: 
    general recommendations applicable to all health-care
    settings, including special precautions for cough-inducing
    procedures, and b) recommendations for selected specific
    health-care settings. Facilities should adapt these
    recommendations as appropriate for individual circumstances.  
    Recommendations Applicable to All Health-Care Settings  
        Early identification and preventive treatment of persons who
        have tuberculous infection and are at high risk for active
        tuberculosis
        --Persons belonging to groups at risk for tuberculosis (see
        section I.B.) should be screened with a Mantoux tuberculin skin
        test. Those with positive skin tests should be evaluated for
        preventive therapy according to current guidelines (5).
        --All persons with HIV infection or with risk factors for HIV
        infection should be given a Mantoux tuberculin skin test. Those
        with positive skin tests or histories of positive skin tests, for
        whom diagnostic evaluation for active tuberculosis is negative,
        should be evaluated for preventive therapy according to current
        guidelines (5).  
        Early identification and treatment of persons with active
        tuberculosis
        --Vigorous efforts should be made to identify patients with
        active tuberculosis in a timely manner and to place them on
        appropriate therapy (see section II.B.2.). Pulmonary tuberculosis
        should always be included in the differential diagnosis of
        persons with pulmonary signs or symptoms, and appropriate
        diagnostic measures should be instituted.
        --For patients with pulmonary signs or symptoms that are
        initially ascribed to other etiologies, evaluation for
        co-existing tuberculosis should be repeated if the patient does
        not respond to appropriate therapy for the presumed etiology of
        the pulmonary abnormalities (see section II.B.2.).
        --In health-care facilities, isolation precautions should be
        applied for patients who are suspected or confirmed to have
        active tuberculosis and who may be infectious (see sections
        II.B.3 and III.B.1.a.).
        --Procedure-specific precautions should be applied for
        cough-inducing or aerosol-generating procedures (see section
        III.A.5.).
        --Patients with suspected or confirmed tuberculosis should be
        reported to the appropriate health department so that standard
        procedures for identifying and evaluating tuberculosis contacts
        can be initiated.  
        Ventilation
        --Staff of inpatient facilities should either include an engineer
        or other professional with expertise in ventilation or industrial
        hygiene, or the facility should have this expertise available
        from a consultant. These persons should work closely with the
        infection-control committee in the control of airborne
        infections.
        --Ventilation for health-care facilities should be developed and
        maintained in consultation with experts in ventilation
        engineering who also have hospital ventilation experience.
        Facility design should meet local and state requirements.
        Specific recommendations for health-care facilities have been
        published by ASHRAE and HRSA (40,41) (see section II.D.).
        --The direction of air flow in health-care facilities should be
        set up and maintained so that air flows from clean areas to
        less-clean areas. In areas of a facility in which tuberculosis
        transmission is a potential problem, direction of air flow should
        be monitored frequently. Periodic checks with smoke tubes or
        smoke sticks provide a sensitive indication of air-flow direction
        (see section II.D.1.c.).
        --Facilities serving populations with a high prevalence of
        tuberculosis may need to enhance ventilation or use supplemental
        approaches in areas of the facility where patients with
        tuberculosis are likely to be found (e.g., waiting areas,
        emergency rooms, radiology suites, or treatment rooms) or where
        skin tests of personnel demonstrate an increased risk of
        tuberculosis transmission (see section II.D.2.).  
        Potential supplemental environmental approaches  
            High-efficiency filtration
            If air from potentially contaminated general-use areas (e.g.,
            emergency rooms or clinic waiting areas) cannot be exhausted
            directly to the outside, HEPA filters with test efficiencies of
            greater than or equal to 99.97% may be useful for removing
            infectious organisms from air before recirculation in a room or
            before return to common supply ducts. If HEPA filters are used,
            they must be designed, installed, maintained, and disposed of in
            accordance with all applicable regulations and manufacturers'
            recommendations (see section II.D.2.a.). HEPA filters should not
            be used to recirculate air from a tuberculosis isolation room
            back into the general circulation.  
            Germicidal UV irradiation
            For settings in which the risk of tuberculosis transmission is
            high (see section I.B.), UV lamps have been used to supplement
            ventilation (see section II.D.2.b.). The decision to use UV lamps
            should be made on a case-by-case basis. If UV lamps are used,
            applicable safety guidelines should be followed (see section
            II.D.2.b.). UV lamps are not recommended for use in small rooms
            or booths where nebulizing devices will be used. UV units
            installed in ducts should not be used to recirculate air from a
            tuberculosis isolation room back into the general circulation.  
            Disposable PRs for filtration of inhaled air
            PRs (see section II.D.2.c.) should be provided by health-care
            facilities and worn by persons in the same room with a patient
            whose signs and symptoms suggest a high potential for
            infectiousness and by those performing procedures that are likely
            to produce bursts of droplet nuclei, such as bronchoscopy,
            endotracheal suctioning, and administration of AP.
            Wearers should be adequately trained in the use and disposal of
            PRs and should carefully follow manufacturers' instructions.
            Ideally, a respirator program consistent with the guidelines
            found in Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), National
            Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Publication
            No. 87-116, Guide to Industrial Respiratory Protection (64) and
            the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health
            Administration (OSHA) General Industry Occupational Safety and
            Health Standards (29 Code of Federal Regulations Part 1910.134)
            should be implemented. Such a program includes training, fit
            testing, care and maintenance, and medical monitoring.
            5. Procedure-specific precautions  
            Diagnostic sputum induction
            Sputum induction performed on patients who may have tuberculosis
            should be carried out in an individual room or booth with
            negative pressure relative to adjacent rooms and hallways,
            ideally with room or booth air exhausted directly to the outside
            and away from all windows and air intake ducts (see section
            II.C.1.). Patients should remain in the booth or treatment room
            (or go outside, weather permitting) and not return to common
            waiting areas until coughing has subsided. Time should be allowed
            between patients so that any droplet nuclei that have been
            introduced into the air can be removed. This time will vary
            according to the efficiency of the ventilation or filtration used
            (Table 1, page 26). Health-care-facility personnel collecting
            induced sputum should wear PRs if it is necessary for them to be
            in the room with the patient during the procedure (see section
            II.D.2.c.).  
            Administration of AP
            All patients should be screened for active tuberculosis before AP
            therapy is initiated. Screening should include medical history,
            tuberculin skin test, and a baseline chest radiograph (see
            section II.B.2).
            Before each subsequent AP treatment, patients should be evaluated
            for symptoms highly suggestive of tuberculosis, such as the
            development of a productive cough or cough and fever. If such
            symptoms are elicited, a diagnostic evaluation should be
            initiated.
            If active tuberculosis is found or suspected, the patient should
            be placed on antituberculosis chemotherapy. AP treatments should
            be administered to patients who may have active tuberculosis only
            in a room or booth as described for sputum induction.
            Ideally, AP treatments for all patients should be administered in
            an individual room or booth as described for sputum induction
            (see sections II.C.1. and III.A.5.a.). Adequate time should be
            allowed between patients for removal of residual pentamidine and
            any infectious organisms from the air when treatment rooms or
            booths are to be reused (Table 1, page 26).
            Workers administering AP should wear PRs whenever they must be in
            the room or booth during administration of AP to patients who
            have, or are at high risk of having, tuberculosis (see section
            II.D.2.c.).
            After they have received AP, patients should not return to common
            waiting areas until coughing subsides.  
            Bronchoscopy
            Bronchoscopy should be performed in rooms that have adequate
            ventilation, good distribution of air flow, and air exhausted
            directly to the outside--in accordance with federal, state, and
            local regulations for environmental discharges--or recirculated
            through HEPA filters. Ideally, bronchoscopy should be performed
            in rooms with negative pressure relative to adjacent areas. If
            bronchoscopy must be performed in positive-pressure rooms (such
            as operating rooms), the risk of infectious tuberculosis should
            be ruled out beforehand.
            Additional protection may be afforded by local exhaust
            ventilation employed near the patient's head to exhaust most
            organisms near their source (see section II.C.1.) or by the use
            of UV lamps in treatment areas where bronchoscopies are performed
            (see section II.D.2.b.).
            Persons who must be in the room with the patient during
            bronchoscopy should wear PRs (see section II.D.2.c.).  
            Endotracheal intubation/suctioning
            Rooms occupied by intubated patients who may have active
            tuberculosis should be provided with ventilation as described for
            patient isolation rooms (see section III.B.1.a.). Persons
            performing endotracheal suctioning on patients who have suspected
            or confirmed active tuberculosis should wear PRs.  
            Other procedures
            Other aerosol treatments, cough-inducing procedures, or
            aerosol-generating procedures should be administered as described
            for AP administration (see section II.C.1.).
            6. Decontamination: cleaning, disinfecting, and sterilizing
            --Decisions about decontamination processes should be based on
            the intended use of the item and not on the diagnosis of the
            patient for whom the item was used (see section II.E.).
            --Generally, critical items should be sterilized, semi-critical
            items should be sterilized or cleaned with high-level
            disinfectants, and noncritical items need only be cleaned with
            detergents or low-level disinfectants. Meticulous physical
            cleaning before sterilization or a high level of disinfection is
            essential (see section II.E.).
            --The same routine, daily cleaning procedures used in other
            hospital or facility rooms should be used to clean rooms of
            patients who are on AFB isolation precautions (see section
            II.E.).
            7. Conducting surveillance for tuberculosis transmission  
            Surveillance and reporting
            Health-care facilities providing care to patients at risk for
            tuberculosis should maintain active surveillance for tuberculosis
            among patients and health-care-facility personnel and for
            skin-test conversions among health-care-facility personnel. When
            tuberculosis is suspected or diagnosed, public health authorities
            should be notified so that appropriate contact investigation can
            be performed. Data on the occurrence of tuberculosis and
            skin-test conversions among patients and health-care-facility
            personnel should be collected and analyzed to estimate the risk
            of tuberculosis transmission in the facility and to evaluate the
            effectiveness of infection-control and screening practices.
            At the time of employment, all health-care facility personnel,
            including those with a history of Bacillus of Calmette and Guerin
            (BCG) vaccination, should receive a Mantoux tuberculin skin test
            unless a previously positive reaction can be documented or
            completion of adequate preventive therapy or adequate therapy for
            active disease can be documented.
            Initial and follow-up tuberculin skin tests should be
            administered and interpreted according to current guidelines
            (5,11).
            Health-care-facility personnel with a documented history of a
            positive tuberculin test, or adequate treatment for disease or
            preventive therapy for infection, should be exempt from further
            screening unless they develop symptoms suggestive of
            tuberculosis.
            Periodic retesting of PPD-negative health-care workers should be
            conducted to identify persons whose skin tests convert to
            positive (11). In general, the frequency of repeat testing should
            be based on the risk of developing new infection.
            Health-care-facility workers who may be frequently exposed to
            patients with tuberculosis or who are involved with potentially
            high-risk procedures (e.g., bronchoscopy, sputum induction, or
            aerosol treatments given to patients who may have tuberculosis)
            should be retested at least every 6 months. Health-care-facility
            personnel in other areas should be retested annually. Data on
            skin-test conversions should be periodically reviewed so that the
            risk of acquiring new infection may be estimated for each area of
            the facility. On the basis of this analysis, the frequency of
            retesting may be altered accordingly.  
            Evaluation of health-care-facility personnel after unprotected
            exposure to tuberculosis
            In addition to periodic screening, health-care-facility personnel
            and patients should be evaluated if they have been exposed to a
            potentially infectious tuberculosis patient for whom the
            infection-control procedures outlined in this document have not
            been taken. Unless a negative skin test has been documented
            within the preceding 3 months, each exposed health-care-facility
            worker (except those already known to be positive reactors)
            should receive a Mantoux tuberculin skin test as soon as possible
            after exposure and should be managed in the same way as other
            contacts (5). If the initial skin test is negative, the test
            should be repeated 12 weeks after the exposure ended. Exposed
            persons with skin-test reactions greater than or equal to 5 mm or
            with symptoms suggestive of tuberculosis should receive chest
            radiographs. Persons with previously known positive skin-test
            reactions who have been exposed to an infectious patient do not
            require a repeat skin test or a chest radiograph unless they have
            symptoms suggestive of tuberculosis.  
            Evaluation and management of health-care-facility personnel
            with positive skin tests or symptoms that may be due to
            tuberculosis
            Health-care-facility personnel with positive tuberculin skin
            tests or with skin-test conversions on repeat testing or after
            exposure should be clinically evaluated for active tuberculosis
            (11). Persons with symptoms suggestive of tuberculosis should be
            evaluated regardless of skin-test results. If tuberculosis is
            diagnosed, appropriate therapy should be instituted according to
            published guidelines (65). Personnel diagnosed with active
            tuberculosis should be offered counseling and HIV-antibody
            testing (27).
            Health-care-facility personnel who have positive tuberculin skin
            tests or skin-test conversions but do not have clinical
            tuberculosis should be evaluated for preventive therapy according
            to published guidelines (5,65). Personnel with positive skin
            tests should be evaluated for risk of HIV infection. If HIV
            infection is considered a possibility, counseling and
            HIV-antibody testing should be strongly encouraged (27).
            All persons with a history of tuberculosis or positive tuberculin
            tests are at risk for contracting tuberculosis in the future.
            These persons should be reminded periodically that they should
            promptly report any pulmonary symptoms. If symptoms of
            tuberculosis should develop, the person should be evaluated
            immediately.  
            Routine and follow-up chest radiographs
            Routine chest films are not required for asymptomatic,
            tuberculin-negative health-care-facility personnel. After the
            initial chest radiograph is taken, personnel with positive
            skin-test reactions do not need repeat chest radiographs unless
            symptoms develop that may be due to tuberculosis (66).  
            Work restrictions
            Health-care-facility personnel with current pulmonary or
            laryngeal tuberculosis pose a risk to patients and other
            personnel while they are infectious; therefore, stringent work
            restrictions for these persons are necessary. They should be
            excluded from work until adequate treatment is instituted, cough
            is resolved, and sputum is free of bacilli on three consecutive
            smears. Health-care-facility personnel with current tuberculosis
            at sites other than the lung or larynx usually do not need to be
            excluded from work if concurrent pulmonary tuberculosis has been
            ruled out. Personnel who discontinue treatment before the
            recommended course of therapy has been completed should not be
            allowed to work until treatment is resumed, an adequate response
            to therapy is documented, and they have negative sputum spears on
            three consecutive days.
            Health-care-facility personnel who are otherwise healthy and
            receiving preventive treatment for tuberculous infection should
            be allowed to continue usual work activities.
            Health-care facility personnel who cannot take or do not accept
            or complete a full course of preventive therapy should have their
            work situations evaluated to determine whether reassignment is
            indicated. Work restrictions may not be necessary for otherwise
            healthy persons who do not accept or complete preventive therapy.
            These persons should be counseled about the risk of contracting
            disease and should be instructed to seek evaluation promptly if
            symptoms develop that may be due to tuberculosis, especially if
            they have contact with high-risk patients (i.e., patients at high
            risk for severe consequences if they become infected).  
            Consultation
            Consultation on tuberculosis surveillance, screening, and other
            methods to reduce tuberculosis transmission should be available
            from state health department tuberculosis-control programs.
            Facilities are encouraged to use the services of health
            departments in planning and implementing their surveillance and
            screening programs.
            B. Precautions for Specific Settings  
            Hospitals and other inpatient facilities  
                Tuberculosis (AFB) isolation precautions
                In hospitals and other inpatient facilities, any patient
                suspected or known to have infectious tuberculosis should be
                placed in AFB isolation in a private room.
                ASHRAE (40) and HRSA (41) have published recommendations for
                ventilation in AFB isolation rooms. These recommendations specify
                that rooms should have at least six total air changes per hour,
                including at least two outside air changes per hour, with
                sufficient within-room air distribution to dilute or remove
                tuberculosis bacilli from locations where health-care-facility
                personnel or visitors are likely to be exposed.
                The direction of air flow should be set up and maintained so that
                air flows into the room from the hallway (negative pressure) to
                minimize possible spread of tuberculosis bacilli into the general
                health-care setting.
                The direction of air flow should be monitored while the room is
                being used for AFB isolation. The use of flutter strips provides
                a means of constantly observing the direction of air flow. Smoke
                tubes or smoke sticks are also a quick, simple means of
                determining the direction of air flow.
                Air from the room should be exhausted directly to the outside of
                the building and away from intake vents, people, and animals, in
                accordance with federal, state, and local regulations concerning
                environmental discharges. Germicidal UV lamps may be considered
                as a supplement to ventilation to further decrease the number of
                infectious droplet nuclei in the air (see sections II.D.2.b. and
                III.A.4.b.).
                Isolation-room doors must be kept closed to maintain control over
                the direction of air flow.
                Optionally, a separate anteroom may serve as an airlock to
                minimize the potential for droplet nuclei to spread from the
                patient's area to adjacent areas. To work effectively, the
                anteroom must have directional airflow.
                Persons who enter a room in which AFB isolation precautions are
                in place should wear PRs (see section II.D.2.c.).
                The patient should remain in the isolation room with the door
                closed and should be instructed to cover nose and mouth with a
                tissue during coughing and sneezing. If the patient must leave
                the room (e.g., for a medical procedure that cannot be done at
                the bedside) while potentially infectious, s/he should wear a
                properly fitted surgical mask or valveless PR (see section
                II.C.2.).
                AFB isolation precautions may be discontinued and the patient
                placed in a private room when s/he is improving clinically, cough
                has substantially decreased, and the number of organisms on
                sequential sputum smears is decreasing. Usually, this occurs
                within 2-3 weeks after tuberculosis medications are begun.
                Failure to take medications as prescribed and the presence of
                drug-resistant disease are the two most common reasons for a
                patient's remaining infectious. When a patient is likely to be
                infected with drug-resistant organisms, AFB precautions should be
                applied until the patient is improving and the sputum smear is
                negative for AFB. Placing a tuberculosis patient in a room with
                other patients is not advisable, especially immunosuppressed
                patients, until the sputum smear is free of bacilli on three
                consecutive days (see section II.B.3.).  
                Transport, radiology, and treatment rooms
                When a patient who may have infectious tuberculosis must be
                transported outside the AFB isolation room, s/he should wear a
                properly fitted surgical mask or valveless PR (see section
                II.C.2.)..
                Ideally, an area in the treatment or radiology department should
                be specially ventilated for AFB isolation patients. If this is
                not possible, the patient should be returned to the isolation
                room as soon as is practical.
                Health-care-facility workers performing procedures on patients
                with potentially infectious tuberculosis should wear a PR,
                especially if the procedure itself induces cough (see section
                II.D.2.c.).
                Treatment rooms in which patients who have undiagnosed pulmonary
                disease and who are at high risk for active tuberculosis are
                evaluated should meet the ventilation standards for AFB isolation
                rooms. ASHRAE recommends that treatment rooms have at least six
                air changes per hour (40).
                Treatment rooms in which cough-inducing procedures are performed
                should meet the specifications outlined under procedure-specific
                precautions.  
                Intensive-care units (ICUs)
                ASHRAE recommends that ventilation in ICUs should provide at
                least six total air changes per hour, including at least two
                outside air changes per hour (40). If air is recirculated in the
                ICU, it should be passed through properly designed, installed,
                and maintained HEPA filters before being recirculated.
                Installation of UV lamps might be considered in ICUs in which
                there is a high risk of tuberculosis transmission (see section
                I.B.).
                Any ICU patient who may have infectious tuberculosis should be
                placed in a private room in which ventilation meets the
                recommendations for AFB isolation.
                Endotracheal suctioning of patients who may have infectious
                tuberculosis should be carried out as described under
                procedure-specific precautions (see section III.A.5.d.)
                ICU patients with undiagnosed pulmonary symptoms who may have
                infectious tuberculosis should have respiratory secretions
                submitted for AFB smear and culture (see section II.B.2.).  
                Emergency rooms
                Ventilation in emergency rooms, including waiting areas, should
                be designed and maintained to reduce the risk of tuberculosis
                transmission, (39-41). ASHRAE recommends that emergency room
                waiting areas have at least 10 air changes per hour (40).
                In facilities serving populations with a high incidence of
                tuberculosis (see section I.B.), germicidal UV lamps and/or HEPA
                filters in the emergency room may provide additional benefit when
                used to supplement ventilation (see section II.D.2.).  
                Laboratories
                Laboratories should adhere to previously published
                recommendations concerning control of tuberculosis transmission
                (67).  
                Autopsy rooms
                ASHRAE recommends that autopsy rooms have ventilation that
                provides at least 12 total air changes per hour (40). In
                addition, these rooms should have good distribution of air flow
                in the room, negative pressure with respect to adjacent areas,
                and room air exhausted directly to the outside of the building.
                PRs should be worn by personnel performing procedures that may
                aerosolize infectious particles (e.g., sawing, irrigating).  
                Hospices
                All tuberculosis-control recommendations for inpatient facilities
                apply to hospices.  
                Nursing homes
                Published recommendations for prevention and control of
                tuberculosis in nursing homes should be followed (68).  
                    Correctional facilities
                    Published recommendations for prevention and control of
                    tuberculosis in correctional facilities should be followed (54).
                    Prison medical facilities should follow the recommendations
                    outlined in this document.
                    2. Ambulatory-care facilities
                    --Health-care employers in outpatient settings should be aware of
                    the risk of tuberculosis among their patient population. They
                    should be especially aware of the increased risk among persons
                    who have both HIV infection and tuberculous infection, and they
                    should develop infection-control policies accordingly.
                    --Persons who have HIV infection or who are otherwise at risk for
                    contracting tuberculosis should receive a tuberculin skin test,
                    and the results should be noted in the patient's medical record.
                    Tuberculosis diagnostic procedures should be initiated if signs
                    and symptoms of tuberculosis develop (see section II.B.2.).
                    --Ambulatory patients who have pulmonary symptoms of uncertain
                    etiology should be instructed to cover their mouths and noses
                    when coughing or sneezing; they should spend a minimum of time in
                    common waiting areas (see section II.C.2.).
                    --Personnel who are the first point of contact in facilities
                    serving patients at risk for tuberculosis should be trained to
                    recognize, and bring to the attention of the appropriate person,
                    any patients with symptoms suggestive of tuberculosis (see
                    section II.B.2.), such as a productive cough of greater than 3
                    weeks' duration, especially when accompanied by other
                    tuberculosis symptoms, such as weight loss, fever, fatigue, and
                    anorexia.
                    --Ventilation in clinics serving patients who are at high risk
                    for tuberculosis (see section I.B.) should be designed and
                    maintained to reduce the risk of tuberculosis transmission
                    (39-41) (see section II.D.). This is particularly important if
                    immunosuppressed patients are treated in the same or a nearby
                    area. In some settings, (see section I.B.), enhanced ventilation
                    or air-disinfection techniques (e.g., HEPA filters or germicidal
                    UV lamps, see sections II.D.2.a. and II.D.2.b.) may be
                    appropriate for common areas such as waiting rooms. Air from
                    clinics serving patients at high risk for tuberculosis should not
                    be recirculated unless it is first passed through an effective
                    high-efficiency filtration system.
                    --In outpatient settings where cough-inducing procedures are
                    carried out, procedure-specific AFB precautions should be
                    implemented (see sections II.C. and III.A.5.).  3. Emergency medical
services
--When emergency-medical-response personnel or others must
transport patients with confirmed or suspected active
tuberculosis, a mask or valveless PR should be fitted on the
patient. If this is not possible, the worker should wear a PR
(see sections II.C.2. and II.D.2.c.). If feasible, the rear
windows of the vehicle should be kept open and the heating and
air conditioning system set on a nonrecirculating cycle.
--Emergency-response personnel should be routinely screened for
tuberculosis at regular intervals. They should also be included
in the follow-up of contacts of a patient with infectious
tuberculosis (see section III.A.7.).  4. Home-health services
--For persons visiting the home of patients with suspected or
confirmed infectious tuberculosis, precautions may be necessary
to prevent exposure to air containing droplet nuclei until
infectiousness has been eliminated by chemotherapy. These
precautions include instructing patients to cover coughs and
sneezes. The worker should wear a PR when entering the home or
the patient's room.
--Respiratory precautions in the home may be discontinued when
the patient is improving clinically, cough has decreased, and the
number of organisms in the sputum smear is decreasing. Usually
this occurs within 2-3 weeks after tuberculosis medications are
begun. Failure to take medications as prescribed and the presence
of drug-resistant disease are the two most common reasons for a
patient's failure to improve clinically. Home health-care
personnel can assist in preventing tuberculosis transmission by
educating the patient about the importance of taking medications
as prescribed (unless adverse effects are seen).
--If immunocompromised persons or young children live in the home
with a patient who has infectious pulmonary or laryngeal
tuberculosis, temporary relocation should be considered until the
patient has negative sputum smears.
--If cough-inducing procedures (such as AP) are performed in the
home of a patient who may have infectious tuberculosis, they
should be administered in a well-ventilated area away from other
household members. Persons who perform these procedures should
wear PRs while performing them.
--Home health-care workers should be included in an
employer-sponsored tuberculosis screening and prevention program
(see section III.A.7.).
--Early identification and treatment of persons with tuberculosis
is important. Home health-care personnel and patients who are at
risk for contracting active tuberculosis should be reminded
periodically of the importance of having pulmonary symptoms
evaluated.
--Close contacts of any patient with active infectious
tuberculosis should be evaluated for tuberculous infection and
managed according to CDC and American Thoracic Society guidelines
(5,65).  IV. Research Needs  Additional research is needed regarding the airborne
transmission of tuberculosis including the following: a) better
quantitating the risk of tuberculosis transmission in a variety
of health-care settings, b) assessing the acceptability,
efficacy, adverse impact, and cost-effectiveness of currently
available methods for preventing transmission, and c) developing
better methods for preventing transmission. These needs also
extend to other infections transmitted by the airborne route.
Currently, large numbers of immunosuppressed persons, including
patients infected with HIV, are being brought together in
health-care settings in which procedures are used that induce the
generation of droplet nuclei. Research is needed to fill many of
the gaps in current knowledge and to lead to new and better
guidelines for protecting patients and personnel in these
settings.  V. Glossary of Abbreviations  AFB
Acid-fast bacilli--organisms that retain certain stains, even
after being washed with acid alcohol. Most are mycobacteria. When
seen on a stained smear of sputum or other clinical specimen, a
diagnosis of tuberculosis should be considered.  AIDS
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome--an advanced stage of
disease caused by infection with the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV). A patient with AIDS is especially susceptible to other
infections.  AP
Aerosolized pentamidine--drug treatment given to patients with
HIV infection to treat or to prevent Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia. The drug is put into solution, the solution is
aerosolized, and the patient inhales the aerosol.  ASHRAE
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air
Conditioning Engineers, Inc.  HEPA
High-efficiency particulate air filter.
HIV
Human immunodeficiency virus--the virus that causes AIDS.
HRSA
Health Resources and Services Administration.
PCP
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia--this organism does not cause
disease among persons with a normal immune system.  PR
A disposable, particulate respirator (respiratory protective
device (face mask)) that is designed to filter out particles 1-5
microns in diameter.  Tuberculous infection
A condition in which tuberculosis organisms (M. tuberculosis,
M. bovis, or M. africanum) are present in the body, but no active
disease is evident.  Tuberculosis transmission
Spread of tuberculosis organisms from one person to another,
usually through the air.  UV
Ultraviolet.  References  
    CDC.  Nosocomial  transmission  of  multidrug-resistant   tuberculosis  to  health  care
workers and HIV-infected patients in
an urban hospital--Florida. MMWR 1990;39:718-22.  2. Pitchenik AR, Fertel D, Bloch AB.
Mycobacterial disease:
epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. Clin Chest
Med 1988;9:425-41.  3. Selwyn PA, Hartel D, Lewis VA, et al. A prospective study of
the risk of tuberculosis among intravenous drug users with human
immunodeficiency virus infection. N Engl J Med 1989;320:545-50.  4. Di Perri G, Cruciani
M, Danzi MC, et al. Nosocomial epidemic
of active tuberculosis among HIV-infected patients. Lancet
1989;23/30:1502-04.  5. CDC. Screening for tuberculosis and tuberculous infection in
high-risk populations, and The use of preventive therapy for
tuberculous infection in the United States: recommendations of
the Advisory Committee for Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR
1990;39(no. RR-8).  6. American Thoracic Society, CDC. Control of tuberculosis. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1983;128:336-42.  7. American Thoracic Society, Ad Hoc Committee of
the Scientific
Assembly on Tuberculosis. Screening for pulmonary tuberculosis in
institutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1977;115:901-6.  8. CDC. Guidelines for prevention of TB
transmission in
hospitals. Atlanta, Georgia: US Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Service, 1982; DHHS publication
no.(CDC)82-8371.  9. Williams WW. Guideline for infection control in hospital
personnel. Infect Control 1983;4(suppl):326-49.
10. Garner JS, Simmons BP. Guideline for isolation precautions in
hospitals. Infect Control 1983;4(suppl):245-325.
11. American Thoracic Society, CDC. Diagnostic standards and
classification of tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis
1990;142:725-35.).
12. Wells WF. Aerodynamics of droplet nuclei. In: Airborne
contagion and air hygiene. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1955:13-9.
13. Barrett-Connor E. The epidemiology of tuberculosis in
physicians. JAMA 1979;241:33-8.
14. Brennen C, Muder RR, Muraca PW. Occult endemic tuberculosis
in a chronic care facility. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1988;9:548-52.
15. Goldman KP. Tuberculosis in hospital doctors. Tubercle
1988;69:237-40.
16. Catanzaro A. Nosocomial tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis
1982;125:559-62.
17. Ehrenkranz NJ, Kicklighter JL. Tuberculosis outbreak in a
general hospital: evidence of airborne spread of infection. Ann
Intern Med 1972;77:377-82.
18. Haley CE, McDonald RC, Rossi L, et al. Tuberculosis epidemic
among hospital personnel. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1989;10:204-10.
19. Hutton MD, Stead WW, Cauthen GM, et al. Nosocomial
transmission of tuberculosis associated with a draining
tuberculous abscess. J Infect Dis 1990;161:286-95.
20. Kantor HS, Poblete R, Pusateri SL. Nosocomial transmission of
tuberculosis from unsuspected disease. Am J Med 1988;84:833-8.
21. Lundgren R, Norrman E, Asberg I. Tuberculous infection
transmitted at autopsy. Tubercle 1987;68:147-50.
22. CDC. Mycobacterium tuberculosis transmission in a health
clinic--Florida, 1988. MMWR 1989;38:256-64.
23. Pitchenik AE, Cole C, Russell BW, et al. Tuberculosis,
atypical mycobacteriosis, and the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome among Haitian and non-Haitian patients in South Florida.
Ann Intern Med 1984;101:641-5.
24. Maayan S, Wormser GP, Hewlett D, et al. Acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in an economically disadvantaged
population. Arch Intern Med 1985;145:1607-12.
25. Klein NC, Duncanson FP, Lenox TH III, et al. Use of
mycobacterial smears in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis
in AIDS/ARC patients. Chest 1989;95:1190-2.
26. Burnens AP, Vurma-Rapp U. Mixed mycobacterial
cultures-occurrence in the clinical laboratory. Zbl Bakt 1989;
271:85-90.
27. CDC. Tuberculosis and human immunodeficiency virus infection:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee for the Elimination of
Tuberculosis (ACET). MMWR 1989;38:236-8,243-50.
28. Willcox PA, Benator SR, Potgieter PD. Use of flexible
fiberoptic bronchoscope in diagnosis of sputum-negative pulmonary
tuberculosis. Thorax 1982;37:598-601.
29. Willcox PA, Potgieter PD, Bateman ED, Benator SR. Rapid
diagnosis of sputum-negative miliary tuberculosis using the
flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope. Thorax 1986;41:681-4.
30. Canessa PA, Fasano L, Lavecchia MA, Torraca A, Schiattone ML.
Tuberculin skin test in asymptomatic HIV seropositive carriers
(Letter). Chest 1989;96:1215-6.
31. Pitchenik AE, Rubinson HA. The radiographic appearance of
tuberculosis in patients with the acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS) and pre-AIDS. Am Rev Respir Dis 1985;131:393-6.
32. Kiehn TE, Cammarata R. Laboratory diagnosis of mycobacterial
infection in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. J
Clin Microbiol 1986;24:708-11.  33. Crawford JT, Eisenach KD, Bates JH. Diagnosis of
tuberculosis: present and future. Semin Resp Infect
1989;4:171-81.
34. Riley RL, Mills CC, O'Grady F, Sultan LU, Wittstadt F,
Shivpuri DN. Infectiousness of air from a tuberculosis ward. Amer
Rev Respir Dis 1962;85:511-25.
35. Noble RC. Infectiousness of pulmonary tuberculosis after
starting chemotherapy: review of the available data on an
unresolved question. Am J Infect Control 1981;9:6-10.
36. Woods JE. Cost avoidance and productivity in owning and
operating buildings (state of the art review). Occup Med
1989;4:753-70.
37. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
Industrial ventilation: a manual of recommended practice.
Lansing, Michigan:ACGIH, 1988.
38. Riley RL. Airborne infection. Am J Med 1974;57:466-75.
39. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air
Conditioning Engineers. Ventilation for acceptable indoor air
quality. Atlanta, Georgia: ASHRAE, Inc., 1989 Standard 62-1989.
40. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air
Conditioning Engineers. 1987 ASHRAE handbook: heating,
ventilating, and air-conditioning systems and applications.
Atlanta, Georgia: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and
Air Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1987:23.1-23.12.
41. Health Resources and Services Administration. Guidelines for
construction and equipment of hospital and medical facilities.
Rockville, Maryland.: US Department of Health & Human Services,
Public Health Service, 1984;PHS publication no.(HRSA)84-14500.
42. Woods JE, Rask DR. Heating, ventilation, air-conditioning
systems: the engineering approach to methods of control. In:
Kundsin RB, ed. Architectural design and indoor microbial
pollution. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988:123-53.
43. Riley RL, Nardell EA. Clearing the air: the theory and
application of UV air disinfection. Am Rev Respir Dis
1989;139:1286-94.
44. Sherertz RJ, Belani A, Kramer BS, et al. Impact of air
filtration on nosocomial Aspergillus infections. Am J Med
1987;83:709-18.
45. Rhame FS, Streifel AJ, Kersey JH, McGlave PB. Extrinsic risk
factors for pneumonia in the patient at high risk of infection.
Am J Med 1984;76:42-52.
46. Opal SM, Asp AA, Cannady PB, Morse PL, Burton LJ, Hammer PG.
Efficacy of infection control measures during a nosocomial
outbreak of disseminated Aspergillus associated with hospital
construction. J Infect Dis 1986;153:63-47.
47. Collins FM. Relative susceptibility of acid-fast and
non-acid-fast bacteria to ultraviolet light. Appl Microbiol
1971;21:411-13.
48. David HL, Jones WD Jr, Newman CM. Ultraviolet light
inactivation and photoreactivation in the mycobacteria. Infect
Immun 1971;4:318-19.
49. David HL. Response of mycobacteria to ultraviolet light
radiation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1973;108:1175-85.
50. Riley RL, Knight M, Middlebrook G. Ultraviolet susceptibility
of BCG and virulent tubercle bacilli. Am Rev Respir Dis
1976;113:413-18.
51. National Tuberculosis and Respiratory Disease Association.
Guidelines for the general hospital in the admission and care of
tuberculous patients. Am Rev Respir Dis 1969;99:631-3.
52. CDC. Notes on air hygiene: summary of conference on air
disinfection. Arch Environ Health 1971;22:473-4.
53. Schieffelbein CW Jr, Snider DE Jr. Tuberculosis control among
homeless populations. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:1843-6.
54. CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in correctional
institutions: recommendations of the Advisory Committee for the
Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1989;38:313-20,325.
55. Stead WW. Clearing the air: the theory and application of
ultraviolet air disinfection (Letter). Am Rev Respir Dis
1989;140:1832.
56. Macher JM. Ultraviolet radiation and ventilation to help
control tuberculosis transmission: guidelines prepared for
California Indoor Air Quality Program. Berkeley, CA: Air and
Industrial Hygiene Laboratory, 1989.
57. Riley RL, Kaufman JE. Effect of relative humidity on the
inactivation of airborne Serratia marcescens by ultraviolet
radiation. Appl Microbiol 1972;23:1113-20.
58. The biological effects of ultraviolet radiation (with
emphasis on the skin). In: Urbach F, ed. Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference Sponsored Jointly by the Skin and Cancer
Hospital, Temple University Health Sciences Center and the
International Society of Biometeorology. Oxford, England:
Pergamon Press, 1969.
59. Riley RL. Ultraviolet air disinfection for control of
respiratory contagion. In: Kundsin RB, ed. Architectural design
and indoor microbial pollution. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1988:175-97.
60. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
Criteria for a recommended standard . . . occupational exposure
to ultraviolet radiation. Washington, DC: National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, 1972;publication
no.(HSM)73-110009.
61. Pippin DJ, Verderame RA, Weber KK. Efficacy of face masks in
preventing inhalation of airborne contaminants. J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 1987;45:319-23.
62. Rutala WA. APIC guidelines for selection and use of
disinfectants. Am J Infect Control 1990;18:99-117.
63. Garner JS, Favero MS. Guideline for handwashing and hospital
environmental control. Atlanta, Georgia: US Department of Health
and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, 1985.
64. NIOSH. Guide to industrial respiratory protection.
Cincinnati, Ohio: US Department of Health and Human Services,
Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 1987;DHHS (NIOSH)
publication no.87-116.
65. American Thoracic Society, CDC. Treatment of tuberculosis and
tuberculosis infection in adults and children, 1986. Am Rev
Respir Dis 1986;134:355-63.
66. Barrett-Connor E. The periodic chest roentgenogram for the
control of tuberculosis in health care personnel. Am Rev Respir
Dis 1980;122:153-5.
67. Strong BE, Kubica GP. Isolation and identification of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Atlanta, Georgia: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, 1981; HHS
publication no.(CDC)81-8390.
68. CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in facilities
providing long-term care to the elderly. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-10).
69. Mutchler JE. Principles of ventilation. In: National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. The industrial
environment--its evaluation and control. Washington, DC: National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1973. 
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.**Questions  or  messages
regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001897.htm
