 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by Lynne M. Mofenson,
MD1 Michael T. Brady, MD2 Susie P. Danner3 Kenneth L. Dominguez, MD, MPH3 Rohan
Hazra, MD1 Edward Handelsman, MD1 Peter Havens, MD4 Steve Nesheim, MD3 Jennifer
S. Read, MD, MS, MPH, DTM&H1 Leslie Serchuck, MD1 Russell Van Dyke, MD5 1National
Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland  2Nationwide  Children's  Hospital,  Columbus,
Ohio  3Centers  from  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,  Georgia  4Childrens
Hospital  of  Wisconsin,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin  5Tulane  University  School  of  Medicine,
New Orleans, Louisiana The material in this report originated in the National Center for
HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  Kevin  Fenton,  MD,  Director.
Corresponding  preparer:  Kenneth  L.  Dominguez,  MD,  MPH,  Division  of  HIV/AIDS
Prevention,  Surveillance  and  Epidemiology,  NCHHSTP,  CDC,  1600  Clifton  Rd.  NE,  MS
E-45,  Atlanta,  GA  30333,  Telephone:  404-639-6129,  Fax:  404-639-6127,  Email:
kld0@cdc.gov. This report updates and combines into one document earlier versions of
guidelines for preventing and treating opportunistic infections (OIs) among HIV-exposed
and  HIV-infected  children,  last  published  in  2002  and  2004,  respectively.  These
guidelines  are  intended  for  use  by  clinicians  and  other  health-care  workers  providing
medical  care  for  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  children  in  the  United  States.  The
guidelines discuss opportunistic pathogens that occur in the United States and one that
might  be  acquired  during  international  travel  (i.e.,  malaria).  Topic  areas  covered  for
each  OI  include  a  brief  description  of  the  epidemiology,  clinical  presentation,  and
diagnosis  of  the  OI  in  children;  prevention  of  exposure;  prevention  of  disease  by
chemoprophylaxis  and/or  vaccination;  discontinuation  of  primary  prophylaxis  after
immune  reconstitution;  treatment  of  disease;  monitoring  for  adverse  effects  during
treatment;  management  of  treatment  failure;  prevention  of  disease  recurrence;  and
discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis  after  immune  reconstitution.  A  separate
document  about  preventing  and  treating  of  OIs  among  HIV-infected  adults  and
postpubertal adolescents (Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic
Infections in HIV-Infected Adults and Adolescents) was prepared by a working group of
adult HIV and infectious disease specialists. The guidelines were developed by a panel
of  specialists  in  pediatric  HIV  infection  and  infectious  diseases  (the  Pediatric
Opportunistic  Infections  Working  Group)  from  the  U.S.  government  and  academic
institutions. For each OI, a pediatric specialist with content-matter expertise reviewed
the literature for new information since the last guidelines were published; they then
proposed  revised  recommendations  at  a  meeting  at  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
(NIH) in June 2007. After these presentations and discussions, the guidelines underwent
further revision, with review and approval by the Working Group, and final endorsement
by NIH, CDC, the HIV Medicine Association (HIVMA) of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America  (IDSA),  the  Pediatric  Infectious  Disease  Society  (PIDS),  and  the  American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). The recommendations are rated by a letter that indicates
the strength of the recommendation and a Roman numeral that indicates the quality of
the  evidence  supporting  the  recommendation  so  readers  can  ascertain  how  best  to
apply  the  recommendations  in  their  practice  environments.  An  important  mode  of
acquisition  of  OIs,  as  well  as  HIV  infection  among  children,  is  from  their  infected
mother;  HIV-infected  women  coinfected  with  opportunistic  pathogens  might  be  more
likely than women without HIV infection to transmit these infections to their infants. In
addition,  HIV-infected  women  or  HIV-infected  family  members  coinfected  with  certain
opportunistic pathogens might be more likely to transmit these infections horizontally
to  their  children,  resulting  in  increased  likelihood  of  primary  acquisition  of  such
infections in the young child. Therefore, infections with opportunistic pathogens might
affect  not  just  HIV-infected  infants  but  also  HIV-exposed  but  uninfected  infants  who
become infected by the pathogen because of transmission from HIV-infected mothers
or  family  members  with  coinfections.  These  guidelines  for  treating  OIs  in  children
therefore  consider  treatment  of  infections  among  all  children,  both  HIV-infected  and
uninfected, born to HIV-infected women. Additionally, HIV infection is increasingly seen
among adolescents with perinatal infection now surviving into their teens and among
youth  with  behaviorally  acquired  HIV  infection.  Although  guidelines  for  postpubertal
adolescents  can  be  found  in  the  adult  OI  guidelines,  drug  pharmacokinetics  and
response  to  treatment  may  differ  for  younger  prepubertal  or  pubertal  adolescents.
Therefore, these guidelines also apply to treatment of HIV-infected youth who have not
yet  completed  pubertal  development.  Major  changes  in  the  guidelines  include  1)
greater  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  antiretroviral  therapy  for  preventing  and
treating  OIs,  especially  those  OIs  for  which  no  specific  therapy  exists;  2)  information
about  the  diagnosis  and  management  of  immune  reconstitution  inflammatory
syndromes; 3) information about managing antiretroviral therapy in children with OIs,
including  potential  drug--drug  interactions;  4)  new  guidance  on  diagnosing  of  HIV
infection and presumptively excluding HIV infection in infants that affect the need for
initiation of prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) in neonates;
5) updated immunization recommendations for HIV-exposed and HIV-infected children,
including hepatitis A, human papillomavirus, meningococcal, and rotavirus vaccines; 6)
addition  of  sections  on  aspergillosis;  bartonella;  human  herpes  virus-6,  -7,  and  -8;
malaria;
 and
 progressive
 multifocal
 leukodystrophy
 (PML);
 and
 7)
 new
recommendations on discontinuation of OI prophylaxis after immune reconstitution in
children.  The  report  includes  six  tables  pertinent  to  preventing  and  treating  OIs  in
children  and  two  figures  describing  immunization  recommendations  for  children  aged
0--6  years  and  7--18  years.  Because  treatment  of  OIs  is  an  evolving  science,  and
availability of new agents or clinical data on existing agents might change therapeutic
options and preferences, these recommendations will be periodically updated and will
be  available  at  http://AIDSInfo.nih.gov.  In  the  pre-antiretroviral  era  and  before
development  of  potent  combination  highly  active  antiretroviral  treatment  (HAART)
regimens,  opportunistic  infections  (OIs)  were  the  primary  cause  of  death  in  human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected children (1). Current HAART regimens suppress
viral  replication,  provide  significant  immune  reconstitution,  and  have  resulted  in  a
substantial
 and
 dramatic
 decrease
 in
 acquired
 immunodeficiency
 syndrome
(AIDS)-related  OIs  and  deaths  in  both  adults  and  children  (2--4).  In  an  observational
study from pediatric clinical trial sites in the United States, Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials
Group (PACTG) 219, the incidence of the most common initial OIs in children during the
potent HAART era (study period 2000--2004) was substantially lower than the incidence
in  children  followed  at  the  same  sites  during  the  pre-HAART  era  (study  period
1988--1998) (1,3). For example, the incidence for bacterial pneumonia decreased from
11.1  per  100  child-years  during  the  pre-HAART  era  to  2.2  during  the  HAART  era;
bacteremia from 3.3 to 0.4 per 100 child-years; herpes zoster from 2.9 to 1.1 per 100
child-years;  disseminated  Mycobacterium  avium  complex  (MAC)  from  1.8  to  0.14  per
100 child-years; and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) from 1.3 to 0.09 per 100
child-years.  Despite  this  progress,  prevention  and  management  of  OIs  remain  critical
components  of  care  for  HIV-infected  children.  OIs  continue  to  be  the  presenting
symptom of HIV infection among children whose HIV-exposure status is not known (e.g.,
because  of  lack  of  maternal  antenatal  HIV  testing).  For  children  with  known  HIV
infection, barriers such as parental substance abuse may limit links to appropriate care
where indications for prophylaxis would be evaluated. HIV-infected children eligible for
primary or secondary OI prophylaxis might fail to be treated because they are receiving
suboptimal medical care. Additionally, adherence to multiple drugs (antiretroviral drugs
and  concomitant  OI  prophylactic  drugs)  may  prove  difficult  for  the  child  or  family.
Multiple  drug-drug  interactions  of  OI,  antiretroviral,  and  other  drugs  resulting  in
increased adverse events and decreased treatment efficacy may limit the choice and
continuation  of  both  HAART  and  prophylactic  regimens.  OIs  continue  to  occur  in
children in whom drug resistance causes virologic and immunologic failure. In PACTG
219,  lack  of  a  sustained  response  to  HAART  predicted  OIs  in  children  (5).  Finally,
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), initially described in HIV-infected
adults  but  also  seen  in  HIV-infected  children,  can  complicate  treatment  of  OIs  when
HAART  is  started  or  when  optimization  of  a  failing  regimen  is  attempted  in  a  patient
with  acute  OI.  Thus,  preventing  and  treating  OIs  in  HIV-infected  children  remains
important even in an era of potent HAART. In 1995, the U.S. Public Health Service and
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) developed guidelines for preventing
OIs  among  adults,  adolescents,  and  children  infected  with  HIV  (6).  These  guidelines,
developed  for  health-care  providers  and  their  HIV-infected  patients,  were  revised  in
1997, 1999, and 2002 (7,8). In 2001, the National Institutes of Health, IDSA, and CDC
convened a working group to develop guidelines for treating HIV-associated OIs, with a
goal  of  providing  evidence-based  guidelines  on  treatment  and  prophylaxis.  In
recognition
 of
 unique
 considerations
 for
 HIV-infected
 infants,
 children,
 and
adolescents---including differences between adults and children in mode of acquisition,
natural  history,  diagnosis,  and  treatment  of  HIV-related  OIs---a  separate  pediatric  OI
guidelines  writing  group  was  established.  The  pediatric  OI  treatment  guidelines  were
initially
 published
 in
 December
 2004
 (9).
 The
 current
 document
 combines
recommendations  for  preventing  and  treating  OIs  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected
children  into  one  document;  it  accompanies  a  similar  document  on  preventing  and
treating OIs among HIV-infected adults prepared by a separate group of adult HIV and
infectious  disease  specialists.  Both  sets  of  guidelines  were  prepared  by  the
Opportunistic  Infections  Working  Group  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  AIDS
Research (OAR) of the National Institutes of Health. Pediatric specialists with expertise
in specific OIs reviewed the literature since the last publication of the prevention and
treatment  guidelines,  conferred  over  several  months,  and  produced  draft  guidelines.
The Pediatric OI Working Group reviewed and discussed recommendations at a meeting
in  Bethesda,  Maryland,  on  June  25--26,  2007.  After  the  meeting,  the  document  was
revised, then reviewed and electronically approved by the writing group members. The
final  report  was  further  reviewed  by  the  core  Writing  Group,  the  Office  of  AIDS
Research, experts at CDC, the HIV Medicine Association of IDSA, the Pediatric Infectious
Diseases  Society,  and  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  before  final  approval  and
publication. Mother-to-child transmission is an important mode of acquisition of OIs and
HIV infection in children. HIV-infected women coinfected with opportunistic pathogens
might be more likely than women without HIV infection to transmit these infections to
their  infants.  For  example,  greater  rates  of  perinatal  transmission  of  hepatitis  C  and
cytomegalovirus  (CMV)  have  been  reported  from  HIV-infected  than  HIV-uninfected
women  (10,11).  In  addition,  HIV-infected  women  or  HIV-infected  family  members
coinfected with certain opportunistic pathogens might be more likely to transmit these
infections horizontally to their children, increasing the likelihood of primary acquisition
of such infections in the young child. For example, Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
among  children  primarily  reflects  acquisition  from  family  members  who  have  active
tuberculosis  (TB)  disease,  and  increased  incidence  and  prevalence  of  TB  among
HIV-infected  persons  is  well  documented.  HIV-exposed  or  -infected  children  in  the
United  States  might  have  a  higher  risk  for  exposure  to  M.  tuberculosis  than  would
comparably  aged  children  in  the  general  U.S.  population  because  of  residence  in
households  with  HIV-infected  adults  (12).  Therefore,  OIs  might  affect  not  only
HIV-infected infants but also HIV-exposed but uninfected infants who become infected
with  opportunistic  pathogens  because  of  transmission  from  HIV-infected  mothers  or
family members with coinfections. Guidelines for treating OIs in children must consider
treatment of infections among all children---both HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected---born
to HIV-infected women. The natural history of OIs among children might differ from that
among  HIV-infected  adults.  Many  OIs  in  adults  are  secondary  to  reactivation  of
opportunistic  pathogens,  which  often  were  acquired  before  HIV  infection  when  host
immunity  was  intact.  However,  OIs  among  HIV-infected  children  more  often  reflect
primary  infection  with  the  pathogen.  In  addition,  among  children  with  perinatal  HIV
infection,  the  primary  infection  with  the  opportunistic  pathogen  occurs  after  HIV
infection is established and the child's immune system already might be compromised.
This can lead to different manifestations of specific OIs in children than in adults. For
example, young children with TB are more likely than adults to have nonpulmonic and
disseminated infection, even without concurrent HIV infection. Multiple difficulties exist
in  making  laboratory  diagnoses  of  various  infections  in  children.  A  child's  inability  to
describe the symptoms of disease often makes diagnosis more difficult. For infections
for  which  diagnosis  is  made  by  laboratory  detection  of  specific  antibodies  (e.g.,  the
hepatitis  viruses  and  CMV),  transplacental  transfer  of  maternal  antibodies  that  can
persist in the infant for up to 18 months complicates the ability to make a diagnosis in
young  infants.  Assays  capable  of  directly  detecting  the  pathogen  are  required  to
diagnose such infections definitively in infants. In addition, diagnosing the etiology of
lung  infections  in  children  can  be  difficult  because  children  usually  do  not  produce
sputum, and more invasive procedures, such as bronchoscopy or lung biopsy, might be
needed  to  make  a  more  definitive  diagnosis.  Data  related  to  the  efficacy  of  various
therapies for OIs in adults usually can be extrapolated to children, but issues related to
drug  pharmacokinetics,  formulation,  ease  of  administration,  and  dosing  and  toxicity
require  special  considerations  for  children.  Young  children  in  particular  metabolize
drugs differently from adults and older children, and the volume of distribution differs.
Unfortunately, data often are lacking on appropriate drug dosing recommendations for
children  aged  <2  years.  The  prevalence  of  different  opportunistic  pathogens  among
HIV-infected  children  during  the  pre-HAART  era  varied  by  child  age,  previous  OI,
immunologic  status,  and  pathogen  (1).  During  the  pre-HAART  era,  the  most  common
OIs  among  children  in  the  United  States  (event  rates  >1.0  per  100  child-years)  were
serious  bacterial  infections  (most  commonly  pneumonia,  often  presumptively
diagnosed,  and  bacteremia),  herpes  zoster,  disseminated  MAC,  PCP,  and  candidiasis
(esophageal  and  tracheobronchial  disease).  Less  commonly  observed  OIs  (event  rate
<1.0 per 100 child-years) included CMV disease, cryptosporidiosis, TB, systemic fungal
infections,  and  toxoplasmosis  (3,4).  History  of  a  previous  AIDS-defining  OI  predicted
development of a new infection. Although most infections occurred among substantially
immunocompromised  children,  serious  bacterial  infections,  herpes  zoster,  and  TB
occurred  across  the  spectrum  of  immune  status.  Descriptions  of  pediatric  OIs  in
children  receiving  HAART  have  been  limited.  As  with  HIV-infected  adults,  substantial
decreases  in  mortality  and  morbidity,  including  OIs,  have  been  observed  among
children receiving HAART (2). Although the number of OIs has substantially decreased
during the HAART era, HIV-associated OIs and other related infections continue to occur
among HIV-infected children (3,13). In contrast to recurrent serious bacterial infections,
some  of  the  protozoan,  fungal,  or  viral  OIs  complicating  HIV  are  not  curable  with
available treatments. Sustained, effective HAART, resulting in improved immune status,
has  been  established  as  the  most  important  factor  in  controlling  OIs  among  both
HIV-infected  adults  and  children  (14).  For  many  OIs,  after  treatment  of  the  initial
infectious  episode,  secondary  prophylaxis  in  the  form  of  suppressive  therapy  is
indicated  to  prevent  recurrent  clinical  disease  from  reactivation  or  reinfection  (15).
These  guidelines  are  a  companion  to  the  Guidelines  for  Prevention  and  Treatment  of
Opportunistic Infections in HIV-Infected Adults and Adolescents (16). Treatment of OIs is
an evolving science, and availability of new agents or clinical data on existing agents
might change therapeutic options and preferences. As a result, these recommendations
will  need  to  be  periodically  updated.  Because  the  guidelines  target  HIV-exposed  and
-infected children in the United States, the opportunistic pathogens discussed are those
common  to  the  United  States  and  do  not  include  certain  pathogens  (e.g.,  Penicillium
marneffei) that might be seen more frequently in resource-limited countries or that are
common  but  seldom  cause  chronic  infection  (e.g.,  chronic  parvovirus  B19  infection).
The  document  is  organized  to  provide  information  about  the  epidemiology,  clinical
presentation, diagnosis, and treatment for each pathogen. The most critical treatment
recommendation is accompanied by a rating that includes a letter and a roman numeral
and is similar to the rating systems used in other U.S. Public Health Service/Infectious
Diseases Society of America guidelines (17). Recommendations unrelated to treatment
were  not  graded,  with  some  exceptions.  The  letter  indicates  the  strength  of  the
recommendation, which is based on the opinion of the Working Group, and the roman
numeral  reflects  the  nature  of  the  evidence  supporting  the  recommendation  (Box  1).
Because  licensure  of  drugs  for  children  often  relies  on  efficacy  data  from  adult  trials
and  safety  data  in  children,  recommendations  sometimes  may  need  to  rely  on  data
from clinical trials or studies in adults. Tables at the end of this document summarize
recommendations  for  preventing  OIs  in  children  (Tables  1--3);  treatment  of  OIs  in
children  (Table  4);  drug  preparation  and  toxicity  information  for  children  (Table  5);
drug-drug  interactions  (Table  6),  and  vaccination  recommendations  for  HIV-infected
children and adolescents (Figures 1 and 
2).  Because  maternal  antibody  persists  in  children  up  to  18  months  of  age,
virologic  tests  (usually  HIV  DNA  or  RNA  assays)  are  needed  to  determine  infection
status  in  children  aged  <18  months.  The  CDC  surveillance  definition  states  a  child  is
considered  definitively  infected  if  he  or  she  has  positive  virologic  results  on  two
separate specimens or is aged >18 months and has either a positive virologic test or a
positive  confirmed  HIV-antibody  test.  CDC  has  revised  laboratory  criteria  to  allow
presumptive  exclusion  of  HIV  infection  at  an  earlier  age  for  surveillance  (Box  2)
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5710a1.htm).  A  child  who  has  not
been breast-fed is presumed to be uninfected if he or she has no clinical or laboratory
evidence  of  HIV  infection  and  has  two  negative  virologic  tests  both  obtained  at  ≥2
weeks of age and one obtained at ≥4 weeks of age and no positive viralogic tests; or
one negative virologic test at ≥8 weeks of age and no positive virologic tests; or one
negative HIV-antibody test at ≥6 months of age. Definitive lack of infection is confirmed
by two negative viral tests, both of which were obtained at ≥1 month of age and one of
which was obtained at ≥4 months of age, or at least two negative HIV-antibody tests
from  separate  specimens  obtained  at  ≥6  months  of  age.  The  new  presumptive
definition of "uninfected" may allow clinicians to avoid starting PCP prophylaxis in some
HIV-exposed infants at age 6 weeks (see PCP section). Studies in adults and children
have  demonstrated  that  HAART  reduces  the  incidence  of  OIs  and  improves  survival,
independent of the use of OI antimicrobial prophylaxis. HAART can improve or resolve
certain OIs, such as cryptosporidiosis or microsporidiosis infection, for which effective
specific  treatments  are  not  available.  However,  potent  HAART  does  not  replace  the
need  for  OI  prophylaxis  in  children  with  severe  immune  suppression.  Additionally,
initiation  of  HAART  in  persons  with  an  acute  or  latent  OI  can  lead  to  IRIS,  an
exaggerated inflammatory reaction that can clinically worsen disease and require use
of anti-inflammatory drugs (see IRIS section below). Specific data are limited to guide
recommendations  for  when  to  start  HAART  in  children  with  an  acute  OI  and  how  to
manage  HAART  when  an  acute  OI  occurs  in  a  child  already  receiving  HAART.  The
decision  of  when  to  start  HAART  in  a  child  with  an  acute  or  latent  OI  needs  to  be
individualized  and  will  vary  by  the  degree  of  immunologic  suppression  in  the  child
before  he  or  she  starts  HAART.  Similarly,  in  a  child  already  receiving  HAART  who
develops  an  OI,  management  will  need  to  account  for  the  child's  clinical,  viral,  and
immune status on HAART and the potential drug-drug interactions between HAART and
the  required  OI  drug  regimen.  As  in  adults,  antiretroviral  therapy  improves  immune
function and CD4 cell count in HIV-infected children; within the first few months after
starting  treatment,  HIV  viral  load  sharply  decreases  and  the  CD4  count  rapidly
increases.  This  results  in  increased  capacity  to  mount  inflammatory  reactions.  After
initiation  of  HAART,  some  patients  develop  a  paradoxical  inflammatory  response  by
their reconstituted immune system to infectious or noninfectious antigens, resulting in
apparent clinical worsening. This is referred to as IRIS, and although primarily reported
in adults initiating therapy, it also has been reported in children (18--28). IRIS can occur
after initiation of HAART because of worsening of an existing active, latent, or occult OI,
where  infectious  pathogens  previously  not  recognized  by  the  immune  system  now
evoke  an  immune  response.  This  inflammatory  response  often  is  exaggerated  in
comparison with the response in patients who have normal immune systems (referred
to  by  some  experts  as  immune  reconstitution  disease).  An  example  is  activation  of
latent or occult TB after initiation of antiretroviral therapy (referred to by some experts
as  "unmasking  IRIS").  Alternatively,  clinical  recrudescence  of  a  successfully  treated
infection  can  occur,  with  paradoxical,  symptomatic  relapse  despite  microbiologic
treatment success and sterile cultures (referred to as "paradoxical IRIS"). In this case,
reconstitution  of  antigen-specific  T-cell--mediated  immunity  occurs  with  activation  of
the  immune  system  after  initiation  of  HAART  against  persisting  antigens,  whether
present  as  dead,  intact  organisms  or  as  debris.  The  pathologic  process  of  IRIS  is
inflammatory and not microbiologic in etiology. Thus, distinguishing IRIS from treatment
failure, antimicrobial resistance, or noncompliance is important. In therapeutic failure, a
microbiologic culture should reveal the continued presence of an infectious organism,
whereas  in  paradoxical  IRIS,  follow-up  cultures  are  most  often  sterile.  However,  with
"unmasking" IRIS, viable pathogens may be isolated. IRIS is described primarily on the
basis of reports of cases in adults. A proposed clinical definition is worsening symptoms
of inflammation or infection temporally related to starting HAART that are not explained
by  newly  acquired  infection  or  disease,  the  usual  course  of  a  previously  acquired
disease, or HAART toxicity in a patient with ≥1 log10 decrease in plasma HIV RNA (29).
The  timing  of  IRIS  after  initiation  of  HAART  in  adults  has  varied,  with  most  cases
occurring during the first 2--3 months after initiation; however, as many as 30% of IRIS
cases can present beyond the first 3 months of treatment. Later-onset IRIS may result
from an immune reaction against persistent noninfectious antigen. The onset of antigen
clearance  varies,  but  antigen  or  antigen  debris  might  persist  long  after  microbiologic
sterility.  For  example,  after  pneumococcal  bacteremia,  the  C-polysaccharide  antigen
can  be  identified  in  the  urine  of  40%  of  HIV-infected  adults  1  month  after  successful
treatment;  similarly,  mycobacterial  DNA  can  persist  several  months  past  culture
viability. In adults, IRIS most frequently has been observed after initiation of therapy in
persons  with  mycobacterial  infections  (including  MAC  and  M.  tuberculosis),  PCP,
cryptococcal infection, CMV, varicella zoster or herpes virus infections, hepatitis B and C
infections,  toxoplasmosis,  and  progressive  multifocal  leukoencephalopathy  (PML).
Reactions  also  have  been  described  in  children  who  had  received  bacille
Calmette-Guérin  (BCG)  vaccine  and  later  initiated  HAART  (22,25,26,28).  In  a  study  of
153  symptomatic  children  with  CD4  <15%  at  initiation  of  therapy  in  Thailand,  the
incidence of IRIS was 19%, with a median time of onset of 4 weeks after start of HAART;
children who developed IRIS had lower baseline CD4 percentage than did children who
did  not  develop  IRIS  (24).  No  randomized  controlled  trials  have  been  published
evaluating  treatment  of  IRIS.  Treatment  has  been  based  on  severity  of  disease  (CIII).
For mild cases, observation alone with close clinical and laboratory monitoring may be
sufficient. For moderate cases, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been used to
ameliorate symptoms. For severe cases, corticosteroids, such as dexamethasone, have
been  used.  However,  the  optimal  dosing  and  duration  of  therapy  are  unknown,  and
inflammation can take weeks to months to subside. During this time, HAART should be
continued. The ideal time to initiate HAART for an acute OI is unknown. The benefit of
initiating HAART is improved immune function, which could result in faster resolution of
the OI. This is particularly important for OIs for which effective therapeutic options are
limited or not available, such as for cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis, PML, and Kaposi
sarcoma (KS). However, potential problems exist when HAART and treatment for the OI
are  initiated  simultaneously.  These  include  drug-drug  interactions  between  the
antiretroviral  and  antimicrobial  drugs,  particularly  given  the  limited  repertoire  of
antiretroviral  drugs  available  for  children  than  for  adults;  issues  related  to  toxicity,
including  potential  additive  toxicity  of  antiretroviral  and  OI  drugs  and  difficulty  in
distinguishing HAART toxicity from OI treatment toxicity; and the potential for IRIS to
complicate  OI  management.  The  primary  consideration  in  delaying  HAART  until  after
initial  treatment  of  the  acute  OI  is  risk  for  death  during  the  delay.  Although  the
short-term risk for death in the United States during a 2-month HAART delay may be
relatively low, mortality in resource-limited countries is significant. IRIS is more likely to
occur in persons with advanced HIV infection and higher OI-specific antigenic burdens,
such  as  those  who  have  disseminated  infections  or  a  shorter  time  from  an  acute  OI
onset to start of HAART. However, in the absence of an OI with central nervous system
(CNS) involvement, such as cryptococcal meningitis, most IRIS events, while potentially
resulting  in  significant  morbidity,  do  not  result  in  death.  With  CNS  IRIS  or  in
resource-limited countries, significant IRIS-related death may occur with simultaneous
initiation of HAART and OI treatment; however, significant mortality also occurs in the
absence  of  HAART.  Because  no  randomized  trials  exist  in  either  adults  or  children  to
address  the  optimal  time  for  starting  HAART  when  an  acute  OI  is  present,  decisions
need to be individualized for each child. The timing is a complex decision based on the
severity  of  HIV  disease,  efficacy  of  standard  OI-specific  treatment,  social  support
system, medical resource availability, potential drug-drug interactions, and risk for IRIS.
Most experts believe that for children who have OIs that lack effective treatment (e.g.,
cryptosporidiosis,  microsporidiosis,  PML,  KS),  the  early  benefit  of  potent  HAART
outweighs any increased risk, and potent HAART should begin as soon as possible (AIII).
For other OIs, such as TB, MAC, PCP, and cryptococcal meningitis, awaiting a response
to therapy may be warranted before initiating HAART (CIII). OIs in HIV-infected children
soon after initiation of HAART (within 12 weeks) may be subclinical infections unmasked
by  HAART-related  improvement  in  immune  function,  also  known  as  "unmasking  IRIS"
and  occurring  usually  in  children  who  have  more  severe  immune  suppression  at
initiation  of  HAART.  This  does  not  represent  a  failure  of  HAART  but  rather  a  sign  of
immune reconstitution (see IRIS section). In such situations, HAART should be continued
and  treatment  for  the  OI  initiated  (AIII).  Assessing  the  potential  for  drug-drug
interactions between the antiretroviral and antimicrobial drugs and whether treatment
modifications  need  to  be  made  is  important.  In  children  who  develop  an  OI  after
receiving >12 weeks of HAART with virologic and immunologic response to therapy, it
can  be  difficult  to  distinguish  between  later-onset  IRIS  (such  as  a  "paradoxical  IRIS"
reaction  where  the  reconstituted  immune  system  demonstrates  an  inflammatory
reaction to a noninfectious antigen) and incomplete immune reconstitution with HAART
allowing occurrence of a new OI. In such situations, HAART should be continued, and if
microbiologic evaluation demonstrates organisms by stain or culture, specific OI-related
therapy  should  be  initiated  (AII).  OIs  also  can  occur  in  HIV-infected  children
experiencing virologic and immunologic failure on HAART and represent clinical failure
of  therapy.  In  this  situation,  treatment  of  the  OI  should  be  initiated,  viral  resistance
testing performed, and the child's HAART regimen reassessed, as described in pediatric
antiretroviral  guidelines  (14).  Vaccines  are  an  extremely  effective  primary  prevention
tool, and vaccines that protect against 16 diseases are recommended for routine use in
children and adolescents in the United States. Vaccination schedules for children aged
0--6
 years
 and
 7--18
 years
 are
 published
 annually
(http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules/default.htm).
 These
 schedules
 are
compiled from approved vaccine-specific policy recommendations and are standardized
among  the  major  vaccine  policy-setting  and  vaccine-delivery  organizations  (e.g.,
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP], American Academy of Pediatrics,
American Association of Family Physicians). HIV-infected children should be protected
from vaccine-preventable diseases. Most vaccines recommended for routine use can be
administered  safely  to  HIV-exposed  or  HIV-infected  children.  The  recommended
vaccination  schedules  for  2009  for  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  children  aged  0--6
years and 7--18 years were approved by the ACIP through October 2008 (Figures 1 and 
2). These schedules will be updated periodically to reflect additional ACIP-approved
vaccine  recommendations  that  pertain  to  HIV-exposed  or  HIV-infected  children.  All
inactivated
 vaccines
 can
 be
 administered
 safely
 to
 persons
 with
 altered
immunocompetence whether the vaccine is a killed whole organism or a recombinant,
subunit,  toxoid,  polysaccharide,  or  polysaccharide  protein-conjugate  vaccine.  If
inactivated  vaccines  are  indicated  for  persons  with  altered  immunocompetence,  the
usual  doses  and  schedules  are  recommended.  However,  the  effectiveness  of  such
vaccinations  might  be  suboptimal  (30).  Persons  with  severe  cell-mediated  immune
deficiency  should  not  receive  live  attenuated  vaccines.  However,  children  with  HIV
infection  are  at  higher  risk  than  immunocompetent  children  for  complications  of
varicella, herpes zoster, and measles. On the basis of limited safety, immunogenicity,
and  efficacy  data  among  HIV-infected  children,  varicella  and  measles-mumps-rubella
vaccines  can  be  considered  for  HIV-infected  children  who  are  not  severely
immunosuppressed  (i.e.,  those  with  age-specific  CD4  cell  percentages  of  ≥15%)
(30--32). Practitioners should consider the potential risks and benefits of administering
rotavirus  vaccine  to  infants  with  known  or  suspected  altered  immunocompetence;
consultation with an immunologist or infectious diseases specialist is advised. There are
no safety or efficacy data related to the administration of rotavirus vaccine to infants
who  are  potentially  immunocompromised,  including  those  who  are  HIV-infected  (33).
However,  two  considerations  support  vaccination  of  HIV-exposed  or  -infected  infants:
first, the HIV diagnosis may not be established in infants born to HIV-infected mothers
before  the  age  of  the  first  rotavirus  vaccine  dose  (only  1.5%--3.0%  of  HIV-exposed
infants in the United States will be determined to be HIV-infected); and second, vaccine
strains of rotavirus are considerably attenuated. Consult the specific ACIP statements
(available at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/ACIP-list.htm) for more detail regarding
recommendations,  precautions,  and  contraindications  for  use  of  specific  vaccines
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/rr/rr4608.pdf
 and
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5602.pdf)  (31--44).  During  the  pre-HAART  era,
serious  bacterial  infections  were  the  most  commonly  diagnosed  OIs  in  HIV-infected
children,  with  an  event  rate  of  15  per  100  child-years  (1).  Pneumonia  was  the  most
common bacterial infection (11 per 100 child-years), followed by bacteremia (3 per 100
child-years), and urinary tract infection (2 per 100 child-years). Other serious bacterial
infections, including osteomyelitis, meningitis, abscess, and septic arthritis, occurred at
rates <0.2 per 100 child-years. More minor bacterial infections such as otitis media and
sinusitis  were  particularly  common  (17--85  per  100  child-years)  in  untreated
HIV-infected  children  (45).  With  the  advent  of  HAART,  the  rate  of  pneumonia  has
decreased  to  2.2--3.1  per  100  child-years  (3,46),  similar  to  the  rate  of  3--4  per  100
child-years in HIV-uninfected children (47,48). The rate of bacteremia/sepsis during the
HAART era also has decreased dramatically to 0.35--0.37 per 100 child-years (3,4,46),
but this rate remains substantially higher than the rate of <0.01 per 100 child-years in
HIV-uninfected children (49,50). Sinusitis and otitis rates among HAART-treated children
are  substantially  lower  (2.9--3.5  per  100  child-years)  but  remain  higher  than  rates  in
children  who  do  not  have  HIV  infection  (46).  Acute  pneumonia,  often  presumptively
diagnosed in children, was associated with increased risk for long-term mortality among
HIV-infected children in one study during the pre-HAART era (51). HIV-infected children
with  pneumonia  are  more  likely  to  be  bacteremic  and  to  die  than  are  HIV-uninfected
children  with  pneumonia  (52).  Chronic  lung  disease  might  predispose  persons  to
development  of  acute  pneumonia;  in  one  study,  the  incidence  of  acute  lower
respiratory  tract  infection  in  HIV-infected  children  with  chronic  lymphoid  interstitial
pneumonitis  was  approximately  10-fold  higher  than  in  a  community-based  study  of
HIV-uninfected  children  (53).  Chronically  abnormal  airways  probably  are  more
susceptible  to  infectious  exacerbations  (similar  to  those  in  children  and  adults  with
bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis) caused by typical respiratory bacteria (Streptococcus
pneumoniae,  nontypeable  Haemophilus  influenzae)  and  Pseudomonas  spp.  S.
pneumoniae  was  the  most  prominent  invasive  bacterial  pathogen  in  HIV-infected
children  both  in  the  United  States  and  worldwide,  accounting  for  >50%  of  bacterial
bloodstream infections in HIV-infected children (1,4,54--57). HIV-infected children have
a  markedly  higher  risk  for  pneumococcal  infection  than  do  HIV-uninfected  children
(58,59). In the absence of HAART, the incidence of invasive pneumococcal disease was
6.1 per 100 child-years among HIV-infected children through age 7 years (60), whereas
among  children  treated  with  HAART,  the  rate  of  invasive  pneumococcal  disease
decreased  by  about  half,  to  3.3  per  100  child-years  (46).  This  is  consistent  with  the
halving of invasive pneumococcal disease rates in HIV-infected adults receiving HAART
compared with rates in those not receiving HAART (61). Among children with invasive
pneumococcal
 infections,
 study
 results
 vary
 on
 whether
 penicillin-resistant
pneumococcal
 strains
 are
 more
 commonly
 isolated
 from
 HIV-infected
 than
HIV-uninfected  persons  (56,60,62--64).  Reports  among  children  without  HIV  infection
have  not  demonstrated  a  difference  in  the  case-fatality  rate  between  those  with
penicillin-susceptible
 and
 those
 with
 nonsusceptible
 pneumococcal
 infections
(case-fatality rate was associated with severity of disease and underlying illness) (65).
Invasive  disease  caused  by  penicillin-nonsusceptible  pneumococcus  was  associated
with  longer  fever  and  hospitalization  but  not  with  greater  risk  for  complications  or
poorer  outcome  in  a  study  of  HIV-uninfected  children  (66).  Since  routine  use  of
seven-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) in 2000, the overall incidence of
drug-resistant pneumococcal infections has stabilized or decreased. H. influenzae type
b  (Hib)  also  has  been  reported  to  have  been  more  common  in  HIV-infected  children
before the availability of Hib vaccine. In a study in South African children who had not
received Hib conjugate vaccine, the estimated relative annual rate of overall invasive
Hib disease in children aged <1 year was 5.9 times greater among HIV-infected than
HIV-uninfected children, and HIV-infected children were at greater risk for bacteremic
pneumonia (67). However, Hib is unlikely to occur in HIV-infected children in most U.S.
communities,  where  high  rates  of  Hib  vaccination  result  in  very  low  rates  of  Hib
nasopharyngeal  colonization  among  contacts.  HIV-related  immune  dysfunction  may
increase the risk for invasive meningococcal disease in HIV-infected patients, but few
cases  have  been  reported  (68--72).  In  a  population-based  study  of  invasive
meningococcal disease in Atlanta, Georgia (72), as expected, the annual rate of disease
was  higher  for  18-  to  24-year-olds  (1.17  per  100,000)  than  for  all  adults  (0.5  per
100,000), but the estimated annual rate for HIV-infected adults was substantially higher
(11.2  per  100,000).  Risk  for  invasive  meningococcal  disease  may  be  higher  in
HIV-infected adults. Specific data are not available on risk for meningococcal disease in
younger HIV-infected children. Although the frequency of gram-negative bacteremia is
lower
 than
 that
 of
 gram-positive
 bacteremia
 among
 HIV-infected
 children,
gram-negative bacteremia is more common among children with advanced HIV disease
or immunosuppression and among children with central venous catheters. However, in
children aged <5 years, gram-negative bacteremia also was observed among children
with  milder  levels  of  immune  suppression.  In  a  study  of  680  HIV-infected  children  in
Miami, Florida, through 1997, a total of 72 (10.6%) had 95 episodes of gram-negative
bacteremia;  the  predominant  organisms  identified  in  those  with  gram-negative
bacteremia were P. aeruginosa (26%), nontyphoidal Salmonella (15%), Escherichia coli
(15%),  and  H.  influenzae  (13%)  (73).  The  relative  frequency  of  the  organisms  varied
over time, with the relative frequency of P. aeruginosa bacteremia increasing from 13%
before 1984 to 56% during 1995--1997, and of Salmonella from 7% before 1984 to 22%
during 1995--1997. However, H. influenzae was not observed after 1990 (presumably
decreasing after incorporation of Hib vaccine into routine childhood vaccinations). The
overall case-fatality rate for children with gram-negative bacteremia was 43%. Among
Kenyan  children  with  bacteremia,  HIV  infection  increased  the  risk  for  nontyphoidal
Salmonella  and  E.  coli  infections  (74).  The  presence  of  a  central  venous  catheter
increases the risk for bacterial infections in HIV-infected children, and the incidence is
similar  to  that  for  children  with  cancer.  The  most  commonly  isolated  pathogens  in
catheter-associated  bacteremia  in  HIV-infected  children  are  similar  to  those  in
HIV-negative
 children
 with
 indwelling
 catheters,
 including
 coagulase-negative
staphylococci,  S.  aureus,  enterococci,  P.  aeruginosa,  gram-negative  enteric  bacilli,
Bacillus  cereus,  and  Candida  spp.  (57,75).  Data  conflict  about  whether  infectious
morbidity increases in children who have been exposed to but not infected with HIV. In
studies in developing countries, uninfected infants of HIV-infected mothers had higher
mortality (primarily because of bacterial pneumonia and sepsis) than did those born to
uninfected  mothers  (76,77).  Advanced  maternal  HIV  infection  was  associated  with
increased risk for infant death (76,77). In a study in Latin America and the Caribbean,
60% of 462 uninfected infants of HIV-infected mothers experienced infectious disease
morbidity  during  the  first  6  months  of  life,  with  the  rate  of  neonatal  infections
(particularly  sepsis)  and  respiratory  infections  higher  than  rates  in  comparable
community-based  studies  (78).  Among  other  factors,  infections  in  uninfected  infants
were  associated  with  more  advanced  maternal  HIV  disease  and  maternal  smoking
during  pregnancy.  However,  in  a  study  from  the  United  States,  the  rate  of  lower
respiratory  tract  infections  in  HIV-exposed,  uninfected  children  was  within  the  range
reported for healthy children during the first year of life (79). In a separate study, the
rate of overall morbidity (including but not specific to infections) decreased from 1990
through  1999  in  HIV-exposed,  uninfected  children  (80),  although  rates  were  not
compared  with  an  HIV-unexposed  or  community-based  cohort.  Clinical  presentation
depends  on  the  particular  type  of  bacterial  infection  (e.g.,  bacteremia/sepsis,
osteomyelitis/septic  arthritis,  pneumonia,  meningitis,  and  sinusitis/otitis  media)  (81).
HIV-infected  children  with  invasive  bacterial  infections  typically  have  a  clinical
presentation similar to children without HIV infection, with acute presentation and fever
(59,60,82). HIV-infected children might be less likely than children without HIV infection
to  have  leukocytosis  (60).  The  classical  signs,  symptoms,  and  laboratory  test
abnormalities that usually indicate invasive bacterial infection (e.g., fever and elevated
white  blood  cell  count)  are  usually  present  but  might  be  lacking  among  HIV-infected
children  who  have  reduced  immune  competence  (59,81).  One-third  of  HIV-infected
children not receiving HAART who have acute pneumonia have recurrent episodes (51).
Resulting  lung  damage  before  initiation  of  HAART  can  lead  to  continued  recurrent
pulmonary infections, even in the presence of effective HAART. In studies in Malawian
and South African children with acute bacterial meningitis, the clinical presentations of
children  with  and  without  HIV  infection  were  similar  (83,84).  However,  in  the  Malawi
study,  HIV-infected  children  were  6.4-fold  more  likely  to  have  repeated  episodes  of
meningitis  than  were  children  without  HIV  infection,  although  the  study  did  not
differentiate  recrudescence  from  new  infections  (83).  In  both  studies,  HIV-infected
children  were  more  likely  to  die  from  meningitis  than  were  children  without  HIV
infection. Attempted isolation of a pathogenic organism from normally sterile sites (e.g.,
blood,  cerebrospinal  fluid  [CSF],  and  pleural  fluid)  is  strongly  recommended.  This  is
particularly  important  because  of  an  increasing  incidence  of  antimicrobial  resistance,
including
 penicillin-resistant
 S.
 pneumoniae
 and
 community-acquired
methicillin-resistant  S.  aureus  (MRSA).  Because  of  difficulties  obtaining  appropriate
specimens  (e.g.,  sputum)  from  young  children,  bacterial  pneumonia  is  most  often  a
presumptive  diagnosis  in  a  child  with  fever,  pulmonary  symptoms,  and  an  abnormal
chest  radiograph  unless  an  accompanying  bacteremia  exists.  In  the  absence  of  a
laboratory  isolate,  differentiating  viral  from  bacterial  pneumonia  using  clinical  criteria
can  be  difficult  (85).  In  a  study  of  intravenous  immune  globulin  (IVIG)  prophylaxis  of
bacterial infections, only a bacterial pathogen was identified in 12% of acute presumed
bacterial  pneumonia  episodes  (51).  TB  and  PCP  must  always  be  considered  in
HIV-infected  children  with  pneumonia.  Presence  of  wheezing  makes  acute  bacterial
pneumonia less likely than other causes, such as viral pathogens, asthma exacerbation,
"atypical" bacterial pathogens such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae, or aspiration. Sputum
induction  obtained  by  nebulization  with  hypertonic  (5%)  saline  was  evaluated  for
diagnosis  of  pneumonia  in  210  South  African  infants  and  children  (median  age:  6
months), 66% of whom had HIV infection (86). The procedure was well-tolerated, and
identified  an  etiology  in  63%  of  children  with  pneumonia  (identification  of  bacteria  in
101,  M.  tuberculosis  in  19,  and  PCP  in  12  children).  Blood  and,  if  present,  fluid  from
pleural effusion should be cultured. Among children with bacteremia, a source for the
bacteremia should be sought. In addition to routine chest radiographs, other diagnostic
radiologic evaluations (e.g., abdomen, ultrasound studies) might be necessary among
HIV-infected children with compromised immune systems to identify less apparent foci
of  infection  (e.g.,  bronchiectasis,  internal  organ  abscesses)  (87--89).  Among  children
with central venous catheters, both a peripheral and catheter blood culture should be
obtained; if the catheter is removed, the catheter tip should be sent for culture. Assays
for  detection  of  bacterial  antigens  or  evidence  by  molecular  biology  techniques  are
important  for  the  diagnostic  evaluation  of  HIV-infected  children  in  whom  unusual
pathogens might be involved or difficult to identify or culture by standard techniques.
For  example,  Bordetella  pertussis  and  Chlamydia  pneumoniae  can  be  identified  by  a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay of nasopharyngeal secretions (85). Preventing
Exposure Because S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae are common in the community, no
effective way exists to eliminate exposure to these bacteria. However, routine use of
conjugated  seven-valent  PCV  and  Hib  vaccine  in  U.S.  infants  and  young  children  has
dramatically  reduced  vaccine  type  invasive  disease  and  nasopharyngeal  colonization,
conferring herd protection of HIV-infected contacts because of decreased exposure to
Hib  and  pneumoccal  serotypes  included  in  the  vaccine.  Food.  To  reduce  the  risk  for
exposure  to  potential  gastrointestinal  (GI)  bacterial  pathogens,  health-care  providers
should advise that HIV-infected children avoid eating the following raw or undercooked
foods  (including  other  foods  that  contain  them):  eggs,  poultry,  meat,  seafood
(especially  raw  shellfish),  and  raw  seed  sprouts.  Unpasteurized  dairy  products  and
unpasteurized fruit juices also should be avoided. Of particular concern to HIV-infected
infants  and  children  is  the  potential  for  caretakers  to  handle  these  raw  foods  (e.g.,
during  meal  preparation)  and  then  unknowingly  transfer  bacteria  from  their  hands  to
the child's food, milk or formula or directly to the child. Hands, cutting boards, counters,
and knives and other utensils should be washed thoroughly after contact with uncooked
foods. Produce should be washed thoroughly before being eaten. Pets. When obtaining
a  new  pet,  caregivers  should  avoid  dogs  or  cats  aged  <6  months  or  stray  animals.
HIV-infected  children  and  adults  should  avoid  contact  with  any  animals  that  have
diarrhea and should wash their hands after handling pets, including before eating, and
avoid contact with pets' feces. HIV-infected children should avoid contact with reptiles
(e.g., snakes, lizards, iguanas, and turtles) and with chicks and ducklings because of the
risk for salmonellosis. Travel. The risk for foodborne and waterborne infections among
immunosuppressed,  HIV-infected  persons  is  magnified  during  travel  to  economically
developing  countries.  HIV-infected  children  who  travel  to  such  countries  should  avoid
foods and beverages that might be contaminated, including raw fruits and vegetables,
raw  or  undercooked  seafood  or  meat,  tap  water,  ice  made  with  tap  water,
unpasteurized  milk  and  dairy  products,  and  items  sold  by  street  vendors.  Foods  and
beverages that are usually safe include steaming hot foods, fruits that are peeled by
the traveler, bottled (including carbonated) beverages, and water brought to a rolling
boil for 1 minute. Treatment of water with iodine or chlorine might not be as effective
as  boiling  and  will  not  eliminate  Cryptosporidia  but  can  be  used  when  boiling  is  not
practical.  Preventing  First  Episode  of  Disease  HIV-infected  children  aged  ≤5  years
should  receive  the  Hib  conjugate  vaccine  (AII)  (Figure  1).  Clinicians  and  other
health-care providers should consider use of Hib vaccine among HIV-infected children
>5  years  old  who  have  not  previously  received  Hib  vaccine  (AIII)  (30,34).  For  these
older  children,  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  recommends  two  doses  of  any
conjugate Hib vaccine, administered at least 1--2 months apart (AIII) (90). HIV-infected
children  aged  2--59  months  should  receive  the  seven-valent  PCV  (AII).  A  four-dose
series of PCV is recommended for routine administration to infants at ages 2, 4, 6, and
12--15  months;  two  or  three  doses  are  recommended  for  previously  unvaccinated
infants  and  children  aged  7--23  months  depending  on  age  at  first  vaccination  (36).
Incompletely vaccinated children aged 24--59 months should receive two doses of PCV
≥8  weeks  apart.  Children  who  previously  received  three  PCV  doses  need  only  one
additional  dose.  Additionally,  children  aged  >2  years  should  receive  the  23-valent
pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  (PPSV)  (≥2  months  after  their  last  PCV  dose),
with
 a
 single
 revaccination
 with
 PPSV
 5
 years
 later
 (CIII)
 (36)
 (see
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/provisional/downloads/pneumo-Oct-2008-508.pdf  for
the  most  updated  recommendations).  Data  are  limited  regarding  efficacy  of  PCV  for
children aged ≥5 years and for adults who are at high risk for pneumococcal infection.
Administering  PCV  to  older  children  with  high-risk  conditions  (including  HIV-infected
children) is not contraindicated. (Figures 1 and 
2).  One  study  reported  that  five-valent  PCV  is  immunogenic  among  HIV-infected
children  aged  2--9  years  (91).  A  multicenter  study  of  pneumococcal  vaccination  in  a
group of HIV-infected children not administered PCV during infancy demonstrated the
safety  and  immunogenicity  of  two  doses  of  PCV  followed  by  one  dose  of  PPSV  for
HAART-treated  HIV-infected  children  aged  2--19  years  (including  some  who  had
previously received PPSV) (92). In a placebo-controlled trial of a nine-valent PCV among
South African children, although vaccine efficacy was somewhat lower among children
with  than  without  HIV  infection  (65%  versus  85%,  respectively),  the  incidence  of
invasive  pneumococcal  disease  was  substantially  lower  among  HIV-infected  vaccine
recipients (63). HIV-infected children probably are at increased risk for meningococcal
disease,  although  not  to  the  extent  they  are  for  invasive  S.  pneumoniae  infection.
Although the efficacy of conjugated meningococcal vaccine (MCV) and meningococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (MPSV) among HIV-infected patients is unknown, HIV infection is
not a contraindication to receiving these vaccines (30). MCV is currently recommended
for all children at age 11 or 12 years or at age 13--18 years if not previously vaccinated
and  for  previously  unvaccinated  college  freshmen  living  in  a  dormitory  (44).  A
multicenter safety and immunogenicity trial of MCV in HIV-infected 11- to 24-year-olds
is  under  way.  In  addition,  children  at  high  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  because  of
other  conditions  (e.g.,  terminal  complement  deficiencies,  anatomic  or  functional
asplenia)  should  receive  MCV  if  aged  2--10  years  (BIII)  (41).  Although  the  efficacy  of
MCV among HIV-infected children is unknown, because patients with HIV probably are
at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease,  HIV-infected  children  who  do  not  fit  into
the above groups may elect to be vaccinated. Revaccination with MCV is indicated for
children  who  had  been  vaccinated  ≥5  years  previously  with  MPSV  (CIII).  Because
influenza increases the risk for secondary bacterial respiratory infections (93), following
guidelines for annual influenza vaccination for influenza prevention can be expected to
reduce the risk for serious bacterial infections in HIV-infected children (BIII) (Figures 1
and 
2)  (35).  To  prevent  serious  bacterial  infections  among  HIV-infected  children  who
have hypogammaglobulinemia (IgG <400 mg/dL), clinicians should use IVIG (AI). During
the  pre-HAART  era,  IVIG  was  effective  in  preventing  serious  bacterial  infections  in
symptomatic HIV-infected children (54), but this effect was most clearly demonstrated
only  in  those  not  receiving  daily  trimethoprim--sulfamethoxazole  (TMP--SMX)  for  PCP
prophylaxis  (55).  Thus,  IVIG  is  no  longer  recommended  for  primary  prevention  of
serious bacterial infections in HIV-infected children unless hypogammaglobulinemia is
present  or  functional  antibody  deficiency  is  demonstrated  by  either  poor  specific
antibody  titers  or  recurrent  bacterial  infections  (CII).  TMP--SMX  administered  daily  for
PCP  prophylaxis  is  effective  in  reducing  the  rate  of  serious  bacterial  infections
(predominantly respiratory) in HIV-infected children who do not have access to HAART
(AII) (55,94). Atovaquone combined with azithromycin, which provides prophylaxis for
MAC  as  well  as  PCP,  has  been  shown  in  HIV-infected  children  to  be  as  effective  as
TMP--SMX  in  preventing  serious  bacterial  infections  and  is  similarly  tolerated  (95).
However,  indiscriminate  use  of  antibiotics  (when  not  indicated  for  PCP  or  MAC
prophylaxis  or  other  specific  reasons)  might  promote  development  of  drug-resistant
organisms.  Thus,  antibiotic  prophylaxis  is  not  recommended  solely  for  primary
prevention of serious bacterial infections (DIII). In developing countries, where endemic
deficiency of vitamin A and zinc is common, supplementation with vitamin A and zinc
conferred  additional  protection  against  bacterial  diarrhea  and/or  pneumonia  in
HIV-infected children (96,97). However, in the United States, although attention to good
nutrition including standard daily multivitamins is an important component of care for
HIV-infected  children,  additional  vitamin  supplementation  above  the  recommended
daily  amounts  is  not  recommended  (DIII).  Discontinuation  of  Primary  Prophylaxis  A
clinical  trial,  PACTG  1008,  demonstrated  that  discontinuation  of  MAC  and/or  PCP
antibiotic  prophylaxis  in  HIV-infected  children  who  achieved  immune  reconstitution
(CD4 >15%) while receiving ART did not result in excessive rates of serious bacterial
infections  (46).  Treatment  of  Disease  The  principles  of  treating  serious  bacterial
infections  are  the  same  in  HIV-infected  and  HIV-uninfected  children.  Specimens  for
microbiologic  studies  should  be  collected  before  initiation  of  antibiotic  treatment.
However,  in  patients  with  suspected  serious  bacterial  infections,  therapy  should  be
administered  empirically  and  promptly  without  waiting  for  results  of  such  studies;
therapy can be adjusted once culture results become available. The local prevalence of
resistance  to  common  infectious  agents  (i.e.,  penicillin-resistant  S.  pneumoniae  and
MRSA)  and  the  recent  use  of  prophylactic  or  therapeutic  antibiotics  should  be
considered when initiating empiric therapy. When the organism is identified, antibiotic
susceptibility  testing  should  be  performed,  and  subsequent  therapy  based  on  the
results of susceptibility testing (AII).  HIV-infected children whose immune systems are
not  seriously  compromised  (CDC  Immunologic  Category  I)  (98)  and  who  are  not
neutropenic can be expected to respond similarly to HIV-uninfected children and should
be  treated  with  the  usual  antimicrobial  agents  recommended  for  the  most  likely
bacterial organisms (AIII). For example, for HIV-infected children outside of the neonatal
period  who  have  suspected  community-acquired  bacteremia,  bacterial  pneumonia,  or
meningitis,  empiric  therapy  with  an  extended-spectrum  cephalosporin  (such  as
ceftriaxone or cefotaxime) is reasonable until culture results are available (AIII) (85,99).
The  addition  of  azithromycin  can  be  considered  for  hospitalized  patients  with
pneumonia  to  treat  other  common  community-acquired  pneumonia  pathogens  (M.
pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae). If MRSA is suspected or the prevalence of MRSA is high
(i.e., >10%) in the community, clindamycin or vancomycin can be added (choice based
on local susceptibility patterns) (100,101). Neutropenic children also should be treated
with an antipseudomonal drug such as ceftazidime or imipenem, with consideration of
adding an aminoglycoside if infection with Pseudomonas spp. is thought likely. Severely
immunocompromised  HIV-infected  children  with  invasive  or  recurrent  bacterial
infections require expanded empiric antimicrobial treatment covering a broad range of
resistant organisms similar to that chosen for suspected catheter sepsis pending results
of  diagnostic  evaluations  and  cultures  (AIII).  Initial  empiric  therapy  of  HIV-infected
children with suspected catheter sepsis should include coverage for both gram-positive
and
 enteric
 gram-negative
 organisms,
 such
 as
 ceftazidime,
 which
 has
anti-Pseudomonas  activity,  and  vancomycin  to  cover  MRSA  (AIII).  Factors  such  as
response  to  therapy,  clinical  status,  identification  of  pathogen,  and  need  for  ongoing
vascular  access,  will  determine  the  need  and  timing  of  catheter  removal.  Monitoring
and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS  The  response  to  appropriate  antibiotic  therapy
should be similar in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected children, with a clinical response
usually  observed  within  2--3  days  after  initiation  of  appropriate  antibiotics;  radiologic
improvement  in  patients  with  pneumonia  may  lag  behind  clinical  response.  Fatal
hemolytic reaction to ceftriaxone has been reported in an HIV-infected child with prior
ceftriaxone  treatment  (102).  Whereas  HIV-infected  adults  experience  high  rates  of
adverse  and  even  treatment-limiting  reactions  to  TMP--SMX,  in  HIV-infected  children,
serious adverse reactions to TMP--SMX appear to be much less of a problem (103). IRIS
has not been described in association with treatment of bacterial infections in children.
Prevention  of  Recurrence   Status  of  vaccination  against  Hib,  pneumococcus,
meningococcus,  and  influenza  should  be  reviewed  and  updated,  according  to  the
recommendations outlined in the section "Preventing First Episode of Disease" (Figures
1 and 
2)  (AI).  TMP--SMX,  administered  daily  for  PCP  prophylaxis,  and  azithromycin  or
atovaquone-azithromycin,  administered  for  MAC  prophylaxis,  also  may  reduce  the
incidence of drug-sensitive serious bacterial infections in children with recurrent serious
bacterial  infections.  Although  administration  of  antibiotic  chemoprophylaxis  to
HIV-infected children who have frequent recurrences of serious bacterial infections may
be considered, caution is required when using antibiotics solely to prevent recurrence
of  serious  bacterial  infections  because  of  the  potential  for  development  of
drug-resistant  microorganisms  and  drug  toxicity.  In  rare  situations  in  which  antibiotic
prophylaxis is not effective in preventing frequent recurrent serious bacterial infections,
IVIG  prophylaxis  can  be  considered  for  secondary  prophylaxis  (BI).  Discontinuation  of
Secondary
 Prophylaxis
 As
 noted
 earlier,
 PACTG
 1008,
 demonstrated
 that
discontinuation  of  MAC  and/or  PCP  antibiotic  phylaxis  in  HIV-infected  children  who
achieved immune reconstitution (CD4 >15%) while receiving antiretroviral therapy did
not result in excessive rates of serious bacterial infections (46). Bartonella is a genus of
facultative  intracellular  bacteria  including  21  species,  only  a  few  of  which  have  been
implicated  as  human  pathogens  (104--106).  Of  these,  Bartonella  henselae  and
Bartonella quintana cause a spectrum of diseases specifically in immunocompromised
hosts,  such  as  those  infected  with  HIV  (107,108).  These  diseases  include  bacillary
angiomatosis and bacillary peliosis. Immunocompromised persons also are susceptible
to  Bartonella-associated  bacteremia  and  dissemination  to  other  organ  systems.
Complications  of  Bartonella  infection  are  relatively  uncommon  in  the  pediatric
HIV-infected population (4), although complications in adult immunocompromised hosts
also can occur in immunocompromised children with AIDS. Bartonella infections involve
an  intra-erythrocytic  phase  that  appears  to  provide  a  protective  niche  for  the
bartonellae  leading  to  persistent  and  often  relapsing  infection,  particularly  in
immunocompromised persons (104). A feature of infections with the genus Bartonella is
the ability of the bacteria to cause either acute or chronic infection with either vascular
proliferative  or  suppurative  manifestations,  depending  on  the  immune  status  of  the
patient  (104).  In  the  general  population,  B.  henselae  typically  is  associated  with
cat-scratch disease. Most cases of cat-scratch disease occur in patients aged <20 years
(109). A study examining the epidemiology of cat-scratch disease in the United States
estimated  that  437  pediatric  hospitalizations  associated  with  cat-scratch  disease
occurred among children aged <18 years during 2000, giving a national hospitalization
rate of 0.6 per 100,000 children aged <18 years and 0.86 per 100,000 children aged
<5 years (110). Data are lacking on the epidemiology of infection with Bartonella spp.
in  HIV-infected  children.  The  household  cat  is  a  major  vector  for  transmission  of  B.
henselae  to  humans.  Transmission  of  B.  henselae  from  cat  to  cat  appears  to  be
facilitated  by  cat  fleas,  but  data  do  not  suggest  that  B.  henselae  is  efficiently
transmitted  from  cats  to  humans  by  fleas  (111).  More  than  90%  of  patients  with
cat-scratch disease have a history of recent contact with cats, often kittens (109), and a
cat  scratch  or  bite  (112)  has  been  implicated  as  the  principal  mode  of  cat-to-human
transmission.  Compared  with  adult  cats,  kittens  (<1  year  of  age)  are  more  likely  to
have B. henselae bacteremia and to have high levels of bacteremia, and more likely to
scratch. Despite the evidence against fleaborne cat-to-human transmission, researchers
acknowledge the potential for such transmission and the need for further investigation
(111).  Elimination  of  flea  infestation  is  important  in  preventing  transmission  because
contamination of cat claws or of a scratch wound with infected flea feces is a possible
mechanism for infecting humans (111). Infection occurs more often during the autumn
and  winter  (109,112--114).   B.  quintana  is  globally  distributed.  The  vector  for  B.
quintana is the human body louse. Outbreaks of trench fever have been associated with
poor sanitation and personal hygiene, which may predispose individuals to the human
body  louse  (106).  The  clinical  manifestations  of  B.  henselae  infection  are  largely
determined by the host's immune response. Localized disease (e.g., focal suppurative
regional  lymphadenopathy  such  as  in  typical  cat-scratch  disease)  appears  most
common  in  patients  with  an  intact  immune  system;  systemic  infection  appears  more
commonly in immunocompromised patients, although systemic disease has also been
reported  among  otherwise  normal  children  (115,116).  Clinical  manifestations  of  B.
henselae  and  B.  quintana  specific  to  HIV-infected  and  other  immunocompromised
patients include bacillary angiomatosis and bacillary peliosis. Bacillary angiomatosis is a
rare  disorder  that  occurs  almost  entirely  in  severely  immunocompromised  hosts
(117,118).  It  is  a  vascular  proliferative  disease  that  has  been  reported  most  often  in
HIV-infected adults who have severe immunosuppression with a median CD4 count of
<50  cells/mm3  in  a  majority  of  case  studies  of  HIV-infected  adults  (108,119).  The
disease  is  characterized  by  cutaneous  and  subcutaneous  angiomatous  papules;  the
lesions of this disease can be confused with KS. Lesions are often papular and red with
smooth or eroded surfaces; they are vascular and bleed if traumatized. Nodules may be
observed in the subcutaneous tissue and can erode through the skin. Less frequently, it
may  involve  organs  other  than  the  skin.  Bacillary  peliosis  is  characterized  by
angiomatous
 masses
 in
 visceral
 organs;
 it
 mainly
 occurs
 in
 severely
immunocompromised patients with HIV infection. It is a vasoproliferative condition that
contains blood-filled cystic spaces. The organ most commonly affected is the liver (i.e.,
peliosis  hepatis),  but  the  disease  also  can  involve  bone  marrow,  lymph  nodes,  lungs,
and  CNS  (120--122).  Immunocompromised  patients  infected  with  B.  henselae  or  B.
quintana can also present with persisting or relapsing fever with bacteremia, and these
bacteria should be considered in the differential diagnosis of fever of unknown origin in
immunocompromised  children  with  late-stage  AIDS  (123).  Dissemination  to  almost  all
organ  systems  has  been  described,  including  bone  (e.g.,  osteomyelitis),  heart  (e.g.,
subacute  endocarditis),  and  CNS  (e.g.,  encephalopathy,  seizures,  neuroretinitis,
transverse  myelitis)  (124).  Most  patients  with  visceral  involvement  have  nonspecific
systemic  symptoms,  including  fever,  chills,  night  sweats,  anorexia  and  weight  loss,
abdominal  pain,  nausea,  vomiting,  and  diarrhea.  Bartonella  spp.  are  small,
gram-negative bacilli. In cases of bacillary angiomatosis and bacillary peliosis, diagnosis
is  usually  made  through  biopsy  with  a  characteristic  histologic  picture:  clusters  of
organisms can be demonstrated with Warthin-Starry silver stain of affected tissue. The
organisms  can  be  isolated  with  difficulty  from  blood  or  tissue  culture  using  enriched
agar;  they  have  been  isolated  more  successfully  from  specimens  from  patients  with
bacillary angiomatosis and peliosis than from patients with typical cat-scratch disease
(107).  B.  henselae,  similar  to  other  Bartonella  spp.,  is  a  fastidious,  slow-growing
organism; in most cases, colonies first appear after 9--40 days; therefore incubation for
up  to  6  weeks  is  recommended  (124).  Serologic  tests  such  as  indirect  fluorescent
antibody  (IFA)  test  and  enzyme  immunoassay  (EIA)  are  also  available.  The  IFA  is
available  at  many  commercial  laboratories  and  state  public  health  laboratories  and
through  CDC  (109).  Unfortunately,  cross-reactivity  among  Bartonella  spp.  and  other
bacteria,  such  as  Chlamydia  psittaci  (115),  is  common,  and  serologic  tests  do  not
accurately  distinguish  among  them.  Additionally,  the  sensitivity  of  the  currently
available IFA is lower in immunocompromised than immune-competent patients; 25% of
HIV-infected  Bartonella  culture-positive  patients  never  develop  anti-Bartonella  (121).
The  most  sensitive  method  of  diagnosis  is  with  PCR  testing  of  clinical  specimens;
different  procedures  have  been  developed  that  can  discriminate  among  different
Bartonella spp. (125,126). PCR assays are available in some commercial and research
laboratories. Preventing Exposure Prevention of bartonellosis should focus on reducing
exposure to vectors of the disease, i.e., the body louse (for B. quintana) and cats and
cat  fleas  (for  B.  henselae).  Controlling  cat  flea  infestation  and  avoiding  cat  scratches
are  therefore  critical  strategies  for  preventing  B.  henselae  infections  in  HIV-infected
persons. To avoid exposure to B. quintana, HIV-infected patients should avoid and treat
infestation  with  body  lice  (AII).  HIV-infected  persons,  specifically  those  with  severe
immunosuppression,  should  consider  the  potential  risks  of  cat  ownership;  risks  of  cat
ownership for HIV-infected children should be discussed with caretakers. If a decision is
made  to  acquire  a  cat,  cats  <1  year  of  age  should  be  avoided  (BII)  (109,123).
HIV-infected  persons  should  avoid  playing  roughly  with  cats  and  kittens  to  minimize
scratches and bites and should promptly wash sites of contact if they are scratched or
bitten (BIII) (109). Also, cats should not be allowed to lick open wounds or cuts (BIII). No
evidence  indicates  any  benefit  from  routine  culturing  or  serologic  testing  of  cats  for
Bartonella infection or from antibiotic treatment of healthy, serologically positive cats
(DII) (109). Preventing First Episode of Disease No evidence exists that supports the use
of chemoprophylaxis for bartonellosis, such as after a cat scratch (CIII). Discontinuing
Primary Prophylaxis Not applicable. Treatment Recommendations Treatment of Disease
Management  of  typical  cat-scratch  disease  in  immunocompetent  patients  is  mainly
supportive  because  the  disease  usually  is  self-limited  and  resolves  spontaneously  in
2--4  months.  Enlarged,  painful  lymph  nodes  may  need  to  be  aspirated.  Cat-scratch
disease  typically  does  not  respond  to  antibiotic  therapy;  the  localized  clinical
manifestations  of  the  disease  are  believed  to  result  from  an  immunologic  reaction  in
the lymph nodes with few viable Bartonella present by the time a biopsy is performed
(104,127). In one double-blind, placebo-controlled study in a small number (N=29) of
immunocompetent  older  children  and  adults  with  uncomplicated  cat-scratch  disease,
azithromycin  resulted  in  a  more  rapid  decrease  in  initial  lymph  node  volume  by
sonography, although clinical outcomes did not differ (128). Thus, antibiotic treatment
usually  is  not  recommended  for  uncomplicated  localized  disease.  The  in  vitro  and  in
vivo  antibiotic  susceptibilities  of  Bartonella  do  not  correlate  well  for  a  number  of
antibiotics;  for  example,  penicillin  demonstrates  in  vitro  activity  but  has  no  in  vivo
efficacy  (104,115).  Although  no  systematic  clinical  trials  have  been  conducted,
antibiotic treatment of bacillary angiomatosis and peliosis hepatis is recommended on
the  basis  of  reported  experience  in  clinical  case  series  because  severe,  progressive,
and disseminated disease can occur, and without appropriate therapy, systemic spread
can occur and involve virtually any organ (104,108). Guidelines for treating Bartonella
infections  have  been  published  (104).  The  drug  of  choice  for  treating  systemic
bartonellosis  is  erythromycin  or  doxycycline  (AII)  (104,121).  Clarithromycin  or
azithromycin treatment has been associated with clinical response, and either of these
can  be  an  alternative  for  Bartonella  treatment  (BIII)  (129).  For  patients  with  severe
disease,  intravenous  (IV)  administration  may  be  needed  initially  (AIII)  (130).  Therapy
should  be  administered  for  3  months  for  cutaneous  bacillary  angiomatosis  and  4
months  for  bacillary  peliosis,  CNS  disease,  osteomyelitis,  or  severe  infections,  as
treatment must be of sufficient duration to prevent relapse (AII) (104,123). Combination
therapy  with  the  addition  of  rifampin  to  either  erythromycin  or  doxycycline  is
recommended for immunocompromised patients with acute, life-threatening infections
(BIII)  (104,123).  Because  doxycycline  has  better  CNS  penetration  than  does
erythromycin, the combination of doxycycline and rifampin is preferred for treating CNS
Bartonella infection, including retinitis (AIII). Endocarditis is most commonly caused by
B.  quintana,  followed  by  B.  hensalae,  but  also  has  been  linked  with  infection  with  B.
elizabethae,  B.  vinsonii  subspecies  Berkhoffii,  B.  vinsonii  subspecies  Arupensis,  B.
kohlerae,  and  B.  alsatica  (131).  For  suspected  (but  culture-negative)  Bartonella
endocarditis, 14 days of aminoglycoside treatment (AII) accompanied by ceftriaxone (to
adequately  treat  other  potential  causes  of  culture-negative  endocarditis)  with  or
without  doxycycline  for  6  weeks  is  recommended  (BII)  (104).  For  documented
culture-positive  Bartonella  endocarditis,  doxycycline  for  6  weeks  plus  gentamicin
intravenously  for  the  first  14  days  is  recommended  (BII)  (104,109).  Penicillins  and
first-generation  cephalosporins  have  no  in  vivo  activity  and  should  not  be  used  for
treatment of bartonellosis (DII) (132). Quinolones and TMP--SMX have variable in vitro
activity and an inconsistent clinical response in case reports (115); as a result, they are
not  recommended  for  treatment  (DIII).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS
Response  to  treatment  can  be  dramatic  in  immunocompromised  patients.  Cutaneous
bacillary  angiomatosis  skin  lesions  usually  improve  and  resolve  after  a  month  of
treatment.  Bacillary  peliosis  responds  more  slowly  than  cutaneous  angiomatosis,  but
hepatic
 lesions
 should
 improve
 after
 several
 months
 of
 therapy.
 Some
immunocompromised
 patients
 develop
 a
 potentially
 life-threatening
Jarisch-Herxheimer--like reaction within hours after institution of antibiotic therapy, and
immunocompromised  patients  with  severe  respiratory  or  cardiovascular  compromise
should  be  monitored  carefully  after  institution  of  therapy  (104,107).  No  cases  of
Bartonella-associated  IRIS  have  been  reported.  Management  of  Treatment  Failure  In
immunocompromised  patients  with  relapse,  retreatment  should  be  continued  for  4--6
months;  repeated  relapses  should  be  treated  indefinitely  (AIII)  (128).  Among  patients
whose  Bartonella  infections  fail  to  respond  to  initial  treatment,  one  or  more  of  the
second-line regimens should be considered (AIII). Prevention of Recurrence Relapses in
bone  and  skin  have  been  reported  and  are  more  common  when  antibiotics  are
administered
 for
 a
 shorter
 time
 (<3
 months),
 especially
 in
 severely
immunocompromised  patients.  For  an  immunocompromised  HIV-infected  adult
experiencing  relapse,  long-term  suppression  of  infection  with  doxycycline  or  a
macrolide  is  recommended  as  long  as  the  CD4  cell  count  is  <200  cells/mm3  (AIII).
Although  no  data  exist  for  HIV-infected  children,  it  seems  reasonable  that  similar
recommendations  should  be  followed  (AIII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  No
specific  data  are  available  regarding  the  discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis.
Treponema pallidum can be transmitted from mother to child at any stage of pregnancy
or during delivery. Among women with untreated primary, secondary, early latent, or
late  latent  syphilis  at  delivery,  approximately  30%,  60%,  40%,  and  7%  of  infants,
respectively,  will  be  infected.  Treatment  of  the  mother  for  syphilis  ≥30  days  before
delivery  is  required  for  effective  in  utero  treatment.  Congenital  syphilis  has  been
reported  despite  adequate  maternal  treatment.  Factors  that  contribute  to  treatment
failure include maternal stage of syphilis (early stage, meaning, primary, secondary, or
early latent syphilis), advancing gestational age at treatment, higher Venereal Disease
Research  Laboratory  (VDRL)  titers  at  treatment  and  delivery,  and  short  interval  from
treatment  to  delivery  (<30  days)  (133,134).  In  2005,  the  rate  of  congenital  syphilis
declined to 8 per 100,000 live-born infants (135), down from 14.3 cases per 100,000 in
2000  and  27.9  cases  per  100,000  in  1997.  Overall,  cases  of  congenital  syphilis  have
decreased  74%  since  1996.  The  continuing  decline  in  the  rate  of  congenital  syphilis
probably  reflects  the  substantially  reduced  rate  of  primary  and  secondary  syphilis
among women during the last decade. Drug use during pregnancy, particularly cocaine
use,  has  been  associated  with  increased  risk  for  maternal  syphilis  and  congenital
infection (136). Similarly, HIV-infected women have a higher prevalence of untreated or
inadequately treated syphilis during pregnancy, which places their newborns at higher
risk  for  congenital  syphilis  (137).  Mother-to-child  HIV  transmission  might  be  higher
when syphilis coinfection is present during pregnancy (137--139); transmission does not
appear  to  be  higher  if  the  mother's  syphilis  is  effectively  treated  before  pregnancy
(137).  Although  approximately  two  thirds  of  sexually  transmitted  diseases  (STDs)
diagnosed  annually  in  the  United  States  occur  among  persons  aged  <24  years,  such
individuals  account  for  less  than  25%  of  early  syphilis  cases.  Nevertheless,  the
prevalence  and  incidence  of  syphilis  among  HIV-infected  youth  and  of  HIV  infection
among  youth  with  syphilis  are  appreciable;  in  a  study  of  320  HIV-infected  and
uninfected  U.S.  adolescents  aged  12--19  years,  the  prevalence  of  syphilis  was  9%
among HIV-infected girls and 6% among HIV-infected boys (140). In a meta-analysis of
30 studies, the median HIV seroprevalence among persons infected with syphilis in the
United States was 15.7% (27.5% among men and 12.4% among women with syphilis)
(141).  Untreated  early  syphilis  during  pregnancy  can  lead  to  spontaneous  abortion,
stillbirth,  hydrops  fetalis,  preterm  delivery,  and  perinatal  death  in  up  to  40%  of
pregnancies  (142).  Among  children  with  congenital  syphilis,  two  characteristic
syndromes of clinical disease exist: early and late congenital syphilis. Early congenital
syphilis refers to clinical manifestations appearing within the first 2 years of life. Late
congenital syphilis refers to clinical manifestations appearing in children >2 years old.
At  birth,  infected  infants  may  manifest  such  signs  as  hepatosplenomegaly,  jaundice,
mucocutaneous  lesions  (e.g.,  skin  rash,  nasal  discharge,  mucous  patches,  condyloma
lata),  lymphadenopathy,  pseudoparalysis  of  an  extremity,  anemia,  thrombocytopenia,
pneumonia, and skeletal lesions (e.g., osteochondritis, periostitis, or osteitis). In a study
of 148 infants born to mothers with untreated or inadequately treated syphilis, 47% had
clinical,  radiographic,  or  conventional  laboratory  findings  consistent  with  congenital
syphilis, and 44% had a positive rabbit infectivity test, PCR assay, or IgM immunoblot of
serum,  blood,  or  CSF  (143).  However,  as  many  as  60%  of  infants  with  congenital
syphilis do not have any clinical signs at birth (144). If untreated, these "asymptomatic"
infants can develop clinically apparent disease in the ensuing 3 weeks to 6 months. In
addition,
 fever,
 nephrotic
 syndrome,
 and
 hypopituitarism
 may
 occur.
 The
manifestations  of  acquired  syphilis  in  older  children  and  adolescents  are  similar  to
those  of  adults  (see  Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  and  Treatment  of  Opportunistic
Infections in HIV-Infected Adults) (16). HIV-infected persons with acquired early syphilis
might  be  at  increased  risk  for  neurologic  complications  and  uveitis  and  have  higher
rates of treatment failure (145). The standard serologic tests for syphilis in adults are
based on the measurement of IgG antibody. Because IgG antibody in the infant reflects
transplacental  passively  transferred  antibody  from  the  mother,  interpretation  of
reactive serologic tests for syphilis among infants is difficult. Therefore, the diagnosis of
neonatal  congenital  syphilis  depends  on  a  combination  of  results  from  physical,
laboratory,  radiographic,  and  direct  microscopic  examinations.  All  infants  born  to
women with reactive nontreponemal and treponemal test results should be evaluated
with  a  quantitative  nontreponemal  test  (e.g.,  VDRL  slide  test,  rapid  plasma  reagin
[RPR], or the automated reagin test). Neonatal serum should be tested because of the
potential  for  maternal  blood  contamination  of  the  umbilical  cord  blood  specimens.
Specific  treponemal  tests,  such  as  the  fluorescent  treponemal  antibody  absorption
(FTA-ABS) test and T. pallidum particle agglutination (TP-PA) test, are not necessary to
evaluate  congenital  syphilis  in  the  neonate.  No  commercially  available  IgM  test  is
recommended for diagnostic use. (Note: Some laboratories use treponemal tests, such
as  EIA,  for  initial  screening,  and  nontreponemal  tests  for  confirmation  of  positive
specimens  (146).  However,  such  an  approach  with  congenital  syphilis  has  not  been
published.) Congenital syphilis can be definitively diagnosed if T. pallidum is detected
by  using  darkfield  microscopic  examination  or  direct  fluorescent  antibody  staining  of
lesions or body fluids such as umbilical cord, placenta, nasal discharge, or skin lesion
material  from  the  infant.  Failure  to  detect  T.  pallidum  does  not  definitively  rule  out
infection  because  false-negative  results  are  common.  Pathologic  examination  of
placenta and umbilical cord with specific fluorescent antitreponemal antibody staining
is recommended. Evaluation of suspected cases of congenital syphilis should include a
careful  and  complete  physical  examination.  Further  evaluation  depends  on  maternal
treatment  history  for  syphilis,  findings  on  physical  examination,  and  planned  infant
treatment and may include a complete blood count and differential and platelet count,
long bone radiographs, and CSF analysis for VDRL, cell count, and protein. HIV-infected
infants  might  have  increased  cell  counts  and  protein  concentrations  even  in  the
absence of neurosyphilis. Other tests should be performed as clinically indicated (e.g.,
chest radiograph, liver-function tests, cranial ultrasound, ophthalmologic examination,
and  auditory  brainstem  response).  A  proven  case  of  congenital  syphilis  requires
visualization of spirochetes by darkfield microscopy or fluorescent antibody testing of
body fluid(s). Finding that an infant's serum quantitative nontreponemal serologic titer
that is fourfold higher than the mother's titer suggests infection but is not a criterion in
the case definition. A presumptive case of syphilis is defined as maternal untreated or
inadequately  treated  syphilis  at  delivery,  regardless  of  findings  in  the  infant,  or  a
reactive treponemal test result and signs in an infant of congenital syphilis on physical
examination, laboratory evaluation, long bone radiographs, positive CSF VDRL test, or
an  abnormal  CSF  finding  without  other  cause.  For  diagnosis  of  acquired  syphilis,  a
reactive nontreponemal test must be confirmed by a specific treponemal test such as
FTA-ABS  or  TP-PA.  Treponemal  tests  usually  will  remain  positive  for  life,  even  with
successful treatment. The prozone phenomenon (a weakly reactive or falsely negative)
reaction  might  occur  more  frequently  in  HIV-infected  persons  (147).  Treponemal
antibody titers do not correlate with disease activity and should not be used to monitor
treatment  response.  CSF  should  be  evaluated  among  HIV-infected  adolescents  with
acquired syphilis of unknown or <1 year's duration or if they have neurologic or ocular
symptoms or signs; many clinicians recommend a CSF examination for all HIV-infected
patients with syphilis (16). Preventing Exposure Congenital Syphilis Effective prevention
and detection of congenital syphilis depend on the identification of syphilis in pregnant
women  and,  therefore,  on  the  routine  serologic  screening  of  pregnant  women  during
the first prenatal visit. In communities and populations in which the risk for congenital
syphilis  is  high,  serologic  testing  and  a  sexual  history  also  should  be  obtained  at  28
weeks'  gestation  and  at  delivery.  Moreover,  as  part  of  the  management  of  pregnant
women  who  have  syphilis,  information  about  treatment  of  sex  partners  should  be
obtained to assess the risk for reinfection. Routine screening of serum from newborns
or umbilical cord blood is not recommended. Serologic testing of the mother's serum is
preferred over testing of the infant's serum because the serologic tests performed on
infant serum can be nonreactive if the mother's serologic test result is of low titer or the
mother was infected late in pregnancy. No HIV-exposed infant should leave the hospital
unless  the  maternal  serologic  status  has  been  documented  at  least  once  during
pregnancy  and  at  delivery  in  communities  and  populations  in  which  the  risk  for
congenital  syphilis  is  high  (148,149).  Acquired  Syphilis  Primary  prevention  of  syphilis
includes  routine  discussion  of  sexual  behaviors  that  may  place  persons  at  risk  for
infection. Providers should discuss risk reduction messages that are client-centered and
provide  specific  actions  that  can  reduce  the  risk  for  STD  acquisition  and  HIV
transmission  (150--152).  Routine  serologic  screening  for  syphilis  is  recommended  at
least annually for all sexually active HIV-infected persons, with more frequent screening
(3--6  months)  depending  on  individual  risk  behaviors  (e.g.,  multiple  partners,  sex  in
conjunction with illicit drug use, methamphetamine use, or partners that participate in
such  activities)  (153).  Syphilis  in  an  HIV-infected  person  indicates  high-risk  behavior
and  should  prompt  intensified  counseling  messages  and  consideration  of  referral  for
behavioral  intervention.  Persons  undergoing  screening  or  treatment  for  syphilis  also
should be evaluated for all common STDs (154). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Not
applicable. Treatment of Disease Penicillin remains the treatment of choice for syphilis,
congenital  or  acquired,  regardless  of  HIV  status  (AI).  Congenital  Syphilis  Data  are
insufficient  to  determine  whether  infants  who  have  congenital  syphilis  and  whose
mothers are coinfected with HIV require different evaluation, therapy, or follow-up for
syphilis  than  that  recommended  for  infants  born  to  mothers  without  HIV  coinfection.
Response to standard treatment may differ among HIV-infected mothers. For example,
some  studies  in  adults  have  shown  a  lag  in  serologic  improvement  in  appropriately
treated  patients  with  HIV  infection  (155).  Infants  should  be  treated  for  congenital
syphilis  if  the  mother  has  1)  untreated  or  inadequately  treated  syphilis  (including
treatment with erythromycin or any other nonpenicillin regimen), 2) no documentation
of  having  received  treatment,  3)  receipt  of  treatment  ≤4  weeks  before  delivery,  4)
treatment with penicillin but no fourfold decrease in nontreponemal antibody titer, or 5)
fourfold  or  greater  increase  in  nontreponemal  antibody  titer  suggesting  relapse  or
reinfection  (AII)  (154).  Infants  should  be  treated  regardless  of  maternal  treatment
history  if  they  have  an  abnormal  examination  consistent  with  congenital  syphilis,
positive  darkfield  or  fluorescent  antibody  test  of  body  fluid(s),  or  serum  quantitative
nontreponemal serologic titer that is at least fourfold greater than maternal titer (AII)
(154).  Treatment  for  proven  or  highly  probable  congenital  syphilis  (i.e.,  infants  with
findings  or  symptoms  or  with  titers  fourfold  greater  than  mother's  titer)  is  aqueous
crystalline  penicillin  G  at  100,000--150,000  units/kg/day,  administered  as  50,000
units/kg/dose intravenously every 12 hours during the first 7 days of life and every 8
hours thereafter for a total of 10 days (AII). If congenital syphilis is diagnosed after 1
month  of  life,  the  dosage  of  aqueous  penicillin  G  should  be  increased  to  50,000
units/kg/dose intravenously every 4--6 hours for 10 days (AII). An alternative to aqueous
penicillin G is procaine penicillin G at 50,000 units/kg/dose intramuscularly (IM) daily in
a single dose for 10 days (BII). However, aqueous penicillin G is preferred because of its
higher penetration into the CSF. No reports have been published of treatment failures
with  ampicillin  or  studies  of  the  effectiveness  of  ampicillin  for  treating  congenital
syphilis. Asymptomatic infants born to mothers who have had adequate treatment and
response to therapy, and with a normal physical examination and CSF findings, and who
have  a  serum  quantitative  nontreponemal  serologic  titer  that  is  less  than  fourfold
higher than maternal titer might be treated with a single dose of benzathine penicillin G
50,000  units/kg/dose  IM  with  careful  clinical  and  serologic  follow-up  (BII).  However,
certain  health-care  providers  would  treat  such  infants  with  the  standard  10  days  of
aqueous  penicillin  because  physical  examination  and  laboratory  test  results  cannot
definitively  exclude  congenital  syphilis  in  all  cases  (BII).  Acquired  Syphilis  Acquired
syphilis  in  children  is  treated  with  a  single  dose  of  benzathine  penicillin  G  50,000
units/kg  IM  (up  to  the  adult  dose  of  2.4  million  units)  for  early-stage  disease  (e.g.,
primary, secondary, and early latent disease) (AII). For late latent disease, three doses
of  benzathine  penicillin  G  50,000  units/kg  (up  to  the  adult  dose  of  2.4  million  units)
should be administered IM once weekly for three doses (total 150,000 units/kg, up to
the adult total dose of 7.2 million units) (AIII). Alternative therapies (e.g., doxycycline,
ceftriaxone, or azithromycin) have not been evaluated among HIV-infected patients and
should not be used as first-line therapy (EIII) (154). Neurosyphilis should be treated with
aqueous  penicillin  G  200,000--300,000  units/kg  intravenously  every  4--6  hours
(maximum dosage: 18--24 million units/day) for 10--14 days (AII). See Guidelines for the
Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-Infected Adults for dosing
recommendations  for  older  HIV-infected  adolescents  with  acquired  syphilis  (16).
Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including IRIS All seroreactive infants (or infants whose
mothers  were  seroreactive  at  delivery)  should  receive  careful  follow-up  examinations
and  serologic  testing  (i.e.,  a  nontreponemal  test)  every  2--3  months  until  the  test
becomes nonreactive or the titer has decreased fourfold (AIII). Nontreponemal antibody
titers should decline by age 3 months and should be nonreactive by age 6 months if the
infant was not infected (i.e., if the reactive test result was caused by passive transfer of
maternal IgG antibody) or was infected but adequately treated. The serologic response
after  therapy  might  be  slower  for  infants  treated  after  the  neonatal  period.  Whether
children  with  congenital  syphilis  who  also  are  HIV-infected  take  longer  to  become
nonreactive and require retreatment is not known. Treponemal tests should not be used
to  evaluate  treatment  response  because  the  results  for  an  infected  child  can  remain
positive  despite  effective  therapy.  Passively  transferred  maternal  treponemal
antibodies can be present in an infant until age 15 months. A reactive treponemal test
after  age  18  months  is  diagnostic  of  congenital  syphilis.  If  the  nontreponemal  test  is
nonreactive  at  this  time,  no  further  evaluation  or  treatment  is  necessary.  If  the
nontreponemal  test  is  reactive  at  age  18  months,  the  infant  should  be  fully
(re)evaluated  and  treated  for  congenital  syphilis  (AIII).  Infants  whose  initial  CSF
evaluations  are  abnormal  should  undergo  a  repeat  lumbar  puncture  approximately
every 6 months until the results are normal (AII). A reactive CSF VDRL test or abnormal
CSF indices that cannot be attributed to other ongoing illness requires retreatment for
possible  neurosyphilis.  HIV-infected  children  and  adolescents  with  acquired  early
syphilis  (i.e.,  primary,  secondary,  early  latent)  should  have  clinical  and  serologic
response  monitored  at  age  3,  6,  9,  12,  and  24  months  after  therapy  (AIII);
nontreponemal  test  titers  should  decline  by  at  least  fourfold  by  6--12  months  after
successful therapy, with examination of CSF and retreatment strongly considered in the
absence of such decline. For syphilis of longer duration, follow-up is indicated at 6, 12,
and  24  months;  fourfold  decline  should  be  expected  by  12--24  months.  If  initial  CSF
examination demonstrated a pleocytosis, repeat lumbar puncture should be conducted
at 6 months after therapy, and then every 6 months until the cell count is normal (AIII).
Follow-up CSF examinations also can be used to evaluate changes in the VDRL-CSF or
CSF protein levels after therapy, but changes in these parameters occur more slowly
than  changes  in  CSF  cell  counts.  Data  from  HIV-infected  adults  with  neurosyphilis
suggest  that  CSF  abnormalities  might  persist  for  extended  times,  and  close  clinical
follow-up is warranted (145). Syphilis in an HIV-infected child (congenital or acquired)
manifesting  as  IRIS  has  not  been  reported,  and  only  very  rare  reports  of
syphilis-associated IRIS in adults (primarily syphilitic ocular inflammatory disease) have
been reported (156). Management of Treatment Failure After treatment of congenital
syphilis, children with increasing or stable nontreponmenal titers at age 6--12 months
or children who are seropostive with any titer at 18 months should be evaluated (e.g.,
including a CSF examination) and considered for retreatment with a 10-day course of
parenteral penicillin (AIII). The management of failures of treatment of acquired syphilis
in  older  children  and  adolescents  is  identical  to  that  in  adults  (16).  Retreatment  of
patients  with  early-stage  syphilis  should  be  considered  for  those  who  1)  do  not
experience  at  least  a  fourfold  decrease  in  serum  nontreponemal  test  titers  6--12
months  after  therapy,  2)  have  a  sustained  fourfold  increase  in  serum  nontreponemal
test  titers  after  an  initial  reduction  posttreatment,  or  3)  have  persistent  or  recurring
clinical  signs  or  symptoms  of  disease  (BIII).  If  CSF  examination  does  not  confirm  the
diagnosis of neurosyphilis, such patients should receive 2.4 million units IM benzathine
penicillin G administered at 1-week intervals for 3 weeks (BIII). Certain specialists have
also  recommended  a  course  of  aqueous  penicillin  G  IV  or  procaine  penicillin  IM  plus
probenicid  (as  described  above  for  treatment  of  neurosyphilis)  for  all  patients  with
treatment  failure,  although  data  to  support  this  recommendation  are  lacking  (CIII).  If
titers fail to respond appropriately after retreatment, the value of repeat CSF evaluation
or  retreatment  has  not  been  established.  Patients  with  late-latent  syphilis  should  be
retreated  if  they  1)  have  clinical  signs  or  symptoms  of  syphilis,  2)  have  a  fourfold
increase in serum nontreponemal test titer, or 3) experience an inadequate serologic
response (less than fourfold decline in nontreponemal test titer) within 12--24 months
after therapy if initial titer was high (>1:32) (BIII). Such patients should have a repeat
CSF  examination.  If  the  repeat  CSF  examination  is  consistent  with  CNS  involvement,
retreatment  should  follow  the  neurosyphilis  recommendations  (AIII);  those  without  a
CSF  profile  indicating  CNS  disease  should  receive  a  repeat  course  of  benzathine
penicillin,  2.4  million  units  IM  weekly  for  3  weeks  (BIII),  although  certain  specialists
recommend following the neurosyphilis recommendations in this situation as well (CIII).
Retreatment of neurosyphilis should be considered if the CSF white blood cell count has
not  decreased  6  months  after  completion  of  treatment  or  if  the  CSF-VDRL  remains
reactive 2 years after treatment (BIII). No recommendations have been developed for
secondary  prophylaxis  or  chronic  maintenance  therapy  for  syphilis  in  HIV-infected
children.  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis   Not  applicable.  Mycobacterium
tuberculosis In 2006, of the 13,779 cases of TB reported in the United States, 807 (6%)
occurred in children younger than 15 years (157). Overall, during 1993--2001, 12.9% of
adults  with  TB  were  reported  to  be  coinfected  with  HIV,  compared  with  1.1%  of  all
children with TB (158). However, the actual rate of HIV coinfection in U.S. children with
TB is unknown because of the very low rate of HIV testing in this population. Numerous
studies  have  documented  the  increased  risk  for  TB  among  HIV-infected  adults.
Domestic  and  international  studies  have  documented  a  similar  increased  risk  for  TB
among HIV-infected children (159--162). Unlike other AIDS-related OIs, CD4 cell count is
not a sufficient indicator of increased risk for TB in HIV-infected children. Congenital TB
is  rare  but  has  been  reported  among  children  born  to  HIV-infected  women  with  TB
(163,164).  Children  with  TB  almost  always  were  infected  by  an  adult  in  their  daily
environment, and their disease represents the progression of primary infection rather
than  the  reactivation  disease  commonly  observed  among  adults  (165).  Identification
and  treatment  of  the  source  patient  and  evaluation  of  all  exposed  members  of  the
household  are  particularly  important  because  other  secondary  TB  cases  and  latent
infections with M. tuberculosis often are found. All confirmed and suspected TB cases
must  be  reported  to  state  and  local  health  departments,  which  will  assist  in  contact
evaluation.  Disease  caused  by  Mycobacterium  bovis  recently  reemerged  among
children  in  New  York  City,  and  M.  bovis  is  a  frequent  cause  of  TB  in  children  in  San
Diego  County  (166,167).  Recent  cases  have  been  associated  with  ingestion  of
unpasteurized  fresh  cheese  from  Mexico  (166).  Most  M.  bovis  cases  in  humans  are
attributable  to  ingestion  of  unpasteurized  milk  or  its  products,  and  exposure  to  this
pathogen  in  the  United  States  is  unlikely  except  from  privately  imported  products.
However, human-to-human airborne transmission from persons with pulmonary disease
has  been  confirmed,  and  its  relevance  might  be  increased  by  HIV  infection.  The
distinction  between  M.  tuberculosis  and  M.  bovis  is  important  for  determining  the
source of infection for a child who has TB and for selecting a treatment regimen: almost
all  M.  bovis  isolates  are  resistant  to  pyrazinamide.  Disease  associated  with  bacille
Calmette-Guerin  (BCG),  an  attenuated  version  of  M.  bovis,  has  been  reported  in
HIV-infected children vaccinated at birth with BCG (168). IRIS associated with BCG also
has  been  reported  among  children  initiating  HAART  (22,168).  Internationally,  drug
resistance  is  a  growing  obstacle  to  controlling  TB,  but  in  the  United  States,  effective
public health approaches to prevention and treatment have reduced the rates of drug
resistance.  In  the  United  States  during  1993--2001,  M.  tuberculosis  resistant  to  any
first-line anti-TB drugs was identified in 15.2% of children who had culture-positive M.
tuberculosis,  with  higher  rates  among  foreign-born  children  (19.2%)  than  among
U.S.-born  children  (14.1%)  (158).  Multidrug-resistant  TB  (MDR  TB)  is  unusual  among
U.S.-born children and adults with TB. The prevalence of multidrug resistance (e.g., at
least  isoniazid  and  rifampin)  was  lower:  2.8%  in  foreign-born  children  and  1.4%  in
U.S.-born  children  with  TB.  However,  the  fraction  of  adult  TB  patients  in  the  United
States  that  is  foreign  born  is  increasing,  and  such  persons  are  a  potential  source  of
drug-resistant  infection  for  their  U.S.-born  children.  Once  infected,  children  aged  ≤4
years and all HIV-infected children are more likely to develop active TB disease. Usually
the  clinical  features  of  TB  among  HIV-infected  children  are  similar  to  those  among
children without HIV infection, although the disease usually is more severe (169,170)
and  can  be  difficult  to  differentiate  from  illnesses  caused  by  other  OIs.  Pulmonary
involvement  is  evident  in  most  cases  and  can  be  characterized  by  localized  alveolar
consolidation,  pneumonitis,  and  hilar  and  mediastinal  adenopathy.  Concomitant
atelectasis  might  result  from  hilar  adenopathy  compressing  bronchi  or  from
endobronchial  granulomas.  HIV-infected  children  with  TB  are  more  likely  to  be
symptomatic  (with  fever  and  cough)  and  have  atypical  findings,  such  as  multilobar
infiltrates  and  diffuse  interstitial  disease.  Rapidly  progressive  disease,  including
meningitis or mycobacterial sepsis, can occur without obvious pulmonary findings. Both
HIV  infection  and  young  age  increase  the  rate  of  miliary  disease  and  TB  meningitis.
Older HIV-infected children and adolescents have clinical features more similar to those
in HIV-infected adults, with the typical apical lung infiltrates and late cavitation (171).
Approximately 25% of HIV-uninfected children with TB include extrapulmonary disease
as a sole or concomitant site, and HIV-infected children may have an even higher rate.
The most common sites of extrapulmonary disease among children include the lymph
nodes,  blood  (miliary),  CNS,  bone,  pericardium,  and  peritoneum  (169,172--174).  The
cornerstone of diagnostic methods for latent TB infection (LTBI) is the tuberculin skin
test (TST), administered by the Mantoux method. Because children with HIV infection
are at high risk for TB, annual testing of this population is recommended to diagnose
LTBI  (AIII).  Among  persons  with  HIV  infection,  ≥5  mm  of  induration  is  considered  a
positive (diagnostic) reaction. However, among immunocompetent children with active
TB disease, approximately 10% have a negative TST result, and HIV-infected children
with TB are even more likely to have a negative result. Therefore, a negative TST result
should  never  be  relied  on  for  excluding  the  possibility  of  TB.  The  use  of  control  skin
antigens at time of purified protein derivative testing to assess for cutaneous anergy is
of uncertain value and no longer routinely recommended (DII).  Sensitivity to tuberculin
is reduced by severe viral infections, such as wild-type measles. As a precaution, skin
testing scheduled around the time of live-virus vaccination should be done at the same
time as, or delayed until 6 weeks after vaccination to avoid any potentially suppressed
sensitivity  to  the  skin  test  (AIII).  Two-step  skin  testing  is  used  for  detecting  boosted
sensitivity to tuberculin in health-care workers and others at the time of entry into a
serial testing program for occupational TB exposure. The utility and predictive value of
two-step  testing  have  not  been  assessed  for  children  (with  or  without  HIV  infection),
and its use is not recommended (DIII). Recently, ex vivo assays that determine IFN-γ
release from lymphocytes after stimulation by highly specific synthetic M. tuberculosis
antigens have been developed to diagnose infection (175). QuantiFERON(r)-TB Gold and
QuantiFERON-TB  Gold  In-Tube  (Cellestis  Limited,  Valencia,  California)  and  the
T-SPOT(r).TB assay (Oxford Immunotec, Marlborough, Massachusetts) are now Food and
Drug  Administration  (FDA)-approved  and  available  in  the  United  States.  These  tests
were more specific than the TST in studies among adults, especially among those who
are  BCG  vaccinated.  However,  as  with  the  TST,  these  tests  are  less  sensitive  in
HIV-infected adults with advanced immune suppression (176). In addition, limited data
suggest  these  tests,  particularly  QuantiFERON,  might  have  less  sensitivity  for
diagnosing  infection  in  young  children  (177).  Their  routine  use  for  finding  LTBI  or
diagnosing  TB  in  HIV-infected  children  is  not  recommended  because  of  uncertainty
about test sensitivity (DIII) (175). Patients with a positive test for LTBI should undergo
chest  radiography  and  clinical  evaluation  to  rule  out  active  disease.  Diagnostic
microbiologic  methods  for  TB  consist  of  microscopic  visualization  of  acid-fast  bacilli
from  clinical  specimens,  nucleic-acid  amplification  for  direct  detection  in  clinical
specimens, the isolation in culture of the organism, and drug-susceptibility testing, and
genotyping.  Although  acid-fast  stained  sputum  smears  are  positive  in  50%--70%  of
adults  with  pulmonary  TB,  young  children  with  TB  rarely  produce  sputum  voluntarily
and  typically  have  a  low  bacterial  load  (178).  Smear  results  frequently  are  negative,
even  among  older  children  who  can  expectorate  and  provide  a  sample  (158).
Nevertheless, a positive smear result usually indicates mycobacteria, although it does
not  differentiate  M.  tuberculosis  from  other  mycobacterial  species.  Mycobacterial
culture  improves  sensitivity  and  permits  species  identification,  drug-susceptibility
testing,  and  genotyping.  Confirming  M.  tuberculosis  infection  with  a  culture can  have
greater  significance  for  HIV-infected  children  because  of  the  difficulties  of  the
differential diagnosis. Therefore, all samples sent for microscopy should be cultured for
mycobacteria. Bronchoscopy will increase the likelihood of obtaining a positive smear
and  culture.  Obtaining  early-morning  gastric  aspirates  for  acid-fast--bacilli  stain  and
culture  is  the  diagnostic  method  of  choice  for  children  unable  to  produce  sputum.  A
standardized protocol that includes testing of three samples obtained separately may
improve the yield from gastric aspirates to 50% (179). Others have shown the potential
utility  of  induced  sputum  (180,181)  and  nasopharyngeal  aspirates  (182)  of  obtaining
diagnostic specimens from children in the outpatient setting. Two commercial nucleic
acid  amplification  kits  are  FDA  approved  for  direct  detection  of  M.  tuberculosis  in
sputum  samples  with  positive  smear-microscopy  results.  One  of  the  methods  also  is
approved  for  sputa  with  negative  microscopy.  A  positive  result  from  these  methods
immediately  confirms  the  diagnosis.  However,  when  these  tests  are  used  for  other
specimens,  such  as  gastric  aspirates  or  CSF,  sensitivity  and  specificity  have  been
disappointing (183--185). These assays provide adjunctive, but not primary, diagnostic
evaluation  of  children  with  TB  because  a  negative  result  does  not  rule  out  TB  as  a
diagnostic  possibility  and  a  positive  result,  unlike  culture,  does  not  allow  for
drug-susceptibility testing. However, it might be useful in establishing the diagnosis of
TB among HIV-infected children who have unexplained pulmonary disease when both
culture  and  TSTs  may  be  falsely  negative.  Because  of  the  difficulty  in  obtaining  a
specimen for bacteriologic diagnosis of TB among children, evidence for the diagnosis
often involves linking the child to an adult with confirmed TB with a positive TST and an
abnormal  radiograph  or  physical  examination  in  the  child  (178).  A  high  index  of
suspicion  is  important.  Suspicion  for  and  diagnosis  of  TB  in  HIV-infected  children  is
further  complicated  by  the  frequent  presence  of  preexisting  or  coincidental  fever,
pulmonary  symptoms,  and  radiographic  abnormalities  (e.g.,  chronic  lymphoid
interstitial pneumonitis or coincident pulmonary bacterial infection) and the decreased
sensitivity  of  TST  in  this  population.  Strenuous  efforts  should  be  made  to  obtain
diagnostic specimens (three each of sputum or gastric aspirate specimens or induced
sputum)  whenever  TB  is  presumptively  diagnosed  or  when  it  is  suspected.  Because
many children do not have culture-proven TB, and the diagnosis of drug resistance may
be  delayed  in  source  cases,  MDR  TB  should  be  suspected  in  children  with  TB  in  the
following situations (90,186--188): Antimycobacterial drug-susceptibility testing should
be  performed  on  the  initial  M.  tuberculosis  isolate  and  on  subsequent  isolates  if
treatment  failure  or  relapse  is  suspected;  the  radiometric  culture  system  has  been
adapted  to  perform  rapid  sensitivity  testing.  Before  obtaining  results  of  susceptibility
testing  or  if  an  organism  has  not  been  isolated  from  specimens  from  the  child,  the
antimycobacterial drug susceptibility of the M. tuberculosis isolate from and treatment
history of the source case can be used to define the probable drug susceptibility of the
child's organism and to design the empiric therapeutic regimen for the child. Preventing
Exposure Children most commonly are infected with M. tuberculosis from exposure in
their  immediate  environment,  usually  the  household.  HIV-infected  children  may  have
family  members  dually  infected  with  HIV  and  TB.  Homeless  children  and  children
exposed  to  institutional  settings  (including  prolonged  hospitalization)  may  be  at
increased risk. Risk factors (e.g., homelessness, incarceration, exposure to institutional
settings)  of  close  contacts  of  HIV-infected  children  also  should  be  considered.  BCG
vaccine,  which  is  not  routinely  administered  in  the  United  States  and  should  not  be
administered to HIV-infected infants and children, has potential to cause disseminated
disease (EII) (189). Preventing First Episode of Disease In the United States, where TB
exposure is uncommon and BCG is not routinely administered, HIV-infected infants and
children should have a TST (5-TU purified protein derivitive) at 3 months of age, and
children should be tested at HIV diagnosis. HIV-infected children should be retested at
least once per year (AIII). HIV-infected infants and children should be treated for LTBI if
they  have  a  positive  TST  (AI)  or  exposure  to  a  person  who  has  contagious  TB  (after
exclusion of active TB disease in the infant or child and regardless of the child's TST
results) (AII). Duration of preventive therapy for children should be 9 months, and the
preferred  regimen  is  isoniazid  (10--15  mg/kg/day  [AII]  or  20--30  mg/kg  twice  weekly)
[BII]).  Liver  function  tests  should  be  performed  before  start  of  isoniazid  (AII)  for
HIV-infected  children.  The  child  should  be  further  monitored  if  baseline  tests  are
abnormal; the child has chronic liver disease; or medications include other potentially
hepatotoxic  drugs,  such  as  acetaminophen  and  some  antiretroviral  drugs.  If  isoniazid
resistance  is  known  or  suspected  in  the  source  case,  rifampin  for  4--6  months  is
recommended  (BII).  A  2-month  regimen  of  rifampin  and  pyrazinamide  was  never
recommended for children and now is not recommended for any age group because of
an  increased  risk  for  severe  and  fatal  hepatotoxicity  (EII).  Children  exposed  to
drug-resistant strains should be managed by an experienced clinician, and the regimen
should be individualized on the basis of knowledge about the source-case susceptibility
pattern and treatment history. A randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of isoniazid
in HIV-infected children in South Africa was halted when isoniazid administered daily or
twice weekly (according to the cotrimoxazole schedule) helped reduce overall mortality
(hazard ratio: 0.46; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.22--0.95; p = 0.015) (190). These
findings were found across all ages and CDC HIV disease classification categories and
were  independent  of  TST  result;  however,  the  study  may  not  have  been  adequately
powered to detect these differences. These results suggest that HIV-infected children in
areas  of  extremely  high  burden  of  TB  may  benefit  from  isoniazid  preventive  therapy
irrespective of any known exposure to TB, but this approach is not recommended in the
United  States  because  of  the  low  prevalence  of  TB  (DII).  Discontinuing  Primary
Prophylaxis Not applicable. Treatment of Disease Empiric TB therapy should be started
in HIV-infected infants and children in whom the diagnosis is suspected and continued
until the diagnosis is definitively ruled out (AII). The use of directly observed therapy
(i.e., a trained worker, and not a family member, watches the patient ingest each dose
of medication) decreases rates of relapse, treatment failures, and drug resistance and
is  recommended  for  treatment  of  all  children  and  adolescents  with  TB  in  the  United
States (AII). The principles for treating TB in the HIV-infected child are the same as for
the HIV-uninfected child. However, treating TB in an HIV-infected child is complicated
by antiretroviral drug interactions with the rifamycins and overlapping toxicities caused
by antiretroviral drugs and TB medications. Rifampin is a potent inducer of the CYP3A
family of enzymes. Rifabutin is a less potent inducer but is a substrate of this enzyme
system.  Tables  4  and  5  provide  doses  and  side  effects  of  TB  medications.  In  the
absence  of  concurrent  HAART,  initial  empiric  treatment  of  TB  disease  usually  should
consist  of  a  four-drug  regimen  (isoniazid,  rifampin,  pyrazinamide,  and  either
ethambutol or streptomycin) (AI). For the first 2 months of treatment, directly observed
therapy should be administered daily (intensive phase). Modifications of therapy should
be based on susceptibility testing, if possible. The drug-susceptibility pattern from the
isolate of the adult source case can guide treatment when an isolate is not available
from the child. If the organism is susceptible to isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide
during  the  2-month  intensive  phase  of  therapy,  ethambutol  (or  streptomycin)  can  be
discontinued  and  the  intensive  phase  completed  using  three  drugs  (AI).  After  the
2-month  intensive  phase,  treatment  of  M.  tuberculosis  known  to  be  sensitive  to
isoniazid  and  rifampin  is  continued  with  isoniazid  and  rifampin  as  directly  observed
therapy two to three times weekly (continuation phase) (AI); daily therapy during the
continuation  phase  also  is  acceptable  (AI).  Children  with  severe  immunosuppression
should  receive  only  daily  or  thrice-weekly  treatment  during  the  continuation  phase
because  TB  treatment  regimens  with  once-  or  twice-weekly  dosing  have  been
associated  with  an  increased  rate  of  rifamycin  resistance  among  HIV-infected  adults
with  low  CD4  cell  counts;  thus  twice-weekly  dosing  should  be  considered  only  for
children without immune suppression (e.g., CDC Immunologic Category I: CD4 >25% or
≥500 cells/mm3 if aged ≥6 years) (CIII) (98). Ethionamide can be used as an alternative
to  ethambutol  in  cases  of  TB  meningitis  (CIII)  because  ethionamide  has  better  CNS
penetration than does ethambutol. For HIV-infected children with active pulmonary TB
disease,  the  minimum  recommended  duration  of  antituberculous  drug  treatment  is  6
months,  but  some  experts  recommend  up  to  9  months  (AIII)  (191).  For  children  with
extrapulmonary  disease  involving  the  bones  or  joints,  CNS,  or  miliary  disease,  the
minimum  recommended  duration  of  treatment  is  12  months  (AIII)  (90,192).  These
recommendations  assume  that  the  organism  is  susceptible  to  the  medications,
adherence to the regimen has been ensured by directly observed therapy, and the child
has  responded  clinically  and  microbiologically  to  therapy.  For  HIV-infected  children
diagnosed  with  TB  disease,  anti-TB  treatment  must  be  started  immediately  (AIII).
However, treatment of TB during HAART is complicated by unfavorable pharmacokinetic
interactions  and  overlapping  toxicities  and  should  be  managed  by  a  specialist  with
expertise  in  treating  both  conditions  (AIII).  Issues  to  consider  when  treating  both
conditions  include  1)  the  critical  role  of  rifampin  because  of  its  potent  bactericidal
properties; 2) rifampin's potent induction of the CYP3A enzyme system that precludes
treatment with all protease inhibitors (PIs) but may allow treatment with non-nucleoside
reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors  (NNRTIs);  3)  the  CYP3A  induction  by  rifabutin  is  less
potent but dose adjustments of both rifabutin and possibly the PIs still may be needed,
although minimal data are available for children; 4) overlapping toxicities; and 5) the
challenges of adhering to a medication regimen that may include seven or more drugs.
Given  these  challenges,  some  experts  have  argued  that  the  role  of  rifamycins  in
treating  TB  is  so  important  that  deferral  of  HAART  should  be  considered  until
completion  of  TB  therapy  (CIII).  Others  recommend  that,  to  improve  adherence  and
better  differentiate  potential  side  effects,  treatment  of  TB  in  an  antiretroviral  naïve
HIV-infected child should be initiated 2--8 weeks before antiretroviral medications are
initiated (CIII). Consideration of which option to take must account for clinical factors,
such  as  clinical  stage  of  HIV,  immune  status  of  the  child,  age,  ability  to  adhere  to
complicated
 drug
 regimens,
 and
 other
 comorbid
 conditions.
 For
 severely
immunocompromised  children  (Immunologic  Category  3)  (98),  earlier  initiation  of
HAART  (e.g.,  2  weeks  after  start  of  antimycobacterial  therapy)  may  be  advisable
(despite  risk  for  IRIS),  whereas  delayed  initiation  of  HAART  might  be  considered  for
children  with  higher  CD4  counts  (BII).  The  choice  of  antiretroviral  regimen  in  an
HIV-infected  child  being  treated  for  TB  disease  is  complex,  and  advice  should  be
obtained from an expert in the treatment of these two diseases. Starting antiretroviral
therapy with a NNRTI-based rather than a PI-based regimen is preferred because NNRTI
regimens  have  fewer  interactions  with  rifampin-based  TB  therapy  (BII).  However,
NNRTIs  also  are  metabolized  through  the  CYP3A  enzyme  system,  and  efavirenz  and
nevirapine  are  both  CYP3A4  enzyme  inducers.  Efavirenz  is  the  preferred  NNRTI  in
HIV-infected children aged >3 years; and nevirapine is the preferred NNRTI for children
aged <3 years, as the dosing for efavirenz in younger children has not been defined
and no pediatric formulation exists. No data exist for children on the pharmacokinetics
of  either  drug  in  combination  with  rifampin  to  make  specific  recommendations  about
potential need for an increase in dose of the NNRTI. If a PI is used, a ritonavir-boosted PI
such as lopinavir/ritonavir is required. No pharmacokinetic data are available to address
whether  additional  ritonavir  boosting  is  needed  in  children  receiving  rifampin  and
lopinavir/ritonavir-based regimens. For children already receiving antiretroviral therapy
in  whom  TB  has  been  diagnosed,  the  issues  are  equally  complicated,  and  require
similar  considerations.  Treatment  for  TB  must  be  started  immediately  (AIII),  and  the
child's  antiretroviral  regimen  should  be  reviewed  and  altered,  if  needed,  to  ensure
optimal  treatment  for  both  TB  and  HIV  and  to  minimize  potential  toxicities  and
drug-drug interactions. These recommendations are limited because of the paucity of
data  on  the  optimal  dosing  of  medications  to  treat  TB  in  children,  especially  in
HIV-infected  children.  Guidelines  and  recommendations  exist  for  dose  adjustments
necessary  in  adults  treated  with  rifabutin  and  PIs,  but  the  absence  of  data  preclude
extrapolating these to HIV-infected children being treated for TB. Consultation with an
expert in pediatric HIV and TB infection is recommended. More data are needed on the
pharmacokinetics  of  anti-TB  medications  in  both  HIV-infected  and  HIV-uninfected
children.  For  treatment  of  drug-resistant  TB,  a  minimum  of  three  drugs  should  be
administered,  including  two  or  more  bactericidal  drugs  to  which  the  isolate  is
susceptible (AII). Regimens can include three to six drugs with varying levels of activity.
Children  infected  with  MDR  TB  (e.g.,  resistance  to  at  least  isoniazid  and  rifampin)
should be managed in consultation with an expert in this condition (AIII). If the strain is
resistant only to isoniazid, isoniazid should be discontinued and the patient treated with
9--12  months  of  a  rifampin-  or  rifabutin-containing  regimen  (e.g.,  rifampin,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) (BII). If the strain is resistant only to rifampin, risk for
relapse  and  treatment  failure  increases.  Rifampin  should  be  discontinued,  and  a
2-month  induction  phase  of  isoniazid,  pyrazinamide,  ethambutol,  and  streptomycin
should  be  administered,  followed  by  an  additional  continuation  phase  of  isoniazid,
pyrazinamide,  and  ethambutol  to  complete  a  minimum  of  12--18  months  of  therapy,
with  the  exact  length  of  therapy  based  on  clinical  and  radiologic  improvement  (BIII).
Among  older  adolescents  with  rifampin-monoresistant  strains,  isoniazid,  ethambutol,
and  a  fluoroquinolone  can  be  administered,  with  pyrazinamide  added  for  the  first  2
months  (BIII);  an  injectable  agent  (e.g.,  aminoglycoside  such  as  streptomycin  or
amikacin) also can be included in the first 2--3 months for patients with severe disease
(BIII). When the strain is resistant to isoniazid and rifampin (i.e., MDR TB), therapeutic
regimens  must  be  individualized  on  the  basis  of  the  resistance  pattern,  treatment
history  of  the  patient  or  the  source  case,  relative  activities  of  the  drugs,  extent  of
disease,  and  any  comorbid  conditions.  The  duration  of  therapy  should  be  at  least  12
months---usually  longer.  In  children  who  are  smear-  or  culture-positive  at  treatment
initiation,  therapy  usually  should  continue  for  18--24  months  after  smear  and  culture
conversion.
 Among
 children
 with
 paucibacillary
 disease
 (e.g.,
 smear-
 and
culture-negative), duration of therapy may be shorter but should be ≥12 months (BIII)
(90,193). Extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR TB) has emerged globally as an important
new  threat,  particularly  in  persons  infected  with  HIV  (194).  XDR  TB  is  a  strain  of  TB
resistant to isoniazid and rifampin (which defined MDR TB) with additional resistance to
any  fluoroquinolone  and  at  least  one  of  three  injectable  drugs:  capreomycin,
kanamycin,  and  amikacin  (195).  Of  the  49  cases  of  XDR  TB  identified  in  the  United
States from 1993 to 2006, one (2%) occurred in a child aged <15 years (195). However,
this number possibly underestimates the burden in children because many TB cases in
children  are  not  culture-positive;  thus,  a  definitive  diagnosis  of  drug  resistance
(including MDR or XDR) is not possible. Children with suspected or confirmed XDR TB
should be managed in consultation with an expert because such cases are associated
with  rapid  disease  progression  in  the  prescence  of  HIV  coinfection  and  a  high  death
rate.  Adjunctive  treatment  with  corticosteroids  is  indicated  for  children  who  have  TB
meningitis; dexamethasone lowers mortality and long-term neurologic impairment (AII).
These  drugs  might  be  considered  for  children  with  pleural  or  pericardial  effusions,
severe  miliary  disease,  and  substantial  endobronchial  disease  (BIII).  Antituberculous
therapy  must  be  administered  concomitantly.  Most  experts  use  1--2  mg/kg/day  of
prednisone or its equivalent for 6--8 weeks. Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including
IRIS Monthly monitoring of clinical and bacteriologic response to therapy is important
(AII). For children with pulmonary TB, chest radiographs should be obtained after 2--3
months  of  therapy  to  evaluate  response  (AIII).  Hilar  adenopathy  might  persist  for  as
long as 2--3 years despite successful antituberculous therapy, and a normal radiograph
is  not  a  criterion  to  discontinue  therapy.  Follow-up  radiographs  after  completion  of
therapy  are  not  necessary  unless  clinical  symptoms  recur.  Common  side  effects
associated with TB medications are listed in 
Table 5. Isoniazid is available as syrup, but some specialists advise against using it
because  the  syrup  is  unstable  and  frequently  causes  diarrhea  (DIII).  Gastric  upset
during  the  initial  weeks  of  isoniazid  treatment  occurs  frequently  and  often  can  be
avoided  by  having  some  food  in  the  stomach  when  isoniazid  is  administered.
Hepatotoxicity  is  the  most  common  serious  adverse  effect.  It  includes  subclinical
hepatic enzyme elevation, which usually resolves spontaneously during continuation of
treatment, and clinical hepatitis that usually resolves when the drug is discontinued. It
rarely progresses to hepatic failure, but the likelihood of life-threatening liver damage
increases  when  isoniazid  is  continued  despite  hepatitis  symptoms.  Hepatotoxicity  is
less  frequent  in  children  than  in  adults,  but  no  age  group  is  risk-free.  Transient
asymptomatic serum transaminase elevations have been noted in 3%--10% and clinical
hepatitis  in  <1%  of  children  receiving  isoniazid;  <1%  of  children  required  treatment
discontinuation  (192,196).  However,  the  rate  of  hepatotoxicity  might  be  greater  in
children  who  take  multiple  hepatotoxic  medications  and  in  children  who  have  HIV
infection.  Pyridoxine  (150  mg/day)  is  recommended  for  all  symptomatic  HIV-infected
children treated with isoniazid (AII). HIV-infected children on anti-TB medications should
have liver enzymes obtained at baseline and monthly thereafter (AIII). If symptoms of
drug toxicity develop, a physical examination and liver enzyme measurement should be
repeated  (AIII).  Mild  elevations  in  serum  transaminases  (e.g.,  two  to  three  times  the
upper  limit  of  normal)  do  not  require  discontinuation  of  drugs  if  other  findings  are
normal  (AII),  but  they  do  require  more  frequent  rechecks---as  often  as  weekly---until
they  resolve.  The  most  ominous  toxicity  associated  with  ethambutol  is  optic  neuritis,
with symptoms of blurry vision, central scotomata, and red-green color blindness, which
is  usually  reversible  and  rare  at  doses  of  15--25  mg/kg  among  children  with  normal
renal function (193). Assessments of renal function, ophthalmoscopy, and (if possible)
visual  acuity  and  color  vision,  should  be  performed  before  starting  ethambutol  and
monitored  regularly  during  treatment  with  the  agent  (AIII).  Hypothyroidism  has  been
associated with ethionamide and periodic (e.g., monthly) monitoring of thyroid hormone
serum  concentrations  is  recommended  with  its  use  (AIII).  Major  adverse  effects  of
aminoglycoside  drugs  are  ototoxicity  and  nephrotoxicity.  Periodic  audiometry,
monitoring of vestibular function (as possible), and blood urea nitrogen and creatinine
are recommended (AIII). Secondary drugs used to treat resistant TB have not been well
studied  in  children.  These  medications  should  be  used  in  consultation  with  a  TB
specialist  (AIII).  Coadministration  of  pyridoxine  (150  mg/day)  with  cycloserine  is
recommended  (AII).  Thiacetazone  can  cause  severe  and  often  fatal  reactions  among
HIV-infected  children,  including  severe  rash  and  aplastic  anemia,  and  should  not  be
used (EIII). IRIS in patients receiving anti-TB therapy during HAART has been reported in
HIV-infected adults (197--199). New onset of systemic symptoms, especially high fever;
expanding  CNS  lesions;  and  worsening  adenopathy,  pulmonary  infiltrates,  or  pleural
effusions have been reported in HIV-infected adults during HAART up to several months
after  the  start  of  TB  therapy.  Such  cases  also  have  been  reported  in  children
(22,192,200) and should be suspected in children with advanced immune suppression
who  initiate  HAART  and  subsequently  develop  new  symptoms.  IRIS  occurs  in  two
common  clinical  scenarios.  First,  in  patients  who  have  occult  TB  before  initiation  of
HAART,  TB  may  have  been  unmasked  by  immune  recovery  after  antiretroviral  drug
initiation. This "unmasking IRIS" or incident TB-IRIS usually occurs within the first 3--6
months  after  initiation  of  HAART,  and  the  infectious  pathogen  typically  is  detectable.
Secondly, IRIS can occur as paradoxical exacerbation of TB after initiation of HAART in a
patient  already  receiving  anti-TB  treatment  through  a  clinical  recrudescence  of  a
successfully
 treated
 infection
 or
 symptomatic
 relapse
 despite
 initial
 clinical
improvement and continued microbiologic treatment success (i.e., "paradoxical IRIS");
treatment failure associated with microbial resistance or poor adherence must be ruled
out. The literature on IRIS in children consists largely of case reports and small series,
so whether IRIS occurs more often in children than in adults is not clear. Persons with
mild-to-moderate  symptoms  of  IRIS  have  been  treated  symptomatically  with
nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  while  continuing  anti-TB  and  HIV  therapies.  In
certain  cases,  use  of  systemic  corticosteroids  steroids  for  1--2  weeks  results  in
improvement  during  continuation  of  TB/HIV  therapies  (CIII)  (197--199).  However,  no
controlled  trials  of  the  use  of  corticosteroids  have  been  published.  Despite  the
development of IRIS, TB therapy should not be discontinued. Management of Treatment
Failure Most children with TB respond well to medical therapy. If response is not good,
then adherence to therapy, drug absorption, and drug resistance should be assessed.
Mycobacterial  culture,  drug-susceptibility  testing,  and  antimycobacterial  drug  levels
should  be  performed  whenever  possible.  Drug  resistance  should  be  suspected  in  any
child whose smear or culture fails to convert after 2 months of directly observed anti-TB
therapy. In the absence of initial bacteriologic confirmation of disease, failure should be
suspected in children whose clinical symptoms (including failure to gain weight) fail to
respond  and  who  have  radiographic  evidence  of  disease  progression  on  therapy.  As
described above, drug-resistant TB should be managed in consultation with an expert.
Risk for recurrence is rare in children with drug-susceptible TB who are treated under
direct observation. If TB recurs, the child is at high risk for drug resistance and should
be managed accordingly. Chronic suppressive therapy is unnecessary for a patient who
has  successfully  completed  a  recommended  regimen  of  treatment  for  TB  (DII).
Secondary prophylaxis is not recommended for children who have had a prior episode
of TB. However, HIV-infected children who were treated for LTBI or TB and who again
contact contagious TB should be treated for presumed latent infection, after diagnostic
evalution
 excludes
 current
 disease.
 Discontinuing
 Secondary
 Prophylaxis
 Not
applicable. Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) refers to multiple related species of
nontuberculous  mycobacteria  (e.g.,  M.  avium,  M.  intracellulare,  M.  paratuberculosis)
that  are  widely  distributed  in  the  environment.  Comprehensive  guidelines  on  the
diagnosis,  prevention,  and  treatment  of  nontuberculous  mycobacterial  diseases  were
recently  published  (201).  These  guidelines  highlight  the  tremendous  advances  in
laboratory  methods  in  mycobacteriology  that  have  expanded  the  number  of  known
nontuberculous mycobacterial species from 50 in 1997 to 125 in 2006.  MAC was the
second most common OI among children with HIV infection in the United States after
PCP  during  the  pre-HAART  era,  but  its  incidence  has  greatly  decreased  from  1.3--1.8
episodes per 100 person-years during the pre-HAART era to 0.14--0.2 episodes per 100
person-years  during  the  HAART  era  (3,4).  MAC  is  ubiquitous  in  the  environment  and
presumably  is  acquired  by  routine  exposures  through  inhalation,  ingestion,  or
inoculation  (202).  A  recent  population-based  study  in  Florida  of  adults  and  children
associated soil exposure, along with black race and birth outside the United States, with
MAC infection (203). Respiratory and GI colonization can act as portals of entry that can
lead to disseminated infection (204). MAC can appear as isolated lymphadenitis among
HIV-infected children. Disseminated infection with MAC in pediatric HIV infection rarely
occurs during the first year of life; its frequency increases with age and declining CD4
count,  and  it  is  a  complication  of  advanced  immunologic  deterioration  among
HIV-infected  children  (202,205,206).  Disseminated  MAC  can  occur  at  higher  CD4  cell
counts  among  younger  HIV-infected  children  than  among  older  children  or  adults,
especially  among  HIV-infected  children  aged  <2  years.  Respiratory  symptoms  are
uncommon  among  HIV-infected  children  who  have  disseminated  MAC,  and  isolated
pulmonary  disease  is  rare.  Early  symptoms  can  be  minimal  and  may  precede
mycobacteremia by several weeks. Symptoms commonly associated with disseminated
MAC  infection  among  children  include  persistent  or  recurrent  fever,  weight  loss  or
failure to gain weight, sweats, fatigue, persistent diarrhea, and persistent or recurrent
abdominal  pain.  Lymphadenopathy,  hepatomegaly,  and  splenomegaly  can  occur.
Laboratory abnormalities include anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Although
serum  chemistries  are  usually  normal,  some  children  may  have  elevated  alkaline
phosphatase or lactate dehydrogenase. These signs and symptoms also are relatively
common  in  the  absence  of  disseminated  MAC  among  HIV-infected  children  with
advanced  immunosuppression.  Procedures  used  to  diagnose  MAC  in  children  are  the
same  as  those  used  for  HIV-infected  adults  (16).  MAC  is  definitively  diagnosed  by
isolation  of  the  organism  from  blood  or  from  biopsy  specimens  from  normally  sterile
sites (e.g., bone marrow, lymph node). Multiple mycobacterial blood cultures over time
may  be  required  to  yield  a  positive  result.  Use  of  a  radiometric  broth  medium  or
lysis-centrifugation  culture  technique  can  enhance  recovery  of  organisms  from  blood.
Histology demonstrating macrophage-containing acid-fast bacilli strongly indicates MAC
in  a  patient  with  typical  signs  and  symptoms,  but  culture  is  essential  to  differentiate
nontuberculous  mycobacteria  from  M.  tuberculosis,  determine  which  nontuberculous
mycobacterium is causing infection, and perform drug-susceptibility testing. Testing of
MAC isolates for susceptibility to clarithromycin or azithromycin is recommended (BIII).
The  BACTEC(tm)  method  for  radiometric  susceptibility  testing  can  be  used.
Susceptibility thresholds for clarithromycin are minimal inhibitory concentrations of ≥32
µg/mL  and  a  minimal  inhibitory  concentration  of  ≥256  µg/mL  for  azithromycin  (207).
Preventing Exposure MAC is ubiquitous in the environment. Available information does
not support specific recommendations regarding exposure avoidance. Person-to-person
transmission  is  not  believed  to  be  common.  Preventing  First  Episode  of  Disease  The
most  effective  way  to  prevent  disseminated  MAC  among  HIV-infected  children  is  to
preserve immune function through use of effective antiretroviral therapy. HIV-infected
children who have advanced immunosuppression should be offered prophylaxis against
disseminated  MAC  disease  according  to  the  following  CD4  count  thresholds  (AII)
(208,209): For the same reasons that clarithromycin and azithromycin are the preferred
prophylactic  agents  for  adults,  either  one  should  be  considered  for  prophylaxis  in
children (AII); oral suspensions of both agents are commercially available in the United
States. Before prophylaxis is initiated, the child should be evaluated for disseminated
MAC  disease,  which  should  usually  include  obtaining  a  blood  culture  for  MAC  (AIII).
Although detecting MAC in stool or respiratory tract may precede disseminated disease,
no  data  support  initiating  prophylaxis  in  patients  with  detectable  organisms  at  these
sites in the absence of a blood culture positive for MAC. Therefore, routine screening of
respiratory or GI specimens for MAC is not recommended (DIII). Discontinuing Primary
Prophylaxis  On the basis of both randomized controlled trials and observational data,
primary  prophylaxis  for  MAC  can  be  safely  discontinued  in  HIV-infected  adults  who
respond  to  antiretroviral  therapy  with  an  increase  in  CD4  count.  In  a  study  of
discontinuing OI prophylaxis among HIV-infected children whose CD4 percentages were
≥20% for those aged >6 years and ≥25% for those aged 2--6 years, 63 HIV-infected
children discontinued MAC prophylaxis, and no MAC events were observed during ≥2
years  of  follow  up  (46).  On  the  basis  of  both  these  findings  and  data  from  studies  in
adults, primary prophylaxis can be discontinued in HIV-infected children aged >2 years
receiving  stable  HAART  for  ≥6  months  and  experiencing  sustained  (>3  months)  CD4
cell recovery well above the age-specific target for initiation of prophylaxis (e.g., similar
to  adults,  >100  cells/mm3,  for  children  aged  ≥6  years;  and  >200  cells/mm3  for
children  aged  2--5  years)  (BII).  No  specific  recommendations  exist  for  discontinuing
MAC  prophylaxis  in  HIV-infected  children  aged  <2  years.  Treatment  of  Disease
Disseminated MAC infection should be treated in consultation with a pediatric infectious
disease  specialist  who  has  expertise  in  pediatric  HIV  infection  (AIII).  Combination
therapy  with  a  minimum  of  two  drugs  is  recommended  to  prevent  or  delay  the
emergence  of  resistance  (AI).  Monotherapy  with  a  macrolide  results  in  emergence  of
high-level drug resistance within weeks. Improved immunologic status is important for
controling disseminated MAC disease; potent antiretroviral therapy should be initiated
among  children  with  MAC  disease  who  are  antiretroviral  naïve.  However,  the  optimal
time  to  start  HAART  in  this  situation  is  unknown;  many  experts  treat  MAC  with
antimycobacterial therapy for 2 weeks before starting HAART to try to minimize IRIS,
although  whether  this  makes  a  difference  is  unknown  (CIII).  For  children  already
receiving  HAART,  HAART  should  be  continued  and  optimized  unless  drug  interactions
preclude the safe concomitant use of antiretroviral and antimycobacterial drugs. Doses
and side effects of MAC medications are included in 
tables  4  and  5.  Initial  empiric  therapy  should  include  two  or  more  drugs  (AI):
clarithromycin  or  azithromycin  plus  ethambutol.  Some  experts  use  clarithromycin  as
the  preferred  first  agent  (AI),  reserving  azithromycin  for  patients  with  substantial
intolerance  to  clarithromycin  or  when  drug  interactions  with  clarithromycin  are  a
concern (AII). Clarithromycin levels can be increased by PIs and decreased by efavirenz,
but no data are available to recommend dose adjustments for children. Azithromycin is
not  metabolized  by  the  cytochrome  P450  (CYP450)  system;  therefore,  it  can  be  used
without concern for significant drug interactions with PIs and NNRTIs. Because a study
in adults demonstrated a survival benefit with the addition of rifabutin to clarithromycin
plus  ethambutol,  some  experts  would  add  rifabutin  as  a  third  drug  to  the
clarithromycin/ethambutol regimen (CI); however, drug interactions should be checked
carefully, and more intensive toxicity monitoring might be warranted if such drugs are
administered  concomitantly  (AIII).  Because  rifabutin  increases  CYP450  activity  that
leads to increased clearance of other drugs (e.g., PIs and NNRTIs), and toxicity might
increase  with  concomitant  administration  of  drugs,  other  experts  recommend  against
using this third agent in children (CIII). Guidelines and recommendations exist for dose
adjustments necessary in adults treated with rifabutin and PIs, but the absence of data
in children precludes extrapolating these to HIV-infected children undergoing treatment
for disseminated MAC. No pediatric formulation of rifabutin exists, but the drug can be
administered mixed with foods such as applesauce. Safety data are limited from use in
22 HIV-infected children (median age: 9 years) who received rifabutin in combination
with two or more other antimycobacterial drugs for treatment of MAC for 1--183 weeks;
doses  ranged  from  4  mg/kg/dose  to  18.5  mg/kg/dose,  and  reported  adverse  effects
were similar to those reported in adults (210). Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including
IRIS  Clinically,  most  patients  improve  substantially  during  the  first  4--6  weeks  of
therapy. A repeat blood culture for MAC should be obtained 4--8 weeks after initiation of
antimycobacterial  therapy  in  patients  who  fail  to  respond  clinically  to  their  initial
treatment  regimen.  Improvement  in  fever  can  be  expected  within  2--4  weeks  after
initiation  of  appropriate  therapy.  However,  for  those  with  more  extensive  disease  or
advanced immunosuppression, clinical response might be delayed, and elimination of
the organism from the blood might require up to 12 weeks of effective therapy. IRIS in
patients  receiving  MAC  therapy  during  HAART  has  been  reported  among  HIV-infected
adults  and  children  (211--213).  New  onset  of  systemic  symptoms,  especially  fever  or
abdominal pain, leukocytosis, and focal lymphadenitis (cervical, thoracic, or abdominal)
associated  with  preexisting  but  relatively  asymptomatic  MAC  infection  has  occurred
after start of HAART. Before initiation of HAART among HIV-infected children with low
CD4  counts,  an  assessment  for  MAC  should  be  considered  and  treatment  provided  if
MAC  is  identified.  However,  recent  data  indicate  that  MAC  prophylaxis  with
azithromycin did not prevent IRIS (212). Children with moderate symptoms of IRIS can
be
 treated
 symptomatically
 with
 nonsteroidal
 anti-inflammatory
 drugs
 or,
 if
unresponsive to nonsteroidals, a short course (e.g., 4 weeks) of systemic corticosteroid
therapy  while  continuing  to  receive  HAART  (CIII).  Adverse  effects  from  clarithromycin
and  azithromycin  include  nausea,  vomiting,  abdominal  pain,  abnormal  taste,  and
elevations of liver transaminase levels or hypersensitivity reactions. The major toxicity
associated  with  ethambutol  is  optic  neuritis,  with  symptoms  of  blurry  vision,  central
scotomata, and red-green color blindness, which usually is reversible and rare at doses
of  15--25  mg/kg  among  children  with  normal  renal  function.  Assessments  of  renal
function,  ophthalmoscopy,  and  (if  possible)  visual  acuity  and  color  vision  should  be
performed  before  starting  ethambutol  and  monitored  regularly  during  treatment  with
the agent (AIII). Patients receiving clarithromycin plus rifabutin should be observed for
the
 rifabutin-related
 development
 of
 leukopenia,
 uveitis,
 polyarthralgias,
 and
pseudojaundice. Tiny, almost transparent, asymptomatic peripheral and central corneal
deposits  that  do  not  impair  vision  have  been  observed  in  some  HIV-infected  children
receiving  rifabutin  as  part  of  a  multidrug  regimen  for  MAC  (210).  Management  of
Treatment Failure Treatment failure is defined as the absence of clinical response and
the  persistence  of  mycobacteremia  after  8--12  weeks  of  treatment.  Repeat
susceptibility  testing  of  MAC  isolates  is  recommended  in  this  situation,  and  a  new
multidrug regimen of two or more drugs not previously used and to which the isolate is
susceptible  should  be  administered  (AIII).  Drugs  that  should  be  considered  for  this
scenario include rifabutin, amikacin, and a quinolone. In HIV-infected adults, data from
treating MAC in HIV-uninfected patients indicate an injectable agent such as amikacin
or  streptomycin  should  be  considered  (CIII)  (201).  Because  dosing  of  these  agents  in
children can be problematic, drug-resistant disseminated MAC should be treated with
input  from  an  expert  in  this  disease  (AIII).  Optimization  of  antiretroviral  therapy  is
especially important adjunct to treatment for patients in whom initial MAC therapy has
failed.  Children  with  a  history  of  disseminated  MAC  should  be  administered  lifelong
prophylaxis  to  prevent  recurrence  (AII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  On  the
basis of immune reconstitution data in adults and data in children discontinuing primary
prophylaxis,  some  experts  recommend  discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis  in
HIV-infected children aged >2 years who have completed ≥12 months of treatment for
MAC,  who  remain  asymptomatic  for  MAC,  and  who  are  receiving  stable  HAART  (i.e.,
HAART  not  requiring  change  for  viral  or  immune  failure)  and  have  sustained  (≥6
months)  CD4  cell  recovery  well  above  the  age-specific  target  for  initiation  of  primary
prophylaxis  (e.g.,  similar  to  adults,  >100  cells/mm3,  for  children  aged  >6  years  and
>200 cells/mm3 for children aged 2--6 years) (CIII). Secondary prophylaxis should be
reintroduced if the CD4 count falls below the age-related threshold. Aspergillus spp. are
ubiquitous  molds  that  are  widespread  in  soil  and  grow  on  plants  and  decomposing
organic  materials  (214);  they  are  infrequent  pathogens  in  HIV-infected  children.  The
most  common  species  causing  aspergillosis  is  A.  fumigatus,  followed  by  A.  flavus
(215,216). Aspergillosis is rare but often lethal in pediatric AIDS patients; the estimated
incidence  of  invasive  aspergillosis  in  pediatric  AIDS  patients  was  1.5%--3%  before
widespread use of HAART (217--219), and invasive aspergillosis is believed to be much
less prevalent during the post-HAART era. Specific risk factors include low CD4 count,
neutropenia,
 corticosteroid
 use,
 concurrent
 malignancy
 with
 chemotherapy,
broad-spectrum  antibiotic  exposure,  previous  pneumonia  and  respiratory  OIs,  and
HIV-related phagocytic impairment (217,220--224). Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis is
the  most  common  presentation  among  HIV-infected  children  (223,225,226).  Other
manifestations
 include
 necrotizing
 tracheobronchitis;
 pseudomembranous
tracheobronchitis;  and  involvement  of  CNS,  skin,  sinuses,  middle  ear,  and  mastoid
bones (217--221,227). Disseminated aspergillosis has been described rarely (217,228).
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis commonly associated with fever, cough, dyspnea, and
pleuritic  pain.  Acute  respiratory  distress  and  wheezing  or  fungal  cast  production  can
occur  with  necrotizing  tracheobronchitis,  and  stridor  can  occur  with  laryngotracheitis
(214,217,225). Aspergillus infections of the CNS manifest as single or multiple cerebral
abscesses, meningitis, epidural abscess, or subarachnoid hemorrhage (214). Cutaneous
aspergillosis typically is associated with contaminated adhesive tapes and arm boards
used  to  secure  IV  devices  (214,217).  The  organism  usually  is  not  recoverable  from
blood (except A. terreus) but is isolated readily from lung, sinus, brain, and skin biopsy
specimens  (217,222,229).  A  definitive  diagnosis  requires  relevant  clinical  signs  and
symptoms  and  the  histopathologic  demonstration  of  organisms  in  biopsy  specimens
obtained  from  involved  sites  (e.g.,  liver  or  brain).  Respiratory  tract  disease  can  be
presumptively  diagnosed  in  the  absence  of  a  tissue  biopsy  if  Aspergillus  spp.  are
recovered from a respiratory sample, compatible signs and symptoms are present, and
no alternative diagnosis is identified (90). A serologic assay to detect galactomannan, a
molecule in the cell wall of Aspergillus spp., is available commercially but has not been
evaluated widely in infants and children. In addition, the assay has higher false-positive
results  in  children  (230,231).  Therefore,  use  of  galactomannan  assays  for  early
detection  of  aspergillosis  is  not  recommended  (DIII).  Radiologic  examination  plays  an
important  role  in  diagnosis  and  follow-up  of  invasive  pulmonary  aspergillosis.  Chest
radiograph  demonstrates  either  a  diffuse  interstitial  pneumonitis  or  a  localized
wedge-shaped dense infiltrate representing pulmonary infarction (214,217). Computed
tomography  (CT)  of  the  chest  can  be  used  to  identify  the  halo  sign,  a  macronodule
surrounded by a perimeter of ground-glass opacity, which is an early sign of invasive
pulmonary aspergillosis (232). Cavitation and air crescent formation shown in chest CT
with  an  aspergilloma  appear  more  frequently  in  older  children  and  adults  than  in
younger  children  (233--236).  Preventing  Exposutre  In  HIV-infected  children  who  are
severely immunosuppressed or neutropenic, considerations for preventing exposure to
Aspergillus might include excluding plants and flowers from rooms, avoiding food items
such  as  nuts  and  spices  that  often  are  contaminated,  and  minimizing  application  of
nonsterile  biomedical  devices  and  adhesive  tape  (214,237--239).  Other  hospital
environmental measures that can help prevent aspergillosis outbreaks include placing
suitable barriers between patient-care areas and construction sites; routinely cleaning
showerheads,  hot  water  faucets,  and  air-handling  systems;  repairing  faulty  air  flow;
confining patients to hospital rooms supplied with sterile laminar airflow; and installing
high-efficiency particulate air filters (90,240--242). Preventing First Episode of Disease
The  use  of  chemoprophylaxis  for  aspergillosis  is  not  recommended  in  HIV-infected
children because of the low incidence of invasive disease and the unknown efficacy of
prophylaxis in children, combined with the toxicities of likely agents (DIII) (243--245).
Low-dose amphotericin B, itraconazole, or voriconazole prophylaxis has been employed
to prevent aspergillosis, with unknown efficacy. Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Not
applicable. Treatment of Disease The recommended treatment for invasive aspergillosis
is  voriconazole,  a  second-generation  triazole  and  synthetic  derivative  of  fluconazole
(246--249).  Data  in  adults  have  shown  voriconazole  to  be  superior  to  conventional
amphotericin B in treating aspergillosis and to be associated with superior survival (AI)
(246).  However,  data  regarding  fluconazole  for  children  are  limited  (BII).  In  a
compassionate-use  program  of  voriconazole  that  included  42  immunocompromised
children with invasive aspergillosis, voriconazole treatment elicited a complete (43%) or
partial (45%) response (250,251). The optimal pediatric dose of voriconazole is not yet
known. Children require higher doses (on a mg/kg body weight basis) of voriconazole
than  do  adults  to  attain  similar  serum  concentrations.  The  recommended  dosage  of
voriconazole for children is 6--8 mg/kg intravenously or 8 mg/kg orally every 12 hours
for two doses, followed by 7 mg/kg intravenously or orally twice daily (AII) (252). For
critically  ill  patients,  parenteral  administration  is  recommended  (AIII).  Therapy  is
continued  for  ≥12  weeks,  but  treatment  duration  should  be  individualized  for  each
patient  according  to  clinical  response  (90).  Voriconazole  has  not  been  studied  in
HIV-infected  children.  Voriconazole  is  cleared  primarily  through  three  key  hepatic
microsomal CYP450 enzymes---CYP2C19, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4---with most metabolism
mediated through CYP2C19 (253). As a result of a point mutation in the gene encoding
CYP2C19,  some  persons  poorly  metabolize  voriconazole,  and  others  metabolize  it
extensively;  about  3%--5%  of  whites  and  blacks  are  poor  metabolizers,  whereas
15%--20% of Asians are poor metabolizers (248,253). Drug levels can be as much as
fourfold  greater  in  persons  who  are  poor  metabolizers  than  in  persons  who  are
homozygous extensive metabolizers. Coadministration of voriconazole with drugs that
are  potent  CYP450  enzyme  inducers  can  significantly  reduce  voriconazole  levels.
Voriconazole should be used cautiously with HIV PIs and efavirenz because of potential
interactions, and consideration should be given to therapeutic drug monitoring if used
concomitantly  (CIII).  Amphotericin  B,  either  conventional  or  a  lipid  formulation  has
recommendation  level  BIII  in  children  (90,254).  The  standard  amphotericin  B
deoxycholate dosage is 1.0--1.5 mg/kg/day. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B allow
administration  of  higher  dosage,  deliver  higher  tissue  concentrations  of  drug  to
reticuloendothelial  organs  (e.g.,  lungs,  liver,  spleen),  have  fewer  infusion-related  side
effects  and  less  renal  toxicity,  but  are  more  expensive;  dosing  of  5  mg/kg/day  is
recommended.  Surgical  excision  of  a  localized  invasive  lesion  may  be  warranted,
especially  in  sinus  aspergillosis,  certain  cases  of  pulmonary  aspergillosis  with
impingement  on  great  vessels  or  pericardium,  hemoptysis  from  a  single  focus,  and
erosion  into  the  pleural  space  or  ribs  (BIII).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including
IRIS  The  main  side  effects  of  voriconazole  are  reversible  dose-dependent  visual
disturbances that include a perception of increased brightness and blurred vision that
occurs  in  about  one  third  of  patients,  elevated  hepatic  transaminases  with  higher
doses, and occasional skin rash (248); as noted earlier, adverse side effects can result
from  interactions  with  PIs.  The  primary  toxicities  of  amphotericin  B  include
infusion-related  fever  and  chills  and  nephrotoxicity.  Patients  should  be  monitored  for
adverse  effects  related  to  antifungal  agents,  especially  to  amphotericin  B.  Only  one
case  of  aspergillosis-associated  IRIS  has  been  described  (255).  Management  of
Treatment  Failure  The  efficacy  of  antifungal  therapy  in  invasive  aspergillosis  is
extremely  poor.  No  data  are  available  to  guide  recommendations  for  managing
treatment failure. For patients in whom treatment failed or who were unable to tolerate
voriconazole, amphotericin B should be considered (BIII). Itraconazole for aspergillosis
refractory to primary therapy with voriconazole is not recommended because of similar
mechanisms of action and possible cross-resistance (DIII). Caspofungin is approved for
adults  with  invasive  aspergillosis  who  do  not  improve  or  do  not  tolerate  standard
therapy, and it can be considered for treatment failure in children, although data on this
drug are limited in children (CIII). In a pharmacokinetic study in 39 children aged 2--12
years,  dosing  on  a  body  surface  area  basis  was  recommended  over  a  weight-based
dosing
 scheme;
 50
 mg/m2
 body
 surface
 area
 once
 daily
 resulted
 in
area-under-the-curve  concentrations  similar  to  exposure  in  adults  receiving  the
standard dosage of 50 mg/day (256). Because of limited bioavailability, caspofungin is
available only for IV use. Combination therapy with caspofungin and voriconazole has
been  studied  in  a  small  number  of  adults  and  children  with  invasive  aspergillosis
(257--259).  For  salvage  therapy,  an  additional  antifungal  agent  might  be  added  to
current therapy, or combination antifungal drugs from different classes other than the
initial regimen can be used (BIII) (257,259--264). For patients with acute leukemia and
immunosuppression  unrelated  to  HIV,  continuation  of  antifungal  therapy  throughout
immunosuppression  seems  to  be  associated  with  a  more  favorable  outcome  (265).
However,  no  data  are  available  on  HIV-infected  populations,  and  hence  no
recommendations  can  be  made  for  or  against  secondary  prophylaxis  (CIII).
Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  Not  applicable.  Candida  Infections  The  most
common fungal infections among HIV-infected children are caused by Candida spp. Oral
thrush and diaper dermatitis occur among 50%--85% of HIV-infected children. Candida
albicans is the most common cause of mucosal and esophageal candidiasis. Localized
disease  caused  by  Candida  is  characterized  by  limited  tissue  invasion  to  the  skin  or
mucosa.  Examples  of  localized  candidiasis  include  oropharyngeal  and  esophageal
disease,  vulvovaginitis,  and  diaper  dermatitis.  Once  the  organism  penetrates  the
mucosal  surface  and  widespread  hematogenous  dissemination  occurs,  invasive
candidiasis  ensues.  This  can  result  in  candidemia,  meningitis,  endocarditis,  renal
disease, endophthalmitis, and hepatosplenic disease. Oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC)
continues to be one of the most frequent OIs in HIV-infected children during the HAART
era  (28%  of  children),  with  an  incidence  rate  of  0.93  per  100  child-years  (3).  The
incidence  of  esophageal  or  tracheobronchial  candidiasis  also  has  decreased  from  1.2
per  100  child-years  during  the  pre-HAART  era  to  0.08  per  100  child-years  during  the
HAART era (2001--2004) (1). Candida esophagitis continues to be seen in children who
are  not  responding  to  antiretroviral  therapy  (266,267).  Children  who  develop
esophageal  candidiasis  despite  HAART  may  be  less  likely  to  have  typical  symptoms
(e.g.,  odynophagia  and  retrosternal  pain)  or  have  concomitant  OPC  (268);  during  the
pre-HAART era, concomitant OPC occurred in 94% of children with candida esophagitis
(266). Risk factors for esophageal candidiasis include low CD4 count (<100 cells/mm3),
high  viral  load,  and  neutropenia  (<500  cells/mm3)  (1,3,266,267).  Disseminated
candidiasis  is  infrequent  among  HIV-infected  children,  but  Candida  can  disseminate
from  the  esophagus  particularly  when  coinfection  with  herpes  simplex  virus  (HSV)  or
CMV is present (228,266). Candidemia occurs in up to 12% of HIV-infected children with
chronically  indwelling  central  venous  catheters  for  total  parental  nutrition  or  IV
antibiotics  (267,269).  Approximately  50%  of  reported  cases  of  Candida  bloodstream
infections in HIV-infected children are caused by non-albicans Candida spp., including C.
tropicalis, C. pseudotropicalis, C. parapsilosis, C. glabrata, C. kruse, and C. dubliniensis.
In one study of Cambodian HIV-infected children on HAART who had candidiasis, seven
(75%)  of  nine  isolated  C.  glabrata  were  resistant  to  fluconazole,  and  three  (40%)  of
seven  C.  parapsilosis  isolated  were  resistant  to  more  than  three  azole  agents  (270).
Species-specific  epidemiology  varies  widely  by  geographic  location  and  hospital.  A
substantial  number  of  children  who  develop  candidemia  have  received  systemically
absorbed  oral  antifungal  azole  compounds  (e.g.,  ketoconazole  or  fluconazole)  for
control  of  oral  and  esophageal  candidiasis  (267).  Early  detection  and  treatment  of
candidemia can decrease mortality. Overall mortality was 90% in one study in children
who had >14 days of fever and symptoms before diagnosis of disseminated infection
with
 Candida
 spp.
 (228).
 Clinical
 manifestations
 of
 OPC
 vary
 and
 include
pseudomembranous (thrush) and erythematous (atrophic), hyperplastic (hypertrophic),
and angular cheilitis. Thrush appears as creamy white curdlike patches with inflamed
underlying mucosa that is exposed after removal of the exudate. It can be found on the
oropharyngeal mucosa, palate, and tonsils. Erythematous OPC is characterized by flat
erythematous  lesions  on  the  mucosal  surface.  Hyperplastic  candidiasis  comprises
raised white plaques on the lower surface of the tongue, palate, and buccal mucosa and
cannot be removed. Angular cheilitis occurs as red fissured lesions in the corners of the
mouth.  Esophageal  candidiasis  often  presents  with  odynophagia,  dysphagia,  or
retrosternal pain, and unlike adults, a substantial number of children experience nausea
and  vomiting.  Therefore,  children  with  esophageal  candidiasis  might  present  with
dehydration  and  weight  loss.  Evidence  of  OPC  can  be  absent  among  children  with
esophageal  candidiasis,  particularly  those  receiving  HAART.  New-onset  fever  in  an
HIV-infected  child  with  advanced  disease  and  a  central  venous  catheter  is  the  most
common  clinical  manifestation  of  candidemia.  Renal  candidiasis  presents  with
candiduria  and  ultrasonographically  demonstrated  renal  parenchymal  lesions,  often
without symptoms related to renal disease (267). Candidemia can lead to endogenous
endophthalmitis, and ocular examination by an ophthalmologist is warranted in children
with bloodstream Candida infection. Oral candidiasis can be diagnosed by a potassium
hydroxide  preparation  and  culture  with  microscopic  demonstration  of  budding  yeast
cells in wet mounts or biopsy specimens. For recurrent or refractory OPC, cultures with
in  vitro  susceptibility  testing  can  be  used  to  guide  antifungal  treatment  (271).
Esophageal candidiasis has a classic cobblestoning appearance on barium swallow. In
refractory symptomatic cases, endoscopy should be performed to rule out other causes
of  refractory  esophagitis  (e.g.,  HSV,  CMV,  MAC,  and  azole-resistant  Candida  spp.).
Endoscopy  might  show  few  small  white  raised  plaques  to  elevated  confluent  plaques
with  hyperemia  and  extensive  ulceration.  Candidemia  is  best  diagnosed  with  blood
cultures using lysis-centrifugation techniques (267) or automated broth-based systems
(272).  When  candidemia  is  present,  depending  on  clinical  suspicions,  retinal
examination  for  endophthalmitis,  abdominal  CT  or  ultrasound  for  hepatic  or  renal
involvement,  and  bone  scans  for  osteomyelitis  can  be  considered.  New  diagnostic
techniques
 such
 as
 the
 urine
 D-arabinitol/L-arabinitol
 ratio
 (273),
 serum
D-arabinitol/creatinine ratio (274), Candida antigen mannan (275), (1,3)-beta-D-gulcan
assay  (276),  and  real  time  PCR  (277)  are  promising  diagnostic  alternatives  under
development for early diagnosis of invasive candidiasis in children, but none of these
assays  have  been  validated  for  use  in  children.  Prevention  of  Exposure  Candida
organisms  are  common  commensals  on  mucosal  surfaces  in  healthy  persons,  and  no
measures are available to reduce exposure to these fungi. Preventing First Episode of
Disease  Routine  primary  prophylaxis  of  candidiasis  among  HIV-infected  infants  and
children is not indicated, given the low prevalence of serious Candida infections (e.g.,
esophageal, tracheobronchial, disseminated) during the HAART era and the availability
of  effective  treatment  (DIII).  Concerns  exist  about  the  potential  for  resistant  Candida
strains,  drug  interactions  between  antifungal  and  antiretroviral  agents,  and  lack  of
randomized  controlled  trials  in  children  (278).  Discontinuing  Primary  Prophylaxi  Not
applicable.  Treatment  of  Disease  Oropharyngeal  candidiasis  Early,  uncomplicated
infection can be effectively treated with topical therapy using clotrimazole troches or
oral  polyenes  (such  as  nystatin  or  amphotericin  B  suspension)  (BII)  (279).  Troches
should  not  be  used  in  infants  (DIII).  Resistance  to  clotrimazole  can  develop  as  a
consequence  of  previous  exposure  to  clotrimazole  itself  or  to  other  azole  drugs;
resistance correlates with refractory mucosal candidiasis (280). Systemic therapy with
one of the oral azoles (e.g., fluconazole, ketoconazole, or itraconazole) also is effective
for initial treatment of OPC (281,282). Oral fluconazole is more effective than nystatin
suspension  for  initial  treatment  of  OPC  in  infants;  is  easier  to  administer  to  children
than  the  topical  therapies;  and  is  the  recommended  treatment  if  systemic  therapy  is
used  (AI)  (281,283).  Itraconazole  solution  has  comparable  efficacy  to  fluconazole  and
can be used to treat OPC, although it is less well tolerated than fluconazole (AI) (284).
Gastric acid enhances absorption of itraconazole solution; itraconazole solution should
be taken without food when possible. Itraconazole capsules and oral solution should not
be used interchangeably because, at the same dose, drug exposure is greater with the
oral  solution  than  with  capsules  and  absorption  of  the  capsule  formulation  varies.
Ketoconazole  absorption  also  varies,  and  therefore  neither  itraconazole  capsules  nor
ketoconazole are recommended for treating OPC if fluconazole or itraconazole solutions
are  available  (DII).  Esophageal  disease  Systemic  therapy  is  essential  for  esophageal
disease (AI) and should be initiated empirically among HIV-infected children who have
OPC and esophageal symptoms. In most patients, symptoms should resolve within days
after the start of effective therapy. Oral or IV fluconazole or oral itraconazole solutions,
administered for 14--21 days, are highly effective for treatment of Candida esophagitis
(AI)  (285).  For  treatment  of  OPC,  ketoconazole  and  itraconazole  capsules  are  not
recommended because of variable absorption and lower efficacy (DII). Voriconazole, a
newer  azole  antifungal,  or  caspofungin,  an  echinocandin  inhibitor  of  fungal
(1,3)-beta-D-glucan  synthetase  that  must  be  administered  intravenously  because  of
limited  bioavailability,  also  are  effective  in  treating  esophageal  candidiasis  in
HIV-infected adults (BI) (286--288), but there is little experience with use of these drugs
in  children.  Voriconazole  has  been  used  in  a  limited  number  of  children  without  HIV
infection  to  treat  invasive  fungal  infections,  including  esophageal  candidiasis  or
candidemia
 (251,268).
 Usually
 children
 have
 been
 initiated
 on
 voriconazole
intravenously  and  then  switched  to  oral  administration  to  complete  therapy  after
stabilization.  The  optimal  pediatric  dose  of  voriconazole  is  not  yet  known;  children
require  higher  doses  (on  a  mg/kg  body  weight  basis)  than  do  adults  to  attain  similar
serum  concentrations  of  voriconazole.  The  recommended  voriconazole  dosage  for
children is 6--8 mg/kg intravenously or 8 mg/kg orally every 12 hours (AII) (252,253). A
pharmacokinetic  study  of  caspofungin  in  immunocompromised  children  aged  2--17
years  without  HIV  infection  demonstrated  that  50  mg/m2  body  surface  area/day  (70
mg/day maximum) provides comparable exposure to that obtained in adults receiving a
standard 50-mg daily regimen (256). Because of limited experience with both of these
drugs  in  children,  data  are  insufficient  to  recommend  use  of  voriconazole  or
caspofungin  for  esophageal  or  disseminated  candidiasis  as  first-line  therapy  (CIII).
Invasive  disease  Central  venous  catheters  should  be  removed  when  feasible  in
HIV-infected  children  with  candidemia  (AII)  (267,271).  Conventional  amphotericin  B
(sodium  deoxycholate  complex)  is  the  drug  of  choice  for  most  invasive  Candida
infections  in  children,  administered  once  daily  intravenously  over  1--2  hours  (AI).  In
children who have azotemia or hyperkalemia or are receiving high doses (>1 mg/kg), a
longer  infusion  time  of  3--6  hours  is  recommended  (BIII)  (289).  In  children  with
life-threatening disease, the target daily dose of amphotericin B should be administered
from the beginning of therapy (BIII). Duration of therapy in treating candidemia should
be determined by the presence of deep tissue foci, clinical response, and presence of
neutropenia.  Children  at  high  risk  for  morbidity  and  mortality  should  be  treated  until
2--3  weeks  after  the  last  positive  blood  culture  and  until  signs  and  symptoms  of
infection have resolved (AIII) (279). Among children with persistent candidemia despite
appropriate  therapy,  investigation  for  a  deep  tissue  focus  of  infection  should  be
conducted (e.g., echocardiogram, renal or abdominal ultrasound). Flucytosine has been
used  in  combination  with  amphotericin  B  in  some  children  with  severe  invasive
candidiasis, particularly in those with CNS disease (CIII), but it has a narrow therapeutic
index. Fluconazole has been used as an alternative to amphotericin B to treat invasive
disease in children who have not recently received azole therapy (AI) (279). Treatment
of  invasive  candidiasis  requires  higher  doses  of  fluconazole  than  are  used  for
mucocutaneous disease. Alternatively, an initial course of amphotericin B therapy can
be administered and then carefully followed by completion of a course of fluconazole
therapy  (BIII).  Species  identification  is  necessary  when  using  fluconazole  because  of
intrinsic drug resistance among certain Candida spp. (e.g., C. krusei and C. glabrata).
Fluconazole  administered  to  children  at  12  mg/kg/day  provides  exposure  similar  to
standard 400 mg daily dosing in adults. Clearance in older adolescents can be similar to
adults, so dosing above 600 mg/day should be employed with caution (290). Antifungal
agents in the echinocandin class, including caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin,
have been studied in adults with HIV infection, neutropenic children at risk for fungal
infections,  and  children  with  documented  candidiasis  (258,291--296).  Because  of
limited experience in children and no data in HIV-infected children, data are insufficient
to recommend these drugs as first-line agents for invasive candidiasis in children (CIII).
Data  are  limited  on  the  use  of  caspofungin  in  children  with  systemic  candidiasis.  A
retrospective  report  in  which  caspofungin  was  administered  to  20  children  aged  ≤16
years who had invasive fungal infections (seven had invasive candidiasis) but not HIV
infection, the drug was efficacious and well tolerated (258). In a study of 10 neonates
with persistent and progressive candidiasis and unknown HIV status, caspofungin was
reported to be an effective alternative therapy (294). Micafungin has been studied in
HIV-uninfected,  neutropenic  children  at  risk  for  invasive  fungal  infections.  This  drug
demonstrates dose-proportional pharmacokinetics and an inverse relation between age
and clearance suggesting a need for increased dosage in the young child (295). A study
of  19  Japanese  HIV-uninfected  children  aged  ≤15  years  who  had  confirmed  invasive
fungal infections, such as candidiasis, showed that plasma concentration of micafungin
dosed at 3 mg/kg body weight was similar to that in adults administered 150 mg per
dose  (297).  Micafungin  was  administered  to  premature  infants  receiving  antifungal
therapy  for  a  suspected  invasive  fungal  infection.  Clearance  of  the  drug  in  neonates
was  more  than  double  that  in  older  children  and  adults  (296).  Dosages  of  10--15
mg/kg/day have been studied in premature neonates, resulting in area-under-the-curve
values consistent with an adult dosage of 100--150 mg/day. One pharmacokinetic study
of anidulafungin in HIV-uninfected neutropenic children aged 2--17 years showed drug
concentrations  at  0.75  mg/kg  per  dose  and  1.5  mg/kg  per  dose  were  similar  to  drug
concentrations in adults with 50 mg per dose and 100 mg per dose, respectively (298).
Data  in  adults  are  limited  on  use  of  combination  antifungal  therapy  for  invasive
candidal  infections;  combination  amphotericin  B  and  fluconazole  resulted  in  more
frequent  clearance  of  Candida  from  the  bloodstream  but  no  difference  in  mortality
(299).  Data  are  insufficient  to  support  the  routine  use  of  combination  therapy  in
children with invasive candidiasis (DIII) (249). Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including
IRIS No adverse effects have been reported with the use of oral nystatin for treatment
of oral candidiasis, but bitter taste might contribute to poor adherence. The azole drugs
have  relatively  low  rates  of  toxicity,  but  because  of  their  ability  to  inhibit  the
CYP450-dependent hepatic enzymes (ketoconazole has the strongest inhibitory effect)
they can interact substantially with other drugs undergoing hepatic metabolism. These
interactions  can  result  in  decreased  plasma  concentration  of  the  azole  because  of
increased  metabolism  induced  by  the  coadministered  drug  or  development  of
unexpected  toxicity  from  the  coadministered  drug  because  of  increased  plasma
concentrations  secondary  to  azole-induced  alterations  in  hepatic  metabolism.  The
potential for drug interactions, particularly with antiretroviral drugs such as PIs, should
be  carefully  evaluated  before  initiation  of  therapy  (AIII).  The  most  frequent  adverse
effects  of  the  azole  drugs  are  GI,  including  nausea  and  vomiting  (10%--40%  of
patients).  Skin  rash  and  pruritus  might  occur  with  all  drugs;  rare  cases  of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and alopecia have been reported with fluconazole therapy.
All  drugs  are  associated  with  asymptomatic  increases  in  transaminases  (1%--13%  of
patients) and, less frequently, hepatitis. Hematologic abnormalities have been reported
with  itraconazole,  including  thrombocytopenia  and  leukopenia.  Of  the  azoles,
ketoconazole is associated with the highest frequency of side effects. Its use has been
associated  with  endocrinologic  abnormalities  related  to  steroid  metabolism,  including
adrenal  insufficiency  and  gynecomastia,  hemolytic  anemia,  and  transaminitis.
Dose-related, reversible visual changes (e.g., photophobia and blurry vision) have been
reported  in  approximately  30%  of  patients  receiving  voriconazole  (300).  Cardiac
arrhythmias and renal abnormalities including nephritis and acute tubular necrosis also
have been reported with voriconazole use. Amphotericin B deoxycolate undergoes renal
excretion  as  inactive  drug.  Adverse  effects  of  amphotericin  B  are  primarily
nephrotoxicity, defined by substantial azotemia from glomerular damage, and can be
accompanied by hypokalemia from tubular damage. Nephrotoxicity is exacerbated by
use  of  concomitant  nephrotoxic  drugs.  Permanent  nephrotoxicity  is  related  to
cumulative dose. Nephrotoxicity can be ameliorated by hydration before amphotericin
B infusion. Infusion-related fevers, chills, nausea, and vomiting occur less frequently in
children  than  in  adults.  Onset  occurs  usually  within  1--3  hours  after  the  infusion  is
started,  typical  duration  is  <1  hour,  and  the  febrile  reactions  tend  to  decrease  in
frequency  over  time.  Pretreatment  with  acetaminophen  or  diphenhydramine  might
alleviate  febrile  reactions.  Idiosyncratic  reactions,  such  as  hypotension,  arrhythmias,
and  allergic  reactions,  including  anaphylaxis,  occur  less  frequently.  Hepatic  toxicity,
thrombophlebitis,  anemia,  and  rarely  neurotoxicity  (manifested  as  confusion  or
delirium, hearing loss, blurred vision, or seizures) also can occur. In approximately 20%
of  children,  lipid  formulations  of  amphotericin  B  can  cause  acute,  infusion-related
reactions, including chest pain; dyspnea; hypoxia; severe pain in the abdomen, flank, or
leg;  or  flushing  and  urticaria.  Compared  with  infusion  reactions  with  conventional
amphotericin B, most (85%) of the reactions to the lipid formulations occur within the
first  5  minutes  after  infusion  and  rapidly  resolve  with  temporary  interruption  of  the
amphotericin B infusion and administration of IV diphenhydramine. Premedication with
diphenhydramine  can  reduce  the  incidence  of  these  reactions.  Flucytosine  has
considerable  toxicity:  adverse  effects  on  the  bone  marrow  (e.g.,  anemia,  leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia),  liver,  GI  tract,  kidney,  and  skin  warrant  monitoring  of  drug  levels
and  dose  adjustment  to  keep  the  level  at  40--60  µg/mL.  Drug  levels  should  be
monitored, especially in patients with renal impairment. High levels can result in bone
marrow  suppression.  The  drug  should  be  avoided  in  children  who  have  severe  renal
impairment (EIII). The echinocandins have an excellent safety profile. In a retrospective
evaluation of 25 immunocompromised children who received caspofungin, the drug was
well  tolerated,  although  three  patients  had  adverse  events  potentially  related  to  the
drug  (hypokalemia  in  all  three  children,  elevated  bilirubin  in  two,  and  decreased
hemoglobin and elevated alanine aminotransferase in one) (256). In this study, children
weighing <50 kg received 0.8--1.6 mg/kg body weight daily, and those weighing >50
kg received the adult dosage. In the pharmacokinetic study of 39 children who received
caspofungin at 50 mg/m2 body surface area/day, five (13%) patients experienced one
or  more  drug-related  clinical  adverse  events,  including  one  patient  each  with  fever,
diarrhea, phlebitis, proteinuria, and transient extremity rash. Two patients reported one
or  more  drug-related  laboratory  adverse  events,  including  one  patient  each  with
hypokalemia  and  increased  serum  aspartate  transaminase.  None  of  the  drug-related
adverse  events  in  this  study  were  considered  serious  or  led  to  discontinuation  of
caspofungin  (256).  IRIS  associated  with  Candida  infection  has  not  been  described  in
children. However, evidence suggests that candidiasis occurs with increased frequency
in  adults  during  the  first  2  months  after  initiation  of  HAART,  except  for  candidal
eosophagitis (301). Management of Treatment Failure Oropharyngeal and esophageal
candidiasis If OPC initially is treated topically, failure or relapse should be treated with
oral fluconazole or itraconazole cyclodextrin oral solution (AI) (284,302). Approximately
50%--60%  of  patients  with  fluconazole-refractory  OPC  and  80%  of  patients  with
fluconazole-refractory esophageal candidiasis will respond to itraconazole solution (AII)
(303,304).  Posaconazole  is  a  second-generation  orally  bioavailable  triazole  that  has
been  effective  in  HIV-infected  adults  with  azole-refractory  OPC  or  esophageal
candidiasis  (305).  However,  experience  in  children  is  limited,  and  an  appropriate
pediatric  dosage  has  not  been  defined;  thus  data  in  children  are  insufficient  to
recommend  its  use  in  HIV-infected  children  (CIII)  (306,307).  Amphotericin  B  oral
suspension at 1 mL four times daily of a 100-mg/mL suspension sometimes has been
effective  among  patients  with  OPC  who  do  not  respond  to  itraconazole  solution;
however,  this  product  is  not  available  in  the  United  States  (CIII)  (304).  Low-dose  IV
amphotericin B (0.3--0.5 mg/kg/day) has been effective in children with refractory OPC
or esophageal candidiasis (BII) (279,304,308,309). Experience is limited with the use of
echinocandins  in  the  treatment  of  azole-refractory  OPC  or  esophageal  candidiasis  in
children  (with  or  without  HIV  infection);  however,  given  their  excellent  safety  profile,
the  echinocandins  (306)  could  be  considered  for  treatment  of  azole-refractory
esophageal candidiasis (CIII). Invasive disease Amphotericin B lipid formulations have a
role among children who are intolerant of amphotericin B, have disseminated candidal
infection  that  is  refractory  to  conventional  amphotericin  B,  or  are  at  high  risk  for
nephrotoxicity because of preexisting renal disease or use of other nephrotoxic drugs
(BII).  Although  lipid  formulations  appear  to  be  at  least  as  effective  as  conventional
amphotericin  B  for  treating  serious  fungal  infections  (310,311),  the  drugs  are
considerably more expensive than conventional amphotericin B. Two lipid formulations
are  used:  amphotericin  B  lipid  complex  and  liposomal  amphotericin  B  lipid  complex.
Experience  with  these  preparations  among  children  is  limited  (254,312,313).  For
invasive  candidiasis,  amphotericin  B  lipid  complex  is  administered  as  5  mg/kg  body
weight intravenously once daily over 2 hours (254,312,314). Amphotericin B liposome is
administered  intravenously  as  3--5  mg/kg  body  weight  once  daily  over  1--2  hours.
Duration of therapy is based on clinical response; most patients are treated for at least
2--4  weeks.  The  role  of  the  echinocandins  in  invasive  candidiasis  has  not  been  well
studied  in  HIV-infected  children.  However,  invasive  candidiasis  associated  with
neutropenia  in  patients  undergoing  bone  marrow  transplantation  has  been  treated
successfully  with  this  class  of  antifungals.  These  agents  should  be  considered  in  the
treatment  of  invasive  candidiasis  but  reserved  as  alternative,  second-line  therapy  to
currently available treatment modalities (CIII). Secondary prophylaxis of recurrent OPC
usually  is  not  recommended  because  1)  the  treatment  of  recurrence  is  typically
effective,  2)  the  potential  exists  for  the  development  of  resistance  and  drug
interactions,  and  3)  additional  rounds  of  prophylaxis  are  costly  (DIII).  Immune
reconstitution with HAART in immunocompromised children should be a priority (AIII).
However, if recurrences are severe, data on HIV-infected adults with advanced disease
on  HAART  suggest  that  suppressive  therapy  with  systemic  azoles,  either  with  oral
fluconazole  (BI)  or  with  itraconazole  solution  (CI),  can  be  considered  (315).  Potential
azole  resistance  should  be  considered  when  long-term  prophylaxis  with  azoles  is
considered.
 Data
 on
 HIV-infected
 adults
 suggest
 that,
 in
 children
 with
fluconazole-refractory OPC or esophageal candidiasis who responded to voriconazole or
posaconazole therapy or to echinocandins, continuing the effective drug as secondary
prophylaxis  can  be  considered  because  of  high  relapse  rate  until  HAART  produces
immune  reconstitution  (CIII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  In  situations  where
secondary prophylaxis is instituted, no data exist on which to base a recommendation
regarding  discontinuation.  On  the  basis  of  experience  with  HIV-infected  adults  with
other  OIs,  discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis  can  be  considered  when  the  CD4
count  or  percentage  has  risen  to  CDC  Immunologic  Category  2  or  1  (CIII)  (98).
Coccidioidomycosis is caused by the endemic dimorphic fungus, Coccidioides spp. Two
species,  Coccidioides  posadasii  and  C.  immitis,  have  been  identified  using  molecular
and  biogeographic  characteristics.  C.  immitis  appears  to  be  confined  mainly  to
California;  C.  posadasii  is  more  widely  distributed  through  the  southwestern  United
States,  northern  Mexico,  and  Central  and  South  America.  Most  reported  infections  in
these  areas  represent  new  infections.  Clinical  illnesses  caused  by  each  are
indistinguishable.  Infection  results  from  inhalation  of  spores  produced  by  the  fungal
form  in  arid  environments  with  hot  summers  preceded  by  rainy  seasons  (316,317).
Infections  in  regions  in  which  coccidioidomycosis  is  not  endemic  usually  result  from
reactivation  of  a  previous  infection.  Contaminated  fomites,  such  as  dusty  clothing  or
agricultural  products,  also  have  been  implicated  as  sources  of  infection  (318).
Preexisting  impairment  of  cellular  immunity  is  a  major  risk  factor  for  severe  primary
coccidioidomycosis  or  relapse  of  past  infection.  In  HIV-infected  adults,  both  localized
pneumonia and disseminated infection usually are observed in persons with CD4 counts
<250 cells/mm3 (319,320). The threshold for risk in HIV-infected children has not been
determined;  systemic  fungal  infection  has  occurred  when  CD4  counts  were  ≤100
cells/mm3  and  with  CD4  <15%,  both  indicative  of  severe  immunosuppression  (1,15).
Although no cases of coccidioidomycosis OI were reported in HIV-infected children from
the  Perinatal  AIDS  Collaborative  Transmission  Study,  the  study  sites  are  not
representative  of  the  areas  endemic  for  coccidioidomycosis  (4).  Data  are  limited  in
children, but in adults, HAART appears to be responsible for the declining incidence of
coccidioidomycosis (321). Immunocompromised persons and previously healthy blacks,
Hispanics, and Filipinos with coccidioidomycosis are at increased risk for dissemination,
as are pregnant women who acquire coccidioidal infection during the second or third
trimester. Clinical manifestations of coccidioidomycosis in HIV-infected adults are well
described.  Among  these  are  diffuse  pulmonary  disease;  focal  pneumonitis  in  less
immunocompromised patients; extrathoracic dissemination to meninges, lymph nodes,
or liver; fever and weight loss syndrome with positive serologies; and the asymptomatic
person
 with
 positive
 serologic
 tests
 (320).
 If
 untreated,
 a
 coccidioidal
antibody-seropositive, HIV-infected person is at risk for serious disease. Bone and joint
involvement is rarely observed in HIV-infected patients (321,322). Children with primary
pulmonary infection may present with fever, malaise, and chest pain. The presence of
cough varies, and hemoptysis is rare. Persistent fever may be a sign of dissemination to
extrathoracic  sites.  Children  with  meningitis  may  present  with  headaches,  altered
sensorium,  vomiting,  and  focal  neurologic  deficits.  Fever  is  sometimes  absent,  and
meningismus  occurs  in  50%  of  patients.  Hydrocephalus  is  common  and  may  occur
early.  Generalized  lymphadenopathy,  skin  nodules  or  ulcers,  peritonitis,  and  liver
abnormalities  also  may  accompany  disseminated  disease.  Because  signs  and
symptoms are nonspecific, coccidioidomycosis should be considered strongly in regions
where it is endemic. Coccidioidomycosis also has been reported in regions where it is
not endemic, and diagnostic evaluations should be considered in those areas as well. In
patients with meningitis, the CSF shows moderate hypoglycorrhachia, elevated protein
concentration,  and  pleocytosis  with  a  predominance  of  mononuclear  cells.  CSF
eosinophilia  has  been  reported.  The  observation  of  distinctive  spherules  containing
endospores in histopathologic tissue or clinical specimens is diagnostic. However, stains
of CSF in patients with meningitis usually are negative. Pyogranulomatous inflammation
with endosporulating spherules is seen readily with hematoxylin and eosin. Spherules
can  be  observed  using  cytologic  staining  methods,  such  as  Papanicolau  and  Gomori
methenamine  silver  nitrate  stains.  However,  cytologic  stains  are  less  useful  for
diagnosing  pulmonary  coccidioidomycosis  than  for  diagnosing  Pneumocystis  jirovecii,
and  a  negative  cytologic  stain  on  a  clinical  respiratory  specimen  does  not  rule  out
possible  active  pulmonary  coccidioidomycosis  (322).  Potassium  hydroxide  stains  are
less  sensitive  and  should  not  be  used  (DIII)  (322).  Growth  of  Coccidioides  spp.  is
supported  by  many  conventional  laboratory  media  used  for  fungal  isolation  at
30°C--37°C  (86°F--99°F)  with  growth  occurring  within  5  days  (322).  However,  blood
cultures are positive in <15% of cases and <50% of CSF from children with meningitis
will  have  a  positive  culture  (322).  In  contrast,  cultures  of  respiratory  specimens  are
frequently  positive  in  cases  of  pulmonary  coccidioidomycosis  in  adults.  Although
serologic  assays  that  detect  coccidioidal-specific  antibody  are  valuable  noninvasive
aides  in  diagnosis,  negative  assays  cannot  be  used  to  exclude  the  diagnosis  in  the
immunocompromised  host.  In  the  latter  instance,  detection  of  coccidioidin  or
cross-reacting
 antigens
 are
 important
 diagnostic
 tests,
 especially
 in
 severe
manifestations of disease. Assays for coccidioidal antibody in serum or body fluids such
as  CSF  provide  valuable  diagnostic  and  prognostic  information.  Cross-reactivity  may
occur with other endemic mycoses. The presence of IgM-specific coccidioidal antibody
suggests  active  or  recent  infection.  The  complement  fixation  (CF)  assay  detects
IgG-specific antibody. CF titers become undetectable in several months if the infection
resolves. Standardized CF titers >1:16 directly correlate with the presence and severity
of  extrapulmonary  dissemination.  Serologic  tests  may  be  falsely  negative  in  severely
immunosuppressed HIV-infected children. CF antibody is present in the CSF of 95% of
patients with coccidioidal meningitis, but serial testing may be needed to demonstrate
this. Titers decline during effective therapy. Preventing Exposure Although HIV-infected
persons  residing  in  or  visiting  regions  in  which  coccidioidomycosis  is  endemic  cannot
completely  avoid  exposure  to  Coccidioides  spp.,  exposure  risk  can  be  reduced  by
avoiding  activities  that  predispose  to  inhalation  of  spores.  Such  activities  include
disturbing contaminated soil, excavating archaeologic sites, and being outdoors during
dust  storms.  If  such  activities  are  unavoidable,  use  of  respiratory  filtration  devices
should be considered. Preventing First Episode of Disease No prospective studies have
been published that examine the role of primary prophylaxis to prevent development of
active  coccidioidomycosis.  Although  some  experts  would  provide  primary  prophylaxis
with an azole (e.g., fluconazole) to coccidioidal antibody-positive HIV-infected patients
living  in  regions  with  endemic  coccidioidomycosis,  others  would  not  (322).  Some
experts
 would
 consider
 chemoprophylaxis
 for
 coccidioidal
 antibody-positive
HIV-infected  persons  considered  at  higher  risk  for  active  disease,  including  blacks,
persons with unreconstituted cellular immunity with CD4 counts <250 cells/mm3, and
persons  with  a  history  of  thrush  (CII)  (323).  However,  given  the  low  incidence  of
coccidioidomycosis  in  pediatric  HIV-infected  patients,  possibility  of  drug  interactions,
potential antifungal drug resistance, and cost, routine use of antifungal medications for
primary  prophylaxis  of  coccidioidial  infections  in  children  is  not  recommended  (DIII).
Routine  skin  testing  of  HIV-infected  patients  with  coccidioidin  (spherulin)  does  not
predict infection and should not be performed (EIII). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis
Not applicable. Treatment of Disease All HIV-infected patients in whom clinically active
coccidioidomycosis  is  diagnosed  should  be  offered  antifungal  therapy.  Treatment
protocols  for  HIV-infected  children  are  based  on  experience  with  adults  in
nonrandomized  open-label  studies.  Physicians  who  infrequently  treat  children  with
coccidioidomycosis should consider consulting with experts. Because the critical factor
in  controlling  coccidioidomycosis  is  cellular  immune  function,  effective  antiretroviral
therapy
 also
 is
 important
 in
 treating
 disease
 and
 should
 be
 instituted
contemporaneously  with  the  initiation  of  antifungal  therapy,  if  possible.  Diffuse
pulmonary  or  disseminated  infection  should  be  treated  with  amphotericin  B
deoxycholate at 0.5--1.0 mg/kg/day (AII). Amphotericin B treatment is continued until
clinical improvement is observed. The dose and duration of amphotericin B depend on
the  severity  of  the  symptoms,  toxicity,  and  rapidity  of  response.  Total  doses  of
amphotericin  B  deoxycholate  in  adults  have  ranged  from  10  mg/kg  to  100  mg/kg.
Thereafter,  amphotericin  B  can  be  discontinued  and  treatment  with  fluconazole  or
itraconazole begun (BIII). Some experts initiate therapy with amphotericin B combined
with a triazole, such as fluconazole, in patients with disseminated severe disease and
continue the triazole after amphotericin B is stopped (BIII) (322,324). Total duration of
therapy should be ≥1 year (322). No clinical evidence supports greater efficacy of the
lipid formulations of amphotericin B than of deoxycholate. However, they are preferred
when nephrotoxicity is of concern (BI). A dosage of 5 mg/kg/day is recommended for
amphotericin  B  lipid  complex  and  3--5  mg/kg/day  for  liposomal  amphotericin  B.  For
patients with mild disease (such as focal pneumonia), monotherapy with fluconazole or
itraconazole
 is
 appropriate
 given
 their
 safety,
 convenient
 oral
 dosing,
 and
pharmacodynamic parameters (BII). Thus, fluconazole (5--6 mg/kg/dose twice daily) or
itraconazole (5--10 mg/kg/dose twice daily for 3 days followed by 2--5 mg/kg/dose twice
daily)  are  alternatives  to  amphotericin  B  for  children  who  have  mild,  nonmeningitic
disease (BIII). In a randomized, double-blind trial in adults, fluconazole and itraconazole
were  equivalent  in  treating  nonmeningeal  coccidioidomycosis.  However,  itraconazole
tended  to  be  superior  for  skeletal  infections  (AI)  (325).  Treatment  of  coccidioidal
meningitis requires an antifungal agent that achieves high CSF concentrations; thus, IV
amphotericin B should not be used (EII). The relative safety and comparatively superior
ability  of  fluconazole  to  penetrate  the  blood-brain  barrier  have  made  it  the  azole  of
choice for coccidioidal meningitis (AII). An effective dose of fluconazole in adults is 400
mg/day  (AII),  but  some  experts  begin  therapy  with  800--1000  mg/day  (BIII)  (324).
Children usually receive 5--6 mg/kg/dose twice daily (800 mg/day maximum) (AII) (9).
Dosages as high as 12 mg/kg/day have been used (CII) (326). This dosage is required to
achieve  serum  concentrations  equivalent  to  the  adult  dosage  of  400  mg/day  (249).
Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including IRIS In addition to monitoring the patient for
clinical  improvement,  monitoring  coccidioidal  IgG  antibody  titers  by  the  complement
fixation  methodology  is  useful  in  assessing  response  to  therapy.  Titers  should  be
obtained  every  12  weeks  (AIII).  If  therapy  is  succeeding,  titers  should  decrease
progressively,  and  a  rise  in  titers  suggests  recurrence  of  clinical  disease.  However,  if
serologic  tests  initially  were  negative,  titers  during  effective  therapy  may  increase
briefly and then decrease (322). This lag in response during the first 1 or 2 months of
therapy should not be construed as treatment failure. Adverse effects of amphotericin B
are  primarily  nephrotoxicity.  Infusion-related  fevers,  chills,  nausea,  and  vomiting  also
can occur, although they are less frequent in children than in adults. Lipid formulations
of amphotericin B have lower rates of nephrotoxicity. Hepatic toxicity, thrombophlebitis,
anemia,  and  rarely  neurotoxicity  (manifested  as  confusion  or  delirium,  hearing  loss,
blurred vision, or seizures) also can occur (see discussion on monitoring and adverse
events  in  Candida  infection).  Triazoles  can  interact  with  CYP450-dependent  hepatic
enzymes, and the potential for drug interactions should be evaluated carefully before
initiation  of  therapy  (AIII).  Fluconazole  and  itraconazole  appear  to  be  safe  in
combination  with  antiretroviral  therapy.  Voriconazole  should  be  avoided  in  patients
receiving HIV PIs or NNRTIs (320). The most frequent adverse effects of fluconazole are
GI, including nausea and vomiting. Skin rash and pruritis might be observed, and rare
cases  of  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome  have  been  reported.  Asymptomatic  increases  in
transaminases  occur  in  1%--13%  of  patients  receiving  azole  drugs.  In  HIV-infected
patients,
 fluconazole
 at
 high
 doses
 can
 cause
 adrenal
 insufficiency
 (327).
Coccidioidomycosis  disease  in  response  to  IRIS  has  not  been  described  in  children.
Management of Treatment Failure Clinical information is limited about new therapeutic
agents. Posaconazole was effective in six patients with disease refractory to treatment
with  azoles  and  amphotericin  B  (328).  Voriconazole  was  effective  in  treating
coccidioidal meningitis and nonmeningeal disseminated disease in patients who did not
respond  to  fluconazole  or  were  intolerant  of  amphotericin  B  (329,330).  Caspofungin
alone  successfully  treated  disseminated  coccidioidomycosis  in  a  renal  transplant
patient  intolerant  of  fluconazole  and  in  persons  in  whom  conventional  therapy  failed
(331,332).  Others  have  used  caspofungin  in  combination  with  fluconazole  (333).
Adjunctive  interferon-gamma  was  successfully  used  in  a  critically  ill  adult  with
respiratory failure who did not respond to amphotericin B preparations and fluconazole
(334). However, no controlled clinical studies or data exist for children; thus, it is not
recommended  for  use  in  HIV-infected  children  (DIII).  Patients  with  coccidioidal
meningitis who do not respond to treatment with the azoles might improve with both
systemic amphotericin B and direct instillation of amphotericin B into the intrathecal,
ventricular,  or  intracisternal  spaces  with  or  without  concomitant  azole  treatment  (CI)
(325,326). The basilar inflammation characteristic of coccidioidal meningitis commonly
results  in  obstructive  hydrocephalus,  necessitating  placement  of  a  CSF  shunt.
Development of hydrocephalus in coccidioidal meningitis does not necessarily indicate
treatment failure. Relapse can occur in as many as 33% of patients with disseminated
coccidioidomycosis,  even  in  the  absence  of  HIV  infection,  so  lifelong  antifungal
suppression  with  either  fluconazole  or  itraconazole  is  recommended  for  HIV-infected
children  who  have  coccidioidomycosis  (AII)  (322,324,335--337).  In  coccidioidal
meningitis, response rates to the azoles can be excellent, but cures are infrequent, and
relapse after cessation of therapy is common, occurring in as many as 80% of patients
(338). Thus, indefinite continuation of fluconazole therapy is recommended in patients
who  have  coccidioidal  meningitis  (AII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  As  with
other disseminated fungal infections, continued suppressive therapy with fluconazole or
itraconazole  is  recommended  after  completion  of  initial  therapy.  Patients  with  diffuse
pulmonary  disease,  disseminated  disease,  or  meningitic  disease  should  remain  on
lifelong  prophylaxis---even  if  immune  reconstitution  is  achieved  with  HAART
(322)---because  of  high  risk  for  relapse  (AIII).  In  HIV-infected  adults  with  focal
coccidioidal pneumonia who have clinically responded to antifungal therapy and have
sustained  CD4  count  >250  cells/mm3  on  HAART,  some  experts  would  discontinue
secondary  prophylaxis  after  12  months  of  therapy  with  careful  monitoring  for
recurrence  with  chest  radiographs  and  coccidioidal  serology  (CIII).  However,  only  a
small  number  of  patients  have  been  evaluated,  and  the  safety  of  discontinuing
secondary prophylaxis after immune reconstitution with HAART among children has not
been  studied  extensively.  Therefore,  for  coccidioidomycosis  among  HIV-infected
children,  lifelong  suppressive  therapy  is  recommended  after  an  acute  episode  of  the
disease,  regardless  of  HAART  and  immune  reconstitution  (AIII).  Most  cases  of
cryptococcosis  in  HIV-infected  patients  are  caused  by  Cryptococcus  neoformans;  C.
gatti  (formerly  C.  neoformans  variety  gatti)  infection  occurs  primarily  in  tropical  and
subtropical  areas.  Cryptococcal  infections  occur  much  less  frequently  among
HIV-infected  children  than  among  adults  (339--341).  During  the  pre-HAART  era,  most
cases  of  cryptococcosis  in  HIV-infected  children  (overall  incidence,  1%)  occurred  in
those
 aged
 6--12
 years
 and
 in
 those
 with
 CD4
 counts
 indicating
 severe
immunosuppression  (341).  Access  to  HAART  has  dramatically  decreased  the  overall
incidence  of  cryptococcal  infection  (342,343),  and  cryptococcosis  in  HIV-infected
children on HAART remains exceedingly uncommon. Data from various PACTG studies
during  the  pre-HAART  and  post-HAART  eras  indicate  that  the  rate  of  invasive  fungal
infection, including cryptococcosis, has remained <0.1 per 100 child-years (1,3). In the
Perinatal  AIDS  Collaborative  Transmission  Study,  no  cases  of  cryptococcosis  were
identified  during  the  HAART  era  (4).  Cryptococcosis  often  presents  with  subtle  and
nonspecific findings such as fever and headache. Early diagnosis requires consideration
of  this  infection  in  a  symptomatic  patient  whose  CD4  counts  indicate  severe
immunosuppression.  In  both  HIV-infected  adults  and  children,  meningoencephalitis  is
the most common initial manifestation of cryptococcosis. The disease typically evolves
over  days  to  weeks  with  fever  and  headache.  Less  frequent  findings  include  nuchal
rigidity, photophobia, and focal neurologic signs, as were seen among 30 HIV-infected
children with cryptococcosis reported from the United States (341). In contrast to this
indolent presentation, children in Zimbabwe presented with an acute form of neurologic
cryptococcosis (69% with nuchal rigidity, 38% with seizure activity, and 23% with focal
neurologic  signs)  (344).  CNS  mass  lesions  (cryptococcomas)  have  not  been  reported
among  HIV-infected  children.  Disseminated  cryptococcosis  can  be  associated  with
cutaneous  lesions,  including  small,  translucent  umbilicated  papules  (indistinguishable
from  molluscum  contagiosum),  nodules,  ulcers,  and  infiltrated  plaques  resembling
cellulitis.  Diagnosis  of  pulmonary  cryptococcosis  without  dissemination  is  unusual
among  children.  Presenting  findings  include  unexplained  recurrent  fever,  cough  with
scant  sputum,  intrathoracic  lymphadenopathy,  and  focal  or  diffuse  pulmonary
infiltrates.  Alternatively  the  infection  may  be  asymptomatic,  with  pulmonary  nodules
revealed on routine chest radiograph (340). Detection of cryptococcal antigen in serum,
CSF  or  other  body  fluids  is  highly  effective  for  rapid  and  accurate  diagnosis  of
cryptococcal infection. Microscopic examination of CSF on India ink-stained wet mounts
should be performed to diagnose suspected CNS disease. CSF cell count, glucose, and
protein  can  be  virtually  normal  with  CNS  cryptococcosis,  but  the  opening  pressure
usually  is  elevated.  Cryptococcal  antigen  can  be  detected  in  CSF  or  serum  by  latex
agglutination  test  (several  manufacturers)  from  >90%  of  patients  with  cryptococcal
meningitis.  However,  CSF  antigen  detection  may  be  negative  in  culture-positive
cryptococcal  meningitis;  high  titers  of  antigen  (prozone  effect),  low  levels  of  antigen,
and  nonencapsulated  strains  contribute  to  this  contradictory  result  (345,346).  Fungal
cultures from CSF, sputum, and blood can identify the organism; the lysis-centrifugation
method  is  the  most  sensitive  for  blood  specimens.  In  some  cases  (e.g.,  refractory  or
relapsed disease), susceptibility testing of the C. neoformans isolate can be beneficial.
Overall  in  vitro  resistance  to  antifungal  agents  remains  uncommon  (347).  Diffuse
pulmonary  disease  can  be  diagnosed  through  bronchoalveolar  lavage  and  direct
examination  of  India  ink-stained  specimens,  culture,  and  antigen  detection.  Focal
pulmonary  and  skin  lesions  may  require  biopsy  with  culture  and  staining.  Preventing
Exposure No strategies have been proven to prevent exposure. C. neoformans infection
is  believed  to  be  acquired  through  inhalation  of  aerosolized  particles  from  the
environment.  Serologic  studies  of  immunocompetent  children  in  an  urban  setting
indicate that most children are infected by C. neoformans after the second year of life
(348).  Preventing  the  First  Episode  of  Disease  Because  the  incidence  of  cryptococcal
disease is so low in HIV-infected children (4,339--341), routine testing of asymptomatic
children for serum cryptococcal antigen is not recommended (DIII). Additionally, given
the low incidence of cryptococcosis in HIV-infected children, lack of survival benefits in
primary  prevention  studies  of  adults  (349),  possibility  of  drug  interaction,  potential
resistance  to  antifungal  drugs,  and  cost,  routine  use  of  antifungal  medications  is  not
recommended  for  primary  prophylaxis  of  cryptococcal  infections  in  children  (DIII).  A
review  of  randomized  controlled  trials  using  antifungal  interventions  for  the  primary
prevention  of  cryptococcal  diseases  indicates  that  fluconazole  and  itraconazole  can
reduce cryptococcal disease among adults who have advanced HIV disease and severe
immunosuppression  (CD4  count  <50  cells/mm3)  (349).  However,  neither  of  these
interventions  clearly  affected  mortality.  Discontinuing  Primary  Prophylaxis  Not
applicable.  Treatment  of  Disease  Given  the  low  incidence  of  cryptococcosis  in
HIV-infected  children  even  during  the  pre-HAART  era,  management  of  this  disease  in
these patients has not been prospectively studied. Treatment recommendations reflect
information extrapolated from many well-designed studies involving HIV-infected adults
with cryptococcal meningitis. Unlike immunocompentent hosts, in whom recovery from
pulmonary  infection  without  antifungal  treatment  can  occur,  immunocompromised
hosts with cryptococcosis require treatment because the condition is often fatal in the
absence
 of
 treatment.
 Although
 antifungal
 treatment
 is
 effective,
 immune
reconstitution  of  the  host  with  the  use  of  antiretroviral  medications  is  crucial  to  the
long-term outcome in terms of avoiding episodes of recurrence and relapse. However,
IRIS can be problematic in the short term, posing a diagnostic dilemma when it presents
as  clinical  worsening  in  a  host  that  was  (or  is  being)  treated  appropriately  for
cryptococcal infection. Although data are limited on how best to prevent and manage
IRIS, because of the close proximity of OI diagnosis and HAART initiation in patients who
developed IRIS (350,351), some clinicians consider delaying HAART in treatment-naïve
patients  who  have  treatable  OIs  until  after  the  acute  phase  of  initial  OI  therapy  has
been completed (CIII). Factors other than IRIS, such as tolerability of OI treatments and
HAART and overlapping toxicities if both are started concurrently, are also reasons to
delay HAART (CIII). No clinical trials have assessed optimal timing of HAART initiation in
patients with concurrent cryptococcosis. Overall in vitro resistance to antifungal agents
used  to  treat  cryptococcosis  remains  uncommon  (347).  Newer  azoles  (e.g.,
voriconazole, posaconazole, ravuconazole) are all active in vitro against C. neoformans
(347),  but  published  clinical  experience  in  using  them  for  cryptococcosis  is  limited
(352,353).  CNS  disease  The  most  common  and  well-studied  presentation  of
cryptococcal  infection  in  HIV-infected  patients  is  CNS  disease.  In  light  of  studies  in
adults (354--356), combination therapy with amphotericin B and flucytosine for 2 weeks
(induction  therapy)  followed  by  fluconazole  for  a  minimum  of  8  weeks  (consolidation
therapy)  is  recommended  for  children  (AI).  Cryptococci  were  cleared  from  CSF
significantly  more  rapidly  from  adults  with  CNS  disease  who  received  initial  therapy
with  amphotericin  B  (0.7  mg/kg/day)  and  flucytosine  (100  mg/kg/day)  than  it  was  in
those  who  received  amphotericin  B  alone,  amphotericin  B  plus  fluconazole,  or
triple-antifungal  therapy  (357,358).  In  one  study  of  adults,  liposomal  amphotericin  B
(AmBisome(r))  dosed  at  4  mg/kg/day  resulted  in  significantly  earlier  CSF  culture
conversion  than  did  amphotericin  B  at  0.7  mg/kg/day  (359).  Although  the  cost  of
specific  amphotericin  B  formulations  is  an  important  factor  in  selection  of  a  specific
preparation,  the  indication  for  use  of  the  drug  is  also  important.  For  example,  the
liposomal preparation is preferred for patients with renal insufficiency (AII). Monitoring
for and managing raised intracranial pressure is crucial to the optimal management of
CNS  cryptococcosis  (see  below).  In  patients  who  cannot  tolerate  flucytosine,
amphotericin B (or its liposomal preparation) alone can be used for initial therapy (BI).
Fluconazole plus flucytosine is superior to fluconazole alone (360,361) and provides an
alternative to amphotericin B for acute therapy of invasive disease (BII); however, few
data are available regarding use of this combination in children, and it should be used
only  if  amphotericin  B-based  therapy  is  not  tolerated  (BIII).  Although  fluconazole
monotherapy  was  an  effective  alternative  to  amphotericin  B  in  adults  with
AIDS-associated cryptococcal meningitis (362), concerns in this study about differences
in  early  death,  delayed  CSF  sterilization,  and  drug  resistance  (363,364)  make
fluconazole monotherapy less favorable for initial therapy of CNS disease. Because of
rapidly  developing  resistance,  flucytosine  alone  should  never  be  used  to  treat
cryptococcosis (EII). After a minimum of 2 weeks of induction therapy with evidence of
clinical  improvement  and  a  negative  CSF  culture  after  repeat  lumbar  puncture,
amphotericin B and flucytosine can be discontinued and consolidation therapy initiated
with  fluconazole  (AI).  Consolidation  therapy  is  continued  for  a  minimum  of  8  weeks
(365). Itraconazole is an alternative to fluconazole for the consolidation phase of CNS
therapy  and  for  secondary  prophylaxis  (BI).  Fluconazole  is  preferred  because  studies
comparing  the  two  agents  demonstrate  higher  rates  of  CSF  sterilization  during
consolidation  therapy  (355)  and  less  frequent  relapse  (365)  during  maintenance
therapy in fluconazole recipients. Pulmonary and extrapulmonary cryptococcosis (CNS
disease  ruled  out)  No  controlled  clinical  studies  describe  the  outcome  of  non-CNS
cryptococcosis in HIV-infected patients. CNS disease should be ruled out in all patients,
after  which  the  choice  of  antifungal  medication  and  length  of  initial  therapy  can  be
decided  in  light  of  the  clinical  severity  of  illness.  Patients  with  severe  pulmonary
disease or disseminated cryptococcosis should be treated with amphotericin B with or
without  the  addition  of  flucytosine,  as  for  CNS  disease  (AIII).  Usually  combination
therapy  should  be  provided  until  symptoms  resolve.  Those  with  mild-to-moderate
pulmonary  illness  or  other  localized  disease  can  be  managed  with  fluconazole
monotherapy  (AIII).  Regardless  of  the  antifungal  agent  selected  for  initial  therapy,
secondary prophylaxis with fluconazole or itraconazole should be continued (AIII) until a
decision  about  when  to  stop  prophylaxis  can  be  determined  on  a  case-by-case  basis
(see  note  below  on  discontinuing  secondary  prophylaxis).  Monitoring  and  Adverse
Events,  Including  IRIS  Monitoring  for  raised  intracranial  pressure  Whenever  a  lumbar
puncture  is  performed,  opening  pressure  should  be  measured  (AII).  Studies  in  adults
clearly  show  the  role  of  increased  intracranial  pressure  in  death  associated  with  CNS
cryptococcosis (355,366). Health-care providers should be vigilant about this condition.
Its management includes repeated lumbar punctures. In rare cases, CSF shunting may
need  to  be  considered  for  patients  who  do  not  tolerate  daily  lumbar  punctures  or  if
standard  management  does  not  relieve  signs  and  symptoms  of  cerebral  edema.
Corticosteroids and acetazolamide should not be used to reduce intracranial pressure in
cryptococcal  meningitis  (DIII);  acetazolamide  was  associated  with  severe  acidosis,
hypokalemia, and other adverse effects in a clinical trial among adults (367). Monitoring
for treatment response In addition to monitoring clinical response, mycologic response
in patients with CNS cryptococcosis typically is assessed by a repeat lumbar puncture
and CSF examination at 2 weeks of treatment, with continuation of induction therapy if
the  culture  is  positive  until  negative  cultures  are  obtained.  Monitoring  serial  serum
cryptococcal  antigen  titers  is  not  useful  for  following  treatment  efficacy  because
changes in serum cryptococcal antigen titers do not correlate well with outcome during
treatment  for  acute  meningitis  or  during  suppressive  therapy  (368,369).  Serial
measurement of CSF cryptococcal antigen is more useful; in one study, an unchanged
or increased titer of antigen in CSF correlated with clinical and microbiologic failure to
respond to treatment, and a rise in CSF antigen titer during suppressive therapy was
associated with relapse of cryptococcal meningitis (368). However, monitoring of CSF
cryptococcal  antigen  levels  requires  repeated  lumbar  punctures  and  is  not  routinely
recommended  for  monitoring  response  (CIII).  Monitoring  for  adverse  events  Adverse
effects  of  amphotericin  B  (Table  5)  are  primarily  nephrotoxicity;  permanent
nephrotoxicity is related to cumulative dose. Infusion-related fevers, chills, nausea, and
vomiting  can  occur,  but  they  are  less  frequent  in  children  than  in  adults.  Close
monitoring  for  drug  toxicities  is  needed  especially  when  amphotericin  B  is  used  with
flucytosine.  Flucytosine  has  the  potential  for  marked  toxicity,  especially  affecting  the
bone marrow (e.g., anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia), liver, GI tract, kidney,
and skin. In patients receiving flucytosine, flucytosine blood levels should be monitored
to prevent bone marrow suppression and GI toxicity; peak serum levels, which occur 2
hours after an oral dose, should not exceed 75 µg/mL. Flucytosine should be avoided in
children  with  severe  renal  impairment  (EIII).  Fluconazole  and  the  other  azoles  have
relatively low rates of toxicity, but their potential drug interactions can limit their use.
Because of their ability to inhibit the CYP450-dependent hepatic enzymes, the potential
for  drug  interactions,  particularly  with  antiretroviral  drugs,  should  be  carefully
evaluated  before  initiation  of  therapy  (AIII).  IRIS  Patients  who  develop  IRIS  related  to
cryptococcosis are more likely than those who do not develop cyrptococcal IRIS to be
severely immunocompromised with disseminated infection and to have initiated potent
antiretroviral  therapy  soon  after  diagnosis  of  cryptococcal  disease  (370);  in
antiretroviral-naïve  patients  newly  diagnosed  with  cryptococcal  meningitis,  delay  in
potent  antiretroviral  therapy  may  be  prudent  until  the  end  of  the  first  2  weeks  of
induction therapy (CIII). IRIS related to cryptococcosis can present within weeks (e.g.,
meningitis)  or  months  (e.g.,  lymphadenitis)  after  start  of  HAART.  Symptoms  of
meningitis  are  similar  to  those  described  for  meningitis  presenting  as  the  initial
manifestation  of  cryptococcosis.  In  one  study,  about  30%  of  all  HIV-infected  adults
hospitalized for infection with C. neoformans who received HAART were readmitted with
symptoms  attributed  to  an  inflammatory  response  (350).  Of  the  18  patients  with  C.
neoformans-related  IRIS  in  the  cited  study,  17  had  culture-negative  meningitis,  and
most  cases  occurred  during  the  first  30  days  after  initiation  of  HAART.  The  most
common presentation of late cryptococcal IRIS is lymphadenitis, particularly mediastinal
lymphadenitis  (371).  The  optimal  management  of  cryptococcal  IRIS  has  not  been
defined. Antifungal therapy should be initiated in patients not already receiving it, and
antiretroviral  therapy  should  be  continued  (AII).  Although  many  cases  resolve
spontaneously,  some  experts  also  have  used  anti-inflammatory  therapy  (e.g.,
short-course corticosteroids) in patients with severely symptomatic IRIS (BIII) (371,372).
Management of Treatment Failure Treatment failure is defined as clinical deterioration
despite  appropriate  therapy,  including  management  of  intracranial  pressure;  lack  of
improvement in signs and symptoms after 2 weeks of appropriate therapy; or relapse
after an initial clinical response. Differentiating IRIS from treatment failure is important
because treatment approaches and outcomes differ. Optimal management of patients
with  treatment  failure  is  not  known.  If  cultures  are  positive  at  treatment  failure,
evaluation  of  antifungal  susceptibilities  might  be  considered,  although  fluconazole
resistance with C. neoformans is rare in the United States (but more common in some
international settings) (363). Patients in whom initial azole-based therapy fails should
be  switched  to  amphotericin  B-based  therapy  (363),  ideally  in  combination  with
flucytosine  (BIII);  the  possibility  of  drug  interactions  resulting  in  subtherapeutic  azole
levels (e.g., concurrent rifampin use or other drugs metabolized by the liver) should be
explored  (363).  Use  of  liposomal  amphotericin  B  should  be  considered,  as  one  study
suggests  improved  efficacy  in  CSF  sterilization  with  liposomal  preparations  than  with
standard amphotericin B (AII) (359). Some data from HIV-infected adults indicate higher
dosages (e.g., 400--800 mg/day) of fluconazole in combination with flucytosine also can
be  considered  for  salvage  therapy  (BII)  (356,373).  Clinical  experience  with  new
antifungal  agents  in  managing  cryptococcosis  is  limited.  A  few  patients  with
cryptococcal  infections  refractory  or  intolerant  to  standard  antifungal  therapy  have
been  treated  with  posaconazole  or  voriconazole  with  variable  success  (352,353).
Echinocandins do not have clinical activity against cryptococcal infections and should
not  be  used.  Patients  who  have  completed  initial  therapy  for  cryptococcosis  should
receive  suppressive  treatment  (i.e.,  secondary  prophylaxis  or  chronic  maintenance
therapy)  (AI).  Fluconazole  (AI)  is  superior  and  preferable  to  itraconazole  (BI)  for
preventing  relapse  of  cryptococcal  disease  (365,374,375).  Suppressive  therapy
typically  is  continued  long  term.  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  Until  recently,
lifelong secondary prophylaxis typically was recommended. The safety of discontinuing
secondary prophylaxis for cryptococcosis after immune reconstitution with HAART has
not  been  studied  in  children,  and  decisions  in  this  regard  should  be  made  on  a
case-by-case  basis.  Adults  at  apparent  low  risk  for  recurrence  of  cryptococcosis  have
successfully completed a course of initial therapy, remain asymptomatic with regard to
signs and symptoms of cryptococcosis, and have a sustained (≥6 months) increase in
their  CD4  counts  to  ≥200  cells/mm3  after  HAART  (376--378).  In  light  of  these
observations  and  inference  from  data  regarding  discontinuing  secondary  prophylaxis
for other OIs in adults with advanced HIV infection, discontinuing chronic suppressive
therapy  for  cryptococcosis  (after  being  on  it  for  ≥6  months)  can  be  considered  for
asymptomatic  children  aged  ≥6  years,  on  HAART,  and  with  sustained  (≥6  months)
increase  in  their  CD4  counts  to  ≥200  cells/mm3  (BII).  Suppressive  therapy  should  be
reinitiated  if  the  CD4  count  decreases  to  <200  cells/mm3  (AIII).  Histoplasmosis  is
caused  by  inhalation  of  microconidia  produced  by  the  mycelial  form  of  Histoplasma
capsulatum,  an  endemic  dimorphic  fungus,  and  cases  have  been  reported  from  all
continents except Antarctica. It is most highly endemic in the Ohio and Mississippi river
valleys. Infections in regions in which histoplasmosis is not endemic often result from
travel  to  these  regions.  Risk  factors  predisposing  to  infection  are  a  CD4  count  <150
cells/mm3  and  exposure  to  activities  that  disturb  contaminated  sites  and  result  in
aerosolization of spores. Because yeast forms of the fungus may remain viable within
granulomas  formed  after  successful  treatment  or  spontaneous  resolution  of  infection,
late  relapse  can  occur  if  cellular  immune  function  wanes.  Infection  can  occur  during
pregnancy,  and  transplacental  infection  has  rarely  been  reported  (379).  During  the
pre-HAART era, histoplasmosis was reported in 2%--5% of HIV-infected adults in regions
with endemic disease; rates of 25% have been reported in some cities (380). In a highly
endemic region, histoplasmosis was the AIDS-defining illness in 25% of adults and 8%
of  children  (381).  Progressive  disseminated  histoplasmosis  (PDH)  occurred  in  5%  of
HIV-infected children in another highly endemic region (M. Kleiman, unpublished data,
November 28, 2007). The overall incidence of histoplasmosis in children has not been
examined systematically but appeared to be low, even during the pre-HAART era (1).
Few  epidemiologic  data  have  been  reported  on  disseminated  histoplasmosis  in
HIV-infected children and adolescents treated with HAART. In several combined PACTG
cohorts,  the  incidence  rate  of  all  non-Candida  invasive  fungal  infection  was  0.10
infections per 100 child-years (95% CI 0.05--0.20) during the pre-HAART era, and 0.08
infections  per  100  child-years  (95%  CI  0.03--0.17)  during  the  HAART  era  (1,3).  These
data  were  contributed  from  centers  that  underrepresented  the  geographic  regions  of
maximal  histoplasmosis  prevalence;  so  the  statistical  power  to  detect  decreases  in
incidence rates associated with HAART may have been limited. However, none of the
rates  of  domestic  endemic  fungal  infections  (e.g.,  histoplasmosis,  coccidioidomycosis,
and  blastomycosis)  are  likely  to  exceed  these  estimates  in  HIV-infected  children  and
adolescents.  In  children  without  HIV  infection,  acute  pulmonary  manifestations  are
common, but chronic pulmonary infection has not been described. Because of greater
airway  pliability  in  children,  airway  obstruction  from  mediastinal  lymphadenopathy  is
more  common  in  children  (382).  Although  meningitis  is  common  with  progressive
disseminated  infection  in  infancy,  subacute  meningitis  and  parenchymal  lesions
characteristic of CNS disease in adults are unusual in children (383). Isolated pulmonary
granulomas  resulting  from  past  infections  are  common  incidental  findings  in  chest
radiographs of asymptomatic persons residing in histoplasmosis-endemic regions. The
most frequent clinical manifestation of histoplasmosis in HIV-infected children with AIDS
is  PDH;  PDH  is  fatal  if  untreated.  Prolonged  fever  and  failure  to  thrive  are  uniform
presenting  complaints.  Few  reports  have  been  published  of  presenting  signs  and
symptoms in children with PDH complicating AIDS (381,384--386). However, most are
similar to those seen in PDH in otherwise normal infants and in infections in patients
with  other  primary  or  acquired  immunodeficiencies.  These  include  splenomegaly,
cough,
 respiratory
 distress,
 hepatomegaly,
 "septic"
 appearance,
 generalized
lymphadenopathy, interstitial pneumonitis, cytopenia, coagulopathy, oropharyngeal/GI
ulcerations, and erythematous nodular/ulcerative cutaneous lesions (387--389). Culture
and histopathologic, serologic, antigen-detection, and molecular diagnostic techniques
have  been  developed  to  aid  in  diagnosing  histoplasmosis  (390,391).  Understanding
their uses and limitations is essential to interpretating results. Histoplasmin skin tests
are  not  available  and  were  not  useful  in  diagnosing  disseminated  disease  (388,389).
Although  isolation  of  the  fungus  using  culture  is  diagnostic,  it  often  requires  invasive
procedures,  is  insensitive,  and  may  take  10--30  days  to  grow.  Lysis-centrifugation
methodology  facilitates  growth  of  H.  capsulatum,  and  a  DNA  probe  permits  prompt
identification of isolates (392). Histopathologic demonstration of typical yeast forms in
tissue  specimens,  bone  marrow,  or  peripheral  blood  can  be  performed  rapidly  and,
when positive, is highly suggestive of active infection. However, results are positive in
12%--43%  of  adults  with  PDH  (390).  PCR  and  DNA  probes  have  been  developed  to
detect  H.  capsulatum  DNA  in  tissues  (393)  and  body  fluids  (394)  but  are  neither
sufficiently sensitive nor specific (390,391). Interpretation of serologic testing using CF
and immunodiffusion methods is problematic in immunocompromised hosts with PDH.
CF  titers  of  ≥1:32  to  the  yeast  and/or  mycelial  antigens  or  detection  of  H  and/or  M
bands  with  the  immunodiffusion  test  are  considered  strongly  suggestive  of  active  or
recent infection. However, only 41% of HIV-infected adults are seropositive, compared
with  82%  of  adults  with  PDH  and  no  underlying  immunocompromise  (395).  Thus,
seronegativity cannot be used to exclude active infection, especially PDH. Although a
fourfold increase in CF antibody is diagnostic of active infection, 2--4 weeks is needed
to determine this. CF antibody titers of CSF may be useful for diagnosing meningitis. In
these instances,  the assay  should  begin  with  undiluted  specimens.  Concurrent serum
titers should be evaluated to exclude false positivity caused by blood contamination of
the  CSF  (383).  Development  and  refinement  of  an  EIA  that  rapidly  identifies  and
quantifies  histoplasmal  antigen  in  body  fluids  fills  most  of  the  gaps  left  by  other
diagnostic  methods.  EIA  is  especially  suited  for  evaluating  patients  with  large  fungal
burdens, a feature of infection in immunocompromised hosts. EIA can detect antigen in
serum, bronchoalveolar lavage, and CSF. The reported sensitivity of antigen detection is
91%--92%  in  adults  with  PDH,  and  95%  in  adults  with  AIDS  (390,391);  sensitivity  in
children with underlying immunocompromise and in otherwise normal infants is 100%
(388;  M  Kleiman,  unpublished  data,  November  28,  2007)  (396).  EIA  has  necessitated
changes in recommendations for specimen submission and interpretation. In contrast to
earlier,  semiquantitative  assays,  the  third  generation  EIA  is  standardized  by
extrapolating antigen concentrations from a calibration curve that is linear to a value of
39  ng/mL.  However,  urine  antigen  concentrations  in  serious  infections  frequently
exceed  this  value.  In  these  instances,  serum  specimens  should  be  followed  because
maximum serum concentrations are lower than those of urine and thus more likely to
be in a range in which differences can be accurately measured. After resolution of the
antigenemia,  urine  concentrations  can  be  followed  to  monitor  the  effectiveness  of
treatment  and,  thereafter,  to  identify  relapse.  Antigenuria  is  identified  in  90%  of
patients  whose  histoplasmosis  relapses  (382).  The  histoplasmal  antigen  assay
demonstrates
 cross-reactions
 with
 blastomycosis,
 paracoccidioidomycosis,
 and
Penicillium  marneffei  infections  (390,391).  Antigen  is  detectable  in  75%--81%  of
immunocompetent hosts with acute, primary pulmonary infection. This occurs early in
infection,  reflecting  the  primary  fungemia  that  is  aborted  by  an  effective  cellular
immune response. Thus, antigenuria in a patient with HIV who retains normal cellular
immunity  may  not  presage  development  of  disseminated  infection.  Diagnosis  of  CNS
infection  is  difficult,  particularly  if  the  patient  has  isolated  meningitis  without
disseminated  disease  (383).  Highest  sensitivity  is  achieved  by  testing  CSF  for
histoplasmal  antigen,  antibody,  and  large-volume  culture.  In  adults,  CSF  culture  is
positive  in  20%--60%  of  patients,  CSF  antigen  is  positive  in  40%--70%,  and  CSF
antibody is positive in 70%--90% (390,391); Meningitis frequently accompanies PDH of
infancy (387). Preventing Exposure Most infections occur without a recognized history
of exposure to a high-risk site or activity. Therefore, complete avoidance of exposure in
histoplasmosis-endemic  regions  is  not  possible.  Sites  and  conditions  commonly
implicated in high-risk exposure and point-source outbreaks include soil contaminated
with  bird  or  bat  droppings,  older  urban  and  rural  structures,  decaying  vegetation  or
trees, and caves. Dry and windy conditions, excavation, demolition, and gardening and
agricultural  activities  predispose  to  aerosolization  of  spores.  If  avoidance  of  these
activities is not feasible, reducing the release of spores by wetting soil, renovation sites,
and other likely areas of aerosolization and using protective respiratory devices (397)
may reduce the likelihood of infection. Preventing First Episode of Disease Prophylaxis
with  itraconazole  is  recommended  for  HIV-infected  adults  whose  CD4  count  is  <150
cells/mm3  and  who  reside  in  areas  where  histoplasmosis  is  highly  endemic  (i.e.,
incidence  is  >10  cases  per  100  patient-years)  and  in  instances  in  which  risk  for
occupational exposure is high. Prophylaxis had no effect on survival (382). Given the
low  incidence  of  histoplasmosis  in  pediatric  HIV-infected  patients,  possibility  of  drug
interaction,  potential  antifungal  drug  resistance,  and  cost,  routine  use  of  antifungal
medications  for  primary  prophylaxis  of  histoplasma  infections  in  children  is  not
recommended (DIII). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Although studies have not been
done  to  support  the  safety  of  discontinuing  primary  prophylaxis,  the  safety  of
discontinuing suppressive therapy (secondary prophylaxis) for HIV-infected adults with
CD4 counts >150 cells/mm3 has been demonstrated; treatment should be resumed if
CD4 count falls below this threshold and the patient continues to reside in an area in
which  the  threshold  of  >10  cases  per  100  patient-years  is  exceeded  (382,398).
Prophylaxis is not recommended for HIV-infected children (DIII). Treatment of Disease
PDH  is  fatal  without  treatment.  Therapy  with  either  amphotericin  B  deoxycholate  or
itraconazole  (399,400)  is  highly  effective.  The  clinical  response  to  amphotericin  B  is
faster  and  is  preferred  for  initial  treatment  of  severe  infections  (AI).  Although
amphotericin  B  may  be  used  as  monotherapy  for  an  extended  time,  it  is  now  more
commonly  used  as  induction  therapy  and  is  followed  by  long-term  treatment  with
itraconazole. Itraconazole is the azole preferred for treatment of histoplasmosis (AIII).
Trials of therapy and the effectiveness of primary and secondary prophylaxis have been
evaluated  in  HIV-infected  adults.  Recommendations  for  HIV-infected  children  are
derived  from  these  data  and  from  anecdotal  experience  in  children  (382).  However,
because  of  important  differences  in  managing  PDH  in  children,  consultation  with
experts should be considered. The dosage of liposomal amphotericin B for children is
3--5  mg/kg/day.  Other  less  costly  or  better  tolerated  lipid  formulations  may  be
substituted for the liposomal product. Amphotericin B deoxycholate, at 1 mg/kg/day, is
better tolerated by children than it is by adults, is effective, and may be used when cost
of  the  lipid  preparations  is  a  consideration.  Itraconazole  is  usually  well  tolerated  in
children. Itraconazole has a long half-life and does not reach steady-state levels for 2
weeks. The interval needed to achieve desired serum concentrations can be shortened
if  the  recommended  dose  is  administered  three  times  daily  for  the  initial  3  days  of
therapy (i.e., loading dose); the recommended dose administered twice daily should be
started thereafter. Itraconazole solution is preferred to the capsule formulation because
it  is  better  absorbed  and  serum  concentrations  are  30%  higher  than  those  achieved
with the capsules. Because absorption of itraconazole varies considerably from patient
to patient, serum concentrations should be measured to ensure effective levels of drug,
monitor  changes  in  dosage,  and  assess  compliance  (BIII).  The  minimal  inhibitory
concentration of H. capsulatum is 0.01 µg/mL, and although minimally effective serum
concentrations  have  not  been  determined,  a  serum  concentration  of  1.0  µg/mL  is
recommended;  dosage  should  be  reduced  if  concentrations  exceed  10  µg/mL  (382).
Fluconazole is an alternative for patients with mild histoplasmosis who are intolerant of
itraconazole  or  in  whom  desired  serum  levels  of  itraconazole  cannot  be  attained.
However, fluconazole is less effective than itraconazole and has been associated with
development of drug resistance (401). Ketoconazole is used infrequently because of its
adverse  reactions;  it  is  effective  in  mild  infections,  excluding  disseminated  infection,
and  may  be  considered  because  it  is  much  less  costly  than  the  other  azoles.  Acute
primary  pulmonary  histoplasmosis  Acute  primary  pulmonary  histoplasmosis  can
present with a wide spectrum of symptoms ranging from dyspnea with high fever and
diffuse pulmonary infiltrates to only mild respiratory symptoms, variable fever, and a
chest  radiograph  showing  mediastinal  adenopathy  with  or  without  focal  pulmonary
infiltrate.  For  severe  or  moderately  severe  symptoms,  amphotericin  B  should  be
administered  for  1--2  weeks;  amphotericin  B  deoxycholate  is  preferred  because  it  is
well  tolerated  in  children  (AIII)  (382).  After  clinical  improvement,  patients  with  intact
immunity should receive itraconazole, beginning with a loading dose (see above) for the
first 3 days, followed by the recommended doses administered twice daily for at least
12  weeks  (AIII);  adults  with  CD4  counts  of  <150  cells/mm3,  and  by  extrapolation,
HIV-infected  children  with  severe  immunosuppression  (e.g.,  CD4  <15%  or  <150
cells/mm3 in children aged ≤6 years), should receive itraconazole for 12 months (AIII).
Urine antigen usually is elevated in these situations and should be monitored to gauge
clinical  response  and,  after  treatment,  identify  relapse  (AIII).  HIV-infected  children,
particularly those with functional cellular immunity, occasionally will present with fever
associated with mild primary pulmonary infection and histoplasma antigen in the urine.
Although an effective cellular immune response may limit such illnesses, treatment with
itraconazole  for  12  weeks  while  following  histoplasmal  urine  antigen  concentrations
may be prudent to ensure concentrations decrease (BIII). Moderately severe to severe
PDH Data from HIV-infected adults suggest that HIV-infected children with moderately
severe  to  severe  disseminated  histoplasmosis  should  be  treated  with  an  IV
amphotericin  B  formulation  for  ≥2  weeks  or  until  they  clinically  improve,  followed  by
itraconazole for 12 months (AI). HIV-infected adults with moderately severe to severe
PDH have a higher response rate to treatment with liposomal amphotericin B than with
the deoxycholate formulation (88% vs 64%) and a lower death rate (2% vs 13%) (AI)
(382). After a favorable clinical response, amphotericin B should be discontinued and
followed by "step-down" therapy with itraconazole for 12 months (AII). A loading dose
(see above) of itraconazole should be used for the initial 3 days. If itraconazole is not
well tolerated, a 4- to 6-week course of amphotericin B should be used and histoplasma
urine  antigen  levels  followed  (AIII).  Although  therapeutic  trials  of  amphotericin  B
deoxycholate used to treat PDH in HIV-infected children have not been performed, this
formulation  is  effective  for  treating  severe  PDH  in  infants  (387,402),  including  those
with  CNS  infection  (387),  and  in  children  with  other  primary  or  acquired
immunodeficiency states. Amphotericin B deoxycholate is better tolerated by children
than by adults, and it is less costly than other formulations. It may be used if cost or
availability of lipid formulations precludes their use (AIII). Mild to moderate PDH Mild to
moderate  PDH  in  adults  without  signs  of  CNS  infection  responds  favorably  in
80%--100%  of  patients  treated  with  itraconazole  monotherapy  for  12  months  (AII)
(382,399).  This  regimen  also  is  recommended  for  HIV-infected  children  with  mild  to
moderate PDH (AII). A loading dose of itraconazole (see above) should be administered
at  the  onset  of  treatment  and  serum  concentrations  monitored.  CNS  infection  CNS
infection that accompanies PDH is expected to respond to the regimen recommended
for moderately severe to severe PDH. Isolated CNS infection is unusual in children. In
adults,  frequent  failure  and  relapse  are  common,  and  aggressive  therapy  is
recommended. Liposomal amphotericin B is preferred for CNS disease in children and
adults because it achieves higher concentrations in the brain (AII); penetration into the
CSF  is  poor  with  all  formulations.  The  deoxycholate  formulation  is  an  alternative.
Amphotericin  should  be  administered  for  4--6  weeks.  Thereafter,  the  child  should
receive a loading dose of itraconazole and continuation of itraconazole for 12 months
and  until  CSF  abnormalities,  including  histoplasmal  antigen,  have  resolved  (AII).
Itraconazole  levels  should  be  followed  and  dose  adjusted  to  ensure  optimal  serum
concentrations
 (AIII).
 Asymptomatic
 Histoplasma
 granuloma
 In
 asymptomatic
HIV-infected  children  who  have  intact  cellular  immunity  and  have  resided  in  an  area
with endemic histoplasmosis, the presence of a typical granuloma in a chest radiograph
should
 prompt  evaluation
 of  both
 histoplasmal
 urine  antigen
 and
 CF  and
immunodiffusion  antibody.  If  any  of  these  tests  are  positive,  treatment  with
itraconazole for 12 weeks is prudent (BIII). If these tests are negative, therapy need not
be used, and clinical follow-up is recommended. In either instance, histoplasmal urine
antigen testing should be considered if unexplained fever or other systemic symptoms
occur.
 Monitoring
 and
 Adverse
 Events,
 Including
 IRIS
 In
 manifestations
 of
histoplasmosis  in  which  antigenuria  is  demonstrated,  antigen  levels  should  be
monitored during therapy and for a year thereafter to identify relapse (AIII) (403). After
a recommended course of therapy and, in the absence of symptoms, low-level, stable
antigenuria  may  not  constitute  a  basis  for  prolonging  the  recommended  course  of
therapy.  Serum  levels  of  itraconazole  should  be  monitored  in  patients  receiving
treatment  (AIII).  Adverse  effects  of  amphotericin  B  are  primarily  nephrotoxicity;
permanent nephrotoxicity is related to cumulative dose. Infusion-related fevers, chills,
nausea,  and  vomiting  can  occur,  although  they  are  less  frequent  in  children  than  in
adults.  Renal  dysfunction  and  electrolyte  imbalances  are  its  primary  toxicities;  these
parameters  should  be  monitored  during  therapy.  Itraconazole,  like  other  azoles,  has
relatively low rates of toxicity. GI upset is seen occasionally and its principal toxicity is
hepatic.  The  azole  drugs  inhibit  CYP450-dependent  hepatic  enzymes  so  that  drug
interactions, particularly with antiretroviral drugs, should be carefully evaluated before
initiation  of  therapy.  IRIS  caused  by  an  inflammatory  response  to  histoplasmosis
unmasked  by  HAART-induced  improvement  in  cellular  immunity  is  unusual,  and
symptoms  are  often  mild  (404).  In  the  event  of  IRIS,  antiretroviral  therapy  should  be
continued along with antifungal therapy (AIII). Management of Treatment Failure Both
voriconazole  and  posaconazole  have  been  used  successfully  in  a  small  number  of
refractory cases in adults (382). Because little experience has been reported using the
newer  azoles  and  data  are  limited  on  use  of  these  agents  in  children,  expert
consultation  is  recommended  for  cases  refractory  to  first-line  agents.  Children
responding  well  after  completion  of  initial  amphotericin  B  treatment  should  be
continued  on  oral  itraconazole  maintenance  therapy  for  at  least  1  year  (AII).
Longer-term  suppressive  therapy  with  itraconazole  may  be  required  in  HIV-infected
children  who  are  severely  immunosuppressed  (i.e.,  CD4  <15%  or  <150  cells/mm3  in
children  aged  ≥6  years)  and  patients  who  experience  relapse  despite  receipt  of
appropriate therapy (AII) (382,398). Fluconazole is less effective than itraconazole (CII),
and  experience  is  limited  in  children  with  voriconazole.  Discontinuing  Secondary
Prophylaxis Discontinuation of treatment has not been examined in children. Data from
a clinical trial evaluating discontinuation in adults with immune restoration on HAART
suggest  discontinuation  of  itraconazole  is  recommended  in  adults  if  itraconazole  has
been received for ≥1 year, blood cultures are negative, histoplasmal serum antigen is
<2 ng/mL, CD4 counts are >150 cells/mm3, and the patient is compliant with HAART
(AI)  (398).  Extrapolating  these  recommendations  to  HIV-infected  children  on  HAART
with immune restoration (i.e., CD4 >150 cells/mm3 in children aged ≥6 years) seems
reasonable  (CIII).  Treatment  should  resume  if  these  parameters  are  not  met.  Chronic
suppressive  therapy  is  recommended  for  relapse  that  occurs  despite  appropriate
treatment  (BIII).  Pneumocystis  spp.  are  found  worldwide  in  the  lungs  of  humans  and
lower  animals.  The  organisms  are  host  specific,  and  cross-infection  between  humans
and  other  animals  does  not  occur.  Pneumocystis  spp.  from  all  sources  are
morphologically,  tinctorially,  and  biologically  similar,  but  surface  antigens  and  gene
sequencing have demonstrated host-specific differences. Since the original designation
of  Pneumocystis  carinii  a  century  ago,  several  changes  in  terminology  have  been
suggested. The most recent proposal to change P. carinii to P. jirovecii for isolates from
human lungs has gained some popularity but remains controversial. Pneumocystis has
been  designated  a  fungus  on  the  basis  of  DNA  analysis,  but  it  has  several  biologic
features of protozoa. It is one of the most frequent causes of infection in humans. By
age 2--4 years, more than 80% of children in most countries have acquired antibodies
to  Pneumocystis  (405--407).  Immunocompetent  infants  with  the  infection  are  either
asymptomatic  or  have  mild  respiratory  symptoms.  Pneumocystis  pneumonia  (PCP)
occurs  almost  exclusively  in  the  immunocompromised  host.  PCP  remains  a  common
AIDS-indicator  disease  among  HIV-infected  children.  The  highest  incidence  of  PCP  in
HIV-infected children is in the first year of life, with cases peaking at age 3--6 months
(408--410).  Data  from  the  CDC  Pediatric  Spectrum  of  Disease  Project  (1994--2001)
indicate a decline in PCP infection rates (cases per 1000 HIV-infected children) from 25
in  1994  to  18  in  1996  to  six  in  2001  (1,411).  Similarly,  analyses  of  data  from  the
Perinatal AIDS Collaborative Transmission Study revealed a 95% decline in PCP (cases
per  100  child-years)  from  5.8  (pre-HAART  era)  to  0.3  (HAART  era)  (4).  Finally,  the
incidence  rate  of  PCP  (cases  per  100  child-years)  was  1.3  during  the  pre-HAART  era
(1981--1988)  and  <0.5  during  the  HAART  era  (2001--2004)  (3).  This  decline  probably
resulted from implementation of interventions to prevent mother-to-child transmission
of HIV, introduction of HAART in HIV-infected children in 1995, and chemoprophylaxis
for  PCP.  PCP  is  a  major  cause  of  death  among  HIV-infected  infants  and  children  in
Africa. Autopsies revealed PCP in 16% of children dying with HIV/AIDS during 1992 and
1993 (412), in 29% of those dying during 1997 and 2000 (413), and in 44% of those
dying during 2000 and 2001 (414). The mode of transmission of Pneumocystis among
HIV-infected  infants,  children,  and  adults  is  not  firmly  established,  but  airborne
human-to-human  transmission  is  likely.  Animal  studies  show  Pneumocystis  is
transmitted  by  air  from  infected  to  susceptible  rats  (415,416).  Human-to-human
transmission  has  been  suggested  by  molecular  epidemiology  and  global  clustering  of
PCP  cases  in  recent  studies  (417--419).  Intrauterine  transmission  is  considered  rare.
However,  in  one  report,  one  of  eight  infants  born  to  women  who  had  AIDS  and  PCP
during  pregnancy  had  evidence  of  Pneumocystis  infection  (420).  The  single  most
important factor in susceptibility of HIV-infected patients of all ages to PCP is the status
of  cell-mediated  immunity  of  the  host.  Severe  compromise,  reflected  by  a  marked
decrease  in  CD4  count  and  percentage,  is  the  hallmark  of  high  risk  for  PCP  and  is
discussed further in the prevention section. Prominent clinical features of PCP among
HIV-infected children are fever, tachypnea, dyspnea, and cough. The severity of these
signs and symptoms varies from child to child. Onset can be abrupt or insidious with
nonspecific  symptoms  (e.g.,  mild  cough,  dyspnea,  poor  feeding,  diarrhea,  and  weight
loss). Some patients may not be febrile, but almost all will have tachypnea by the time
pneumonitis  is  evident  on  chest  radiograph.  Physical  examination  sometimes  shows
bilateral basilar rales with evidence of respiratory distress and hypoxia. In HIV-infected
children with pneumonia, four clinical variables are independently associated with PCP:
age  <6  months,  respiratory  rate  >59  breaths  per  minute,  arterial  percentage
hemoglobin  saturation  ≤92%,  and  the  absence  of  vomiting  (421).  A  high  plasma  HIV
RNA  concentration  strongly  predicts  PCP  and  other  OIs  (422).  Extrapulmonary
Pneumocystis  organisms  are  found  in  <2.5%  of  HIV-infected  adults  and  children
(423,424).  This  can  occur  without  concurrent  PCP  and  can  be  located  at  multiple
noncontiguous  sites.  Involved  sites  have  included  ear,  eye,  thyroid,  spleen,  GI  tract,
peritoneum, stomach, duodenum, small intestine, transverse colon, liver, and pancreas.
Less  frequently  involved  sites  include  adrenal  glands,  muscle,  bone  marrow,  heart,
kidney,  ureter,  lymph  nodes,  meninges,  and  cerebral  cortex.  Most  children  with  PCP
have  substantial  hypoxia  with  low  arterial  oxygen  pressure  and  a  PaO2  >30  mm  Hg.
The CD4 count is often <200 cells/mm3 and the CD4 percentage <15% in children aged
>5  years.  Lactic  dehydrogenase  is  often  increased,  but  this  is  not  specific  for  PCP.
Serum albumin may be depressed. Chest radiographs most commonly indicate bilateral
diffuse parenchymal infiltrates with "ground-glass" or reticulogranular appearance, but
they  also  can  be  normal  or  have  only  mild  parenchymal  infiltrates.  The  earliest
infiltrates are perihilar, progressing peripherally before reaching the apical portions of
the  lung.  Rarely,  lobar,  cavitary,  nodular,  or  miliary  lesions;  pneumothorax;  or
pneumomediastinum
 are
 observed.
 A
 definitive
 diagnosis
 of
 PCP
 requires
demonstration  of  the  organism  in  pulmonary  tissues  or  fluids  in  the  presence  of
pneumonitis. Diagnostic procedures are the same as for adults suspected to have PCP
(see  Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  and  Treatment  of  Opportunistic  Infections  in
HIV-Infected  Adults)  (16),  but  some  procedures  may  be  more  difficult  to  perform  in
children.  Several  procedures  for  collecting  and  staining  specimens  are  available.
Induced sputum analysis, during which the patient produces sputum after inhalation of
nebulized  3%  hypertonic  saline,  may  be  difficult  among  children  aged  <2  years
because of small airways and poor ability to produce sputum. Complications from the
procedure include nausea, vomiting, and bronchospasm. Sensitivity of sputum analysis
in  adults  ranges  from  25%  to  90%.  After  a  negative  induced  sputum  sample,  a
bronchoalveolar  lavage  for  definitive  diagnosis  may  be  necessary.  Nasogastric
aspirates,  if  positive,  are  of  diagnostic  value.  Pneumocystis  organisms  were  found  in
48.6% of HIV-infected children with respiratory illnesses in whom gastric aspirates were
obtained on three consecutive mornings (425). Other studies have shown the organism
is not found in gastric contents without PCP (426). Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar
lavage is the diagnostic procedure of choice for most infants and children. Sensitivity
ranges  from  55%  to  97%  and  may  be  positive  for  ≥72  hours  after  initiation  of  PCP
treatment;  treatment  should  not  be  delayed  while  awaiting  results.  Complications
include  hemoptysis,  pneumothorax,  transient  increase  in  hypoxemia,  a  transient
increase  in  pulmonary  infiltrates  at  the  lavage  site,  and  postbronchoscopy  fever.
Fiberoptic  bronchoscopy  with  transbronchial  biopsy  is  recommended  only  when
bronchoalveolar lavage is negative or nondiagnostic despite a clinical picture consistent
with  PCP.  Sensitivity  is  87%--95%,  and  cysts  can  be  identified  up  to  10  days  after
initiation  of  treatment  (up  to  4--6  weeks  in  certain  patients).  Complications  include
pneumothorax  and  hemorrhage;  this  procedure  is  contraindicated  in  children  with
thrombocytopenia.  Open-lung  biopsy  is  the  most  sensitive  and  specific  diagnostic
technique, but because it requires thoracotomy and often chest tube drainage, is not
recommended  routinely.  It  has  the  advantage  of  revealing  the  type  and  extent  of
disease as well as the organism. Histopathology shows alveoli filled with eosinophilic,
acellular,  proteinaceous  material  that  contains  cysts  and  trophozoites  but  few
inflammatory  cells.  Complications  include  pneumothorax,  pneumomediastinum,  and
hemorrhage. Three types of stains can be used to identify Pneumocystis organisms in
specimens.  Gomori  methenamine-silver  method  stains  the  cyst  wall  brown  or  black.
Toluidine  blue  stains  the  cyst  wall  blue  or  lavender.  Both  methods  stain  fungal
elements.  Giemsa,  Diff-Quick(r),  and  Wright  stains  depict  the  trophozoites  and
intracystic sporozoites pale blue with a punctate red nucleus, but unlike other stains,
these do not stain the cyst wall. Monoclonal immunofluorescent antibodies (Merifluor(r),
Meridian Bioscience, Inc., Cincinnati, OH) that stain the cyst wall also can be used for
diagnosis and have enhanced specificity compared with the other methods. A cyst wall,
trophozoite, and immunofluorescent antibody stain is recommended for each specimen
studied. PCR assays to amplify the human Pneumocystis MSG gene, mitochondrial large
subunit (mtlsu) rRNA, the dihydropteroate synthase gene, and the internal transcribed
spacer  region  genes  have  been  developed  for  diagnostic  evaluation.  These  tests  are
usually  more  sensitive  but  less  specific  than  microscopic  methods  and  are  not
standardized  or  available  in  most  centers  (427,428).  Pneumocystis-specific  DNA  is
found in 18% of bronchoalveolar lavage samples from patients without clinical PCP, HIV,
and  other  infections  (429).  Coinfection  with  other  organisms  (e.g.,  CMV  or
pneumococcus) has been reported in HIV-infected children (410,430,431). Children with
dual  infections  may  have  more  severe  disease.  Although  CMV  in  lung  secretions  of
children  with  PCP  indicates  colonization,  it  usually  does  not  require  therapy.  The
presence  of  Pneumocystis  is  always  an  indication  for  treatment.  Preventing  Exposure
The  need  for  isolation  of  hospitalized  persons  who  have  PCP  has  been  neither
demonstrated  nor  discounted.  PCP  patients  clearly  do  not  need  to  be  isolated  from
persons  with  normal  immune  responses  and  from  immunocompromised  high-risk
patients  who  are  receiving  PCP  prophylaxis.  Under  unusual  circumstances  where
prophylaxis  cannot  be  administered,  avoid  placement  in  the  same  room  with  an
immucompromised patient (CIII). Preventing First Episode of Disease Chemoprophylaxis
is highly effective in preventing PCP. Criteria for its use are based on the patient's age
and  CD4  count  or  percentage  (AII).  Prophylaxis  is  recommended  for  all  HIV-infected
children  aged  ≥6  years  who  have  CD4  counts  <200  cells/mm3  or  CD4  <15%,  for
children aged 1--5 years with CD4 counts of <500 cells/mm3 or CD4 <15%, and for all
HIV-infected  infants  aged  <12  months  regardless  of  CD4  count  or  percentage  (432).
Infants born to HIV-infected mothers should be considered for prophylaxis beginning at
4--6 weeks of age. HIV-infected infants should be administered prophylaxis until 1 year
of age, at which time they should be reassessed on the basis of the age-specific CD4
count or percentage thresholds mentioned above (AII). Infants with indeterminate HIV
infection  status  should  receive  prophylaxis  until  they  are  determined  to  be
HIV-uninfected  or  presumptively  uninfected  with  HIV  (AIII).  Prophylaxis  is  not
recommended  for  infants  who  meet  criteria  for  definitively  or  presumptively
HIV-uninfected. In nonbreast-feeding infants with no positive HIV virologic test results,
presumptive  exclusion  of  HIV  infection  can  be  based  on  two  negative  virologic  test
results: one obtained at ≥2 weeks and one obtained at ≥4 weeks of age, one negative
virologic  test  result  obtained  at  ≥8  weeks  of  age,  or  one  negative  HIV-antibody  test
result obtained at ≥6 months of age. Definitive exclusion of HIV infection is based on
two negative virologic test results: one obtained at ≥1 month of age and one obtained
at  ≥4  months  of  age,  or  on  two  negative  HIV-antibody  test  results  from  separate
specimens obtained at ≥6 months of age. For both presumptive and definitive exclusion
of infection, the child should have no other laboratory (e.g., no positive virologic test
results)  or  clinical  (e.g.,  no  AIDS-defining  conditions)  evidence  of  HIV  infection.  Four
drug  regimens  have  been  found  effective  and  relatively  safe  for  preventing  PCP  in
high-risk HIV-infected children and adults. Trimethoprim--sulfamethoxazole (TMP--SMX)
(Cotrimoxazole)  is  the  drug  of  choice  for  prophylaxis  because  of  its  high  efficacy,
relative safety, low cost, and broad antimicrobial spectrum (AI). TMP alone has little, if
any,  anti-Pneumocystis  activity,  but  it  enhances  the  activity  of  the  sulfonamide.  The
prophylactic  dosage  is  150  mg/m2  body  surface  area/day  TMP  and  750  mg/m2  body
surface  area/day  SMX  (approximately  5.0  mg/kg/day  TMP  and  25  mg/kg/day  SMX)
administered  orally  in  equally  divided  doses  twice  a  day  on  3  consecutive  days  per
week (433). The total daily dose should not exceed 320 mg TMP and 1600 mg SMX. For
patients with impaired renal function, a reduced dose may be necessary. Alternatively,
TMP--SMX  can  be  administered  daily  7  days  a  week  (AI)  (434).  TMP--SMX  also  is
effective  in  preventing  toxoplasmosis  (435)  and  some  bacterial  infections  (e.g.,
Salmonella,  Haemophilus,  Staphylococcus)  (434,436--438).  Dihydropteroate  synthase
gene mutations in Pneumocystis from humans have been observed with TMP--SMX and
dapsone  prophylaxis,  suggestive  of  possible  drug  resistance,  but  studies  for  clinical
correlates have not provided conclusive results (427). More apparent is the association
of prolonged TMP--SMX prophylaxis for PCP with the emergence of selective pressure
resistance of clinically important bacterial species to TMP-SMX, a point to be considered
in  managing  bacterial  infections  in  patients  receiving  prophylaxis  (439,440).  Other
effective  and  safe  prophylaxis  regimens  are  available  for  patients  unable  to  take
TMP-SMX.  A  second  choice  would  be  either  atovaquone  or  dapsone  (BI)  (441).
Atovaquone is effective and safe but expensive. Dapsone is effective and inexpensive
but  associated  with  more  serious  adverse  effects  than  atovaquone.  Atovaquone  is
administered  with  a  meal  as  an  oral  yellow  suspension  in  single  dosage  of  30
mg/kg/day  for  patients  1--3  months  and  >24  months  of  age,  and  45  mg/kg/day  for
infants  aged  4--24  months  (442).  Unlike  TMP-SMX,  atovaquone  has  no  antibacterial
activity but is effective against Toxoplasma gondii. Azithromycin, in a single dosage of
5.0  mg/kg/day  has  been  used  to  supplement  atovaquone  for  greater  broad-spectrum
prophylaxis.  The  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study  PACTG  254
compared  TMP-SMX  and  atovaquone  plus  azithromycin  for  3  years  (median)  in  366
HIV-infected
 children
 qualifying
 for
 PCP
 prophylaxis
 (95).
 Results
 showed
atovaquone-azithromycin to be as effective as TMP-SMX for preventing serious bacterial
infections, as well as PCP. Dapsone can be administered on a daily or weekly schedule
as  2.0  mg/kg/day  (maximum  total  dosage  of  100  mg/day)  or  4.0  mg/kg/week
(maximum total dosage of 200 mg/week) orally. Approximately two thirds of patients
intolerant to TMP-SMX can take dapsone successfully. Studies in adults show dapsone is
as effective as atovaquone or aerosolized pentamidine but slightly less effective than
TMP-SMX (441,442). Aerosolized pentamidine is recommended for children who cannot
take TMP-SMX, atovaquone, or dapsone and are old enough to use nebulization with a
Respirgard II(r) nebulizer (Marquest, Englewood, CO) (BI). The dosage for all ages is 300
mg once a month (437). Adverse reactions among HIV-infected children include cough,
sneezing,  and  bronchospasm  (443).  Pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine  (Fansidar(r))  also  is
recognized as an effective prophylaxis regimen in adults (CIII). Although this drug was
effective  in  preventing  PCP  in  Iranian  orphanages  in  the  1960s,  it  has  not  been
evaluated  adequately  among  HIV-infected  children.  The  use  of  IV  pentamidine  is  not
recommended for prophylaxis (EIII) (444). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Studies of
HIV-infected adults and children following immune reconstitution after receipt of HAART
demonstrate  acceptable  low  risks  for  PCP  after  discontinuation  of  prophylaxis
(46,445--449).  Data  from  the  PACTG  1008  study  evaluated  235  HIV-infected  children
and adolescents on antiretroviral therapy who received PCP prophylaxis ≥6 months and
achieved CD4 percentages of ≥20% for patients aged >6 years and ≥25% for patients
aged  2--6  years,  after  which  the  prophylaxis  was  stopped  (46).  During  the  median
follow-up of 2.5 years (547 person-years), no cases of PCP occurred; 9.4% of patients
enrolled required reinstitution of PCP prophylaxis during observation. These data, along
with data from studies in adults, support the expectation for very low risk for PCP after
prophylaxis  is  discontinued  in  children  who  have  achieved  immune  reconstitution.
Discontinuation of PCP prophylaxis should be considered for HIV-infected children when,
after receiving HAART for ≥6 months, CD4 percentage is ≥15% or CD4 count is ≥200
cells/mm3 for patients aged >6 years (BII) and CD4 percentage is ≥15% or CD4 count
is  ≥500  cells/mm3  for  patients  aged  1--5  years  (BII)  for  >3  consecutive  months.
Subsequently,  the  CD4  percentage  and  count  should  be  reevaluated  at  least  every  3
months and prophylaxis reinstituted if the original criteria for prophylaxis are reached
(BIII). PCP prophylaxis is not to be discontinued in HIV-infected infants aged <1 year.
Treatment of Disease TMP-SMX is the recommended treatment for PCP (AI). The dose
for HIV-infected children aged >2 months is 15--20 mg/kg/day of the TMP component
and  75--100  mg/kg/day  of  the  SMX  component  administered  intravenously  in  3  or  4
divided  doses,  with  the  dose  infused  over  1  hour  for  21  days  (AI).  As  the  acute
pneumonitis  subsides,  children  with  mild  to  moderate  disease  who  do  not  have
malabsorption or diarrhea can be administered oral treatment with the same dose of
TMP-SMX  in  3  or  4  divided  doses  to  complete  a  21-day  course  (AII).  Effective
therapeutic  serum  concentrations  of  5--10  µg/mL  TMP  can  be  reached  with  the
recommended dose administered orally in HIV-infected children (450). IV pentamidine
isethionate  once  daily  is  recommended  for  patients  who  cannot  tolerate  TMP-SMX  or
who demonstrate clinical treatment failure after 5--7 days of TMP-SMX therapy (AI). No
evidence exists for synergistic or additive effects on efficacy of these agents; therefore,
because of potential increased toxicity, their combined use is not recommended (DIII).
Among  patients  with  clinical  improvement  after  7--10  days  of  IV  therapy  with
pentamidine, an oral regimen (e.g., atovaquone or TMP/dapsone) might be considered
to complete a 21-day course (BIII). Atovaquone is an alternative for treatment of mild to
moderately severe PCP in adults (BI) (95). Therapeutic data are limited for children, but
the dosage of 30--40 mg/kg/day in two divided doses administered orally is established
for children <3 months and ≥24 months of age. Children aged 3--24 months require a
higher  dosage  of  45  mg/kg/day  (AII)  (442).  The  dosage  for  adolescents  and  adults  is
750  mg  twice  daily.  Food  increases  the  bioavailability  of  atovaquone  approximately
threefold
 compared
 with
 that
 achieved
 with
 the
 fasting
 state.
 Atovaquone
concentration  increases  with  coadministration  of  fluconazole  and  prednisone  and
decreased  by  coadministration  with  acyclovir,  opiates,  cephalosporins,  rifampin,  and
benzodiazepines.  Dapsone/TMP  is  effective  in  treating  mild  to  moderate  PCP  among
adults (BI) (451); data on toxicity and efficacy among children are limited. The dosage
of dapsone for adolescents and adults is 100 mg (total dose) orally once daily and TMP
15 mg/kg/day divided into three daily doses administered for 21 days. Among children
aged <13 years, a dapsone dosage of 2 mg/kg/day is required to achieve therapeutic
levels  in  children  (AII)  (452).  The  pediatric  dose  of  TMP  is  15  mg/kg/day  divided  into
three
 daily
 doses.
 Dapsone
 is
 less
 effective
 than
 the
 combination
 (453).
Clindamycin/primaquine  has  been  used  to  treat  mild  to  moderate  PCP  among  adults
(BI); data for children are not available (CIII). Primaquine is contraindicated for patients
with  glucose-6-dehydrogenase  deficiency  because  of  the  possibility  of  inducing
hemolytic  anemia.  Dose  information  for  treating  PCP  is  available  only  for  adults.  For
patients weighing >60 kg, clindamycin 600 mg intravenously every 6 hours for 10 days,
then  300--450  mg  orally  every  6  hours  to  complete  21  days  of  treatment  is
recommended. Primaquine is administered as 30 mg of base orally for 21 days. Dosing
for  children  is  based  on  use  of  these  drugs  for  treating  other  infections:  the  usual
pediatric dose of clindamycin for treating bacterial infection is 10 mg/kg/dose every 6
hours, and the pediatric dose of primaquine equivalent to an adult dose of 20 mg base
(when used for malaria) is 0.3 mg/kg/day of the base. On the basis of studies in adults,
a short course of corticosteroids is recommended in cases of moderate or severe PCP,
starting  within  72  hours  of  diagnosis  (AI).  Pediatric  studies  have  indicated  reduced
acute respiratory failure, decreased need for ventilation, and decreased mortality with
early  use  of  corticosteroids  in  HIV-infected  children  who  have  PCP  (454--456).
Indications  for  corticosteroid  treatment  include  a  PaO2  value  of  <70  mm  Hg  or  an
alveolar-arterial  gradient  of  >35  mm  Hg.  Doses  for  children  vary  between  studies.  A
commonly  used  scheme  is  prednisone  on  days  1--5,  1  mg/kg/dose  twice  daily;  days
6--10, 0.5 mg/kg/dose twice daily; and days 11--21, 0.5 mg/kg once daily. Alternative
regimens  include  1)  adult  dosage  prednisone  on  days  1--5,  40  mg  twice  daily;  days
6--10, 40 mg once daily; days 11--21, 20 mg once daily; and 2) methylprednisolone (IV)
on days 1--7, 1 mg/kg/dose every 6 hours; days 8--9, 1 mg/kg/dose twice daily; days 10
and 11, 0.5 mg/kg/dose twice daily; days 12--16, 1 mg/kg once daily. Some case reports
have  documented  improved  pulmonary  function  with  use  of  surfactant  in  cases  of
severe disease (e.g., respiratory distress syndrome with established respiratory failure
requiring  ventilation)  (457--459).  Alterations  in  surfactant  function  and  composition
have been demonstrated in HIV-infected adults with PCP (460). Data are insufficient to
recommend  surfactant  administration  for  PCP.  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,
Including IRIS Clinical parameters to monitor the status of disease include temperature,
respiratory  rate,  arterial  oxygen  saturation,  and  chest  radiograph  (461).  Clinical
improvement  can  be  expected  at  a  mean  of  approximately  4.5  ±  2.5  days  and
radiographic  improvement  at  approximately  7.7  ±  4.5  days  (461).  IRIS  has  been  less
frequently associated with Pneumocystis infection (2% of 44 adults with IRIS) than with
several  other  OIs  in  HIV-infected  adults  and  children  (462).  Whether  this  low  rate  is
related  to  PCP  prophylaxis  is  not  known.  In  children,  adverse  reactions  to  TMP-SMX
include  rash  (mild  maculopapular  in  most  cases  but  rarely  erythema  multiforme  and
Stevens-Johnson
 syndrome),
 hematologic
 abnormalities
 (e.g.,
 neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia,  megaloblastic  or  aplastic  anemia),  GI  complaints  (usually  mild),
hepatitis, and renal disorders (e.g., interstitial nephritis) (463,464). Data from a PACTG
study of HIV-infected children at high risk for PCP receiving TMP-SMX for a median of 3
years showed 28% had a rash, 9.3% had neutropenia, 8.8% had thrombocytopenia, and
2.2%  had  anemia  (95).  None  were  fatal  or  nonreversible  reactions.  Some  very  mild
reactions will resolve while the drug is continued. With any significant adverse effect,
TMP-SMX should be withheld until the reaction has subsided. Unless the reaction has
been  life-threatening,  TMP-SMX  prophylaxis  can  be  resumed,  preferably  by  beginning
with low desensitizing daily doses and gradually increasing to full doses (BII) (465,466).
In adults, 75% of patients affected tolerate rechallenge with TMP-SMX (466). The overall
frequency of adverse reactions appears to be lower among HIV-infected children than
among  adults;  approximately  15%  of  children  have  substantial  adverse  reactions  to
TMP-SMX  (446).  If  an  urticarial  rash  or  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome  occurs,  TMP-SMX
should be discontinued and not readministered (EIII). The most common adverse drug
reaction to pentamidine isethionate is renal toxicity, which usually occurs after 2 weeks
of therapy and can be averted by adequate hydration and careful monitoring of renal
function and electrolytes. Severe hypotension (particularly if infused rapidly), prolonged
QT  interval  (torsades  de  pointes),  and  cardiac  arrhythmias  can  occur.  Hypoglycemia
(usually  after  5--7  days  of  therapy)  or  hyperglycemia,  hypercalcemia,  hyperkalemia,
pancreatitis,  and  insulin-dependent  diabetes  mellitus  also  have  been  reported.  The
patient  may  experience  a  metallic  or  bitter  taste.  Serious  adverse  reactions  to
pentamidine have been reported in approximately 17% of children receiving the drug
(467).  This  drug  should  not  be  administered  with  other  nephrotoxic  drugs  (e.g.,
aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, cisplatin, or vancomycin) and with agents associated
with  pancreatitis  (e.g.,  didanosine).  With  dapsone  and  TMP,  the  primary  adverse
reaction is reversible neutropenia; other reactions include skin rashes, elevated serum
transaminases,
 methemaglobinemia,
 anemia,
 and
 thrombocytopenia
 (451,453).
Dapsone is the problematic component of the combination and accounts for most of the
adverse reactions (442). Skin rashes (10%--15%), nausea, and diarrhea can occur with
atovaquone administration. Liver enzymes may increase briefly. No serious toxicity or
fatality  has  been  demonstrated  from  the  use  of  atovaquone  in  adults  or  children.
Adverse reactions to clindamycin/primaquine include skin rash, nausea, and diarrhea.
Management of Treatment Failure An inflammatory reaction to antibiotic-induced killing
of the organism in the lungs can result in an initial early and reversible deterioration
during the first 3--5 days of therapy, so an adequate trial of therapy is needed before
switching  drugs because of lack of clinical  improvement.  Clinical  failure is defined  by
lack of improvement or worsening of respiratory function documented by arterial blood
gases after at least 4--8 days of anti-PCP treatment. Other concomitant infections need
to  be excluded  as causees of clinical  failure.  With  evidence of treatment failure after
the use of TMP-SMX, drugs can be changed. If tolerated, pentamidine isethionate is the
drug  of  next  choice  (BII).  No  evidence  exists  for  synergistic  or  additive  therapeutic
effects;  therefore,  because  of  potential  increased  toxicity,  their  combination  is  not
recommended.  None  of  the  drugs  administered  to  treat  and  prevent  PCP  completely
eliminates  Pneumocystis,  and  prophylaxis  is  effective  only  while  the  selected  drug  is
administered.  Patients  who  have  experienced  an  episode  of  PCP  should  have
prophylaxis administered continuously after completion of treatment (AI). Discontinuing
Secondary  Prophylaxis  In  most  patients,  secondary  prophylaxis  can  be  discontinued
using the same criteria as for discontinuing primary prophylaxis. PCP prophylaxis is not
to be discontinued in HIV-infected infants <1 year. Children who present with clinical
signs and symptoms compatible with PCP after discontinuation of prophylaxis should be
evaluated  thoroughly  despite  normal  or  high  CD4  counts  or  percentages  (BII)  (468).
Cryptosporidium  spp.  are  protozoal  parasites  that  mainly  cause  enteric  illness  (e.g.,
chronic  diarrhea)  in  humans  and  animals;  the  parasites  have  worldwide  distribution.
The  three  most  common  species  infecting  humans  are  C.  hominis,  C.  parvus,  and  C.
meleagridis. In addition, infections with C. canis, C. felis, C. muris, and Cryptosporidium
pig  genotype  have  been  reported  in  immunocompromised  patients.  Cryptosporidium
parasites usually invade the small bowel, but in immunocompromised hosts, the large
bowel  and  extraintestinal  sites  also  are  involved.  The  parasite  is  transmitted  by
ingestion of oocysts excreted in the feces of infected animals and humans. The parasite
is highly infectious, with an ID50 ranging from nine to 1042 oocysts, depending on the
isolate  (469).  Infection  occurs  when  the  ingested  oocyst  releases  sporozoites,  which
attach to and invade the intestinal epithelial cells. The parasite has a predilection for
the  jejunum  and  terminal  ileum  (469).  Person-to-person  transmission  is  common  in
child care centers; infants with cryptosporidiosis-associated diarrhea can infect adults
during  diapering  (470).  Oocysts  can  contaminate  recreational  water  sources  (e.g.,
swimming  pools,  lakes)  and  public  water  supplies  and  may  persist  despite  standard
chlorination. Physical steps---flocculation, sedimentation, or filtration---are necessary to
remove the parasite from the water. Outbreaks have been associated with ingestion of
contaminated drinking water in large metropolitan areas that have chlorination but not
filtration
 systems
 and
 with
 public
 swimming
 pools
 (471).
 Foodborne
 and
person-to-person  spread  have  been  documented  (469).  Cryptosporidiosis  also  occurs
among  international  travelers.  Although  fewer  than  4000  such  cases  were  reported
each year in the United States during 1995--2002, an estimated 300,000 persons are
infected each year; underuse of diagnostic tests and poor sensitivity of the older tests
combined  with  underreporting  are  the  main  reasons  for  this  difference  (472).  In
industrialized countries, the prevalence of cryptosporidiosis among children is usually
considered  to  range  from  3.0%  to  3.6%  (473);  it  is  reported  more  frequently  among
children in developing countries (474--476). Before the advent of effective antiretroviral
therapy,  cryptosporidiosis  was  diagnosed  primarily  in  patients  with  advanced  HIV
disease  and  AIDS.  However,  the  incidence  has  declined  dramatically  in  areas  where
HAART became widely available (476,477). Microspora spp. are obligate, intracellular,
spore-forming  protozoa  that  primarily  cause  moderate  to  severe  diarrhea  among
children.  They  are  related  to  fungi  but  defined  by  their  unique  single  polar  tube  that
coils  around  the  interior  of  the  spore  (478).  Many  microsporidia  were  reported  as
pathogens in humans, but Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Encephalitozoon intestinalis are
the most common microsporidia that cause infection among patients with HIV infection.
Other  microsporidia  such  as  Encephalitozoon  cuniculi,  Encephalitozoon  hellem,
Trachipleistophora  hominis,  T.  anthropophthera,  Pleistophora  spp.,  P.  ronneeafiei,
Vittaforma (Nosema) corneae, Microsporidium spp., Nosema ocularum, Anncaliia (syns
Brachiola/Nosema)
 connori,
 A.
 (syn
 Brachiola)
 vesicularum,
 and
 A.
 (syns
Brachiola/Nosema)  algerae  also  have  been  implicated  in  human  infections.  The
Microspora  parasites  develop  in  enterocytes  and  are  excreted  with  feces  and,  like  C.
parvum,  are  transmitted  by  the  fecal-oral  route,  including  through  ingestion  of
contaminated  food  or  water  (479).  They  cause  infection  in  HIV-uninfected  children,
elderly  persons,  travelers,  and  organ  transplant  recipients.  Although  the  incidence  of
microsporidiosis has declined dramatically in areas where HAART is used, it continues
to affect HIV-infected patients who are unable to receive or continue HAART. Symptoms
of  cryptosporidiosis  develop  after  an  incubation  period  of  1  week.  Frequent,  usually
nonbloody,  persistent  watery  diarrhea  is  the  most  common  manifestation  of  both
cryptosporidial and microsporidial infection, with abdominal cramps, fatigue, vomiting,
anorexia, weight loss, and poor weight gain. Fever and vomiting are relatively common
in  children,  mimicking  viral  gastroenteritis  (474).  In  almost  half  of  the  cases,  the
diarrhea persists for >2 weeks (480). Longer episodes of diarrhea have been associated
with
 increased
 risk
 for
 recurrent
 episodes
 and
 weight
 loss
 (481).
 Among
immunocompromised  children,  chronic  severe  diarrhea  can  result  in  malnutrition,
failure to thrive, and substantial intestinal fluid losses, resulting in severe dehydration
and even death. Clinical history or physical examination does not allow differentiation
of  cryptosporidial  or  microsporidial  disease  from  those  caused  by  other  pathogens.
Cryptosporidium can migrate into the bile duct and result in inflammation of the biliary
epithelium,  causing  acalculous  cholecystitis,  and  sclerosing  cholangitis  (482).
Symptoms and signs include fever, right upper abdominal pain, and elevated alkaline
phosphatase. Pancreatitis occurs rarely. Although infection usually is limited to the GI
tract,  pulmonary  or  disseminated  infection  can  occur  among  immunocompromised
children.  The  most  common  manifestation  of  microsporidiosis  is  GI  tract  infection.  In
addition to the more common acute and chronic diarrhea, microsporidia species have
been  described  as  causing  hepatitis,  peritonitis,  keratoconjunctivitis,  myositis,
cholangitis, respiratory disease, sinusitis, encephalitis, and disseminated disease (483).
Different  infecting  species  may  result  in  different  clinical  syndromes.  Enterocytozoon
bieneusi  is  associated  with  malabsorption,  diarrhea,  and  cholangitis.  Encephalitozoon
cuniculi  is  associated  with  hepatitis,  encephalitis,  and  disseminated  disease.
Encephalitozoon  (syn  Septata)  intestinalis  is  associated  with  diarrhea,  disseminated
infection, and superficial keratoconjuctivitis. Encephalitozoon hellem is associated with
superficial  keratoconjunctivitis,  sinusitis,  respiratory  disease,  prostatic  abscesses,  and
disseminated  infection.  Nosema,  Vittaforma,  and  Microsporidium  are  associated  with
stromal keratitis following trauma in immunocompetent hosts. Pleistophora, Anncaliia,
and  Trachipleistophora  are  associated  with  myositis.  Trachipleistophora  is  associated
with encephalitis and disseminated disease. Because Cryptosporidium cannot be grown
on
 laboratory
 media,
 cryptosporidiosis
 usually
 is
 diagnosed
 by
 microscopic
identification of the oocysts in stool or tissue. Stool samples are concentrated using the
sucrose  flotation  or  formalin-ethyl  acetate  methods.  Monoclonal  antibody-based
fluorescein-conjugated  stain  for  oocysts  and  an  EIA  to  detect  antigen  in  stool  are
preferred to staining methods (e.g., with a modified Kinyoun acid-fast stain) because of
enhanced  sensitivity  and  specificity  (484,485).  Antigen-detection  assays  (e.g.,
enzyme-linked
 immunosorbent
 assay,
 immunochromatography)
 are
 available
commercially that have good sensitivity and excellent specificity (485,486). Molecular
methods such as PCR hold promise to further enhance sensitivity (487). Among persons
with  profuse  diarrheal  illness,  one  stool  specimen  is  usually  adequate  for  diagnosis.
However,  oocyst  excretion  can  be  intermittent;  therefore,  the  parasite  might  not  be
detected in every stool, and among persons with milder disease, repeat stool sampling
is  recommended.  Organisms  also  can  be  identified  on  small  intestinal  biopsy  or
intestinal  fluid  samples.  To  diagnose  microsporidia  infection,  thin  smears  of
unconcentrated  stool-formalin  suspension  or  duodenal  aspirates  can  be  stained  with
modified  trichrome  stain.  Chemofluorescent  agents  such  as  chromotrope  2R  and
calcofluor  white  (a  fluorescent  brightener)  are  useful  as  selective  stains  for
microsporidia  in  stool  and  other  body  fluids.  Microsporidia  spores  are  small  (1--5  µm
diameter),  ovoid,  stain  pink  to  red  with  modified  trichrome  stain,  and  contain  a
distinctive  equatorial-belt-like  stripe.  Urine  sediment  examination  by  light  microscopy
can  be  used  to  identify  microsporidia  spores  causing  disseminated  disease  (e.g.,
Encephalitozoonidae,  Trachipleistophora).  Transmission  electron  microscopy  or  PCR
(using  specific  primers)  is  needed  for  speciation.  Endoscopic  biopsy  should  be
considered for all patients with chronic diarrhea of >2 months' duration and negative
stool  examinations.  Touch  preparations  are  useful  for  rapid  diagnosis  (i.e.,  within  24
hours). Sensitive assays using PCR amplification of parasite DNA sequences extracted
from  stool  or  biopsy  specimens  have  been  developed  for  Cryptosporidium  and  for
Enterocytozoon  bieneusi  (487,488)  but  are  research  tools  and  not  commercially
available.  Preventing  Exposure  Caregivers  and  HIV-infected  children  should  be
educated and counseled about the different ways Cryptosporidium can be transmitted.
Modes  of  transmission  include  directly  contacting  fecal  material  from  adults,
diaper-aged  children,  and  infected  animals;  contacting  contaminated  water  during
recreational  activities;  drinking  contaminated  water;  and  eating  contaminated  food.
Hand  washing  after  exposure  to  potentially  fecally  contaminated  material,  including
diapers,  is  important  in  reducing  the  risk  for  Cryptosporidium  infection.  HIV-infected
children should not be allowed contact with ill pets or stool from pets, particularly dogs
and cats <6 months of age; stray pets; or surfaces contaminated with human or animal
stool. HIV-infected children should avoid direct contact with calves and lambs at farms
or petting zoos. HIV-infected children should not be allowed to drink water directly from
lakes  or  rivers,  including  swallowing  water  while  swimming  or  playing  in  recreational
water.  Caregivers  and  HIV-infected  children  should  be  aware  that  lakes,  rivers,
salt-water beaches, certain swimming pools, recreational water parks, and ornamental
water  fountains  might  be  contaminated  with  human  or  animal  waste  that  contains
Cryptosporidium. Some outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis have been linked to ingestion of
water from municipal water supplies. During outbreaks or in other situations in which a
community advisory to boil water is issued, water used in preparing infant formula and
for  drinking  should  be  boiled  for  ≥3  minutes  to  eliminate  risk  for  cryptosporidiosis.
Nationally  distributed  brands  of  bottled  or  canned  carbonated  soft  drinks  are  safe  to
drink.  Commercially  packaged  noncarbonated  soft  drinks  and  fruit  juices  that  do  not
require refrigeration until after they are opened (i.e., can be stored unrefrigerated on
grocery  shelves)  also  are  safe.  Nationally  distributed  brands  of  frozen  fruit  juice
concentrate are safe if they are reconstituted by the user with water from a safe water
source. Fruit juices that must be kept refrigerated from the time they are processed to
the time of consumption might be either fresh (i.e., unpasteurized) or heat-treated (i.e.,
pasteurized); only juices labeled as pasteurized should be considered free of risk from
Cryptosporidium.  Other  pasteurized  beverages  also  are  considered  safe  to  drink.
Cryptosporidium-infected  patients  should  not  work  as  food  handlers,  especially  if  the
food  to  be  handled  is  intended  to  be  eaten  without  cooking.  In  a  hospital,  standard
precautions  (i.e.,  use  of  gloves  and  hand  washing  after  removal  of  gloves)  should  be
sufficient  to  prevent  transmission  of  cryptosporidiosis  from  an  infected  patient  to  a
susceptible  HIV-infected  person.  However,  because  of  the  potential  for  fomite
transmission,
 some
 experts
 recommend
 that
 severely
 immunocompromised
HIV-infected  patients  not  share  a  room  with  a  patient  with  cryptosporidiosis  (CIII).
Similar to precautions for preventing cryptosporidiosis, attention to hand washing and
other  personal  hygiene  measures  will  reduce  exposure  to  microsporidia.  Preventing
First  Episode  of  Disease  Because  chronic  Cryptosporidium  infection  occurs  most
frequently  in  HIV-infected  persons  with  advanced  immune  deficiency,  antiretroviral
treatment of HIV-infected children before development of severe immune deficiency is
a primary modality of prevention (AII). Some observational studies from the pre-HAART
era suggested that rifabutin or clarithromycin prophylaxis for MAC may be associated
with decreased rates of cryptosporidiosis (489,490). However, data are conflicting and
insufficient to recommend using these drugs solely for prophylaxis of cryptosporidiosis.
No
 chemoprophylactic
 regimens
 are
 known
 to
 be
 effective
 in
 preventing
microsporidiosis.  Discontinuing  Primary  Prophylaxis  Not  applicable.  Treatment  of
Disease Immune reconstitution resulting from HAART frequently will result in clearance
of Cryptosporidium and Microsporidium infections. Effective HAART is the primary initial
treatment  for  these  infections  in  HIV-infected  children  and  adults  (AII)  (477,491).
Supportive care with hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormalities, and nutritional
supplementation  should  be  provided  (AIII).  Antimotility  agents  should  be  used  with
caution among young children (CIII). Cryptosporidium No consistently effective therapy
is available for cryptosporidiosis, and duration of treatment among HIV-infected persons
is  uncertain  (492).  Multiple  agents  have  been  investigated  in  small  randomized
controlled  clinical  trials  of  HIV-infected  adults,  including  nitazoxanide,  paromomycin,
spiramycin,  bovine  hyperimmune  colostrum,  and  bovine  dialyzable  leukocyte  extract.
No pharmacologic or immunologic therapy directed specifically against C. parvum has
yet  been  shown  consistently  effective  and  durable  when  used  alone  without
concomitant  antiretroviral  therapy  (492).  A  review  of  clinical  trials  of  treatment  for
Cryptosporidia  in  immunocompromised  patients,  including  those  with  HIV  infection,
found
 that
 no
 agent
 has
 proven
 efficacy
 for
 treating
 cryptosporidiosis
 in
immunocompromised  patients;  however,  in  immunocompetent  persons,  nitazoxanide
reduces  the  load  of  parasites.  Given  the  seriousness  of  this  infection  among
immunocompromised
 persons,
 use
 of
 nitazoxanide
 can
 be
 considered
 in
immunocompromised  HIV-infected  children  in  conjunction  with  HAART  for  immune
restoration (CIII) (492). Nitazoxanide is approved in the United States to treat diarrhea
caused  by  Cryptosporidium  and  Giardia  lamblia  among  children  and  is  available  in
liquid and tablet formulations (BI for HIV-uninfected and CIII for HIV-infected children).
An  Egyptian  clinical  trial  among  100  HIV-uninfected  adults  and  children  randomized
patients  to  a  3-day  course  of  nitazoxanide  or  placebo  (493).  Nitazoxanide  therapy
reduced  the  duration  of  both  diarrhea  and  oocyst  shedding;  among  children,  clinical
response was 88% with nitazoxanide and 38% with placebo. No severe adverse events
were  reported,  and  adverse  events  that  were  reported  were  similar  in  the  treatment
and placebo groups in this study. A study in Zambia among 100 malnourished children
(half  of  whom  were  HIV-infected)  aged  12--35  months  reported  a  clinical  response  in
56% of HIV-uninfected children treated with nitazoxanide compared with 23% receiving
placebo  (494).  However,  among  the  children  with  HIV  infection,  no  benefit  was
observed  from  nitazoxinide  (clinical  response  in  8%  treated  with  nitazoxanide
compared with 25% receiving placebo). These results may be due to the short course (3
days)  of  therapy  as  retreatment  for  additional  3  days  increased  the  number  of
responders. In a study in HIV-infected adults who had CD4 counts >50 cells/mm3, 14
days of nitazoxanide resulted in 71% (10 of 14) response using 500 mg twice daily and
90% (9 of 10) using 1000 mg twice daily, compared with 25% with placebo (495). The
recommended dose for children is 100 mg orally twice daily for children aged 1--3 years
and  200  mg  twice  daily  for  children  aged  4--11  years.  A  tablet  preparation  (500  mg
twice  daily)  is  available  for  children  aged  ≥12  years.  All  medications  should  be
administered  with  food.  Paromomycin,  a  nonabsorbable  aminoglycoside  indicated  for
the  treatment  of  intestinal  amebiasis,  is  effective  for  treating  cryptosporidiosis  in
animal  models  but  is  not  specifically  approved  for  treatment  of  cryptosporidiosis  in
humans.  A  review  and  a  meta-analysis  of  the  two  randomized  controlled  trials
comparing paromomycin with placebo among adults with AIDS found the drug was no
more  effective  than  placebo  in  reducing  diarrheal  frequency  or  parasite  burden
(492,496,497),  and  a  clinical  response  to  paromomycin  is  rare  in  patients  with  CD4
count <100 cells/mm3. Therefore, data do not support a recommendation for the use of
paromomycin for cryptosporidiosis (DII). Azithromycin has demonstrated some activity
against  C.  parvum  infection  in  a  limited  number  of  HIV-infected  children  (498).  An
azithromycin regimen of 10 mg/kg/day on day 1, and 5 mg/kg/day on days 2--10 rapidly
resolved enteric symptoms in three of four HIV-infected children with cryptosporidiosis
(498).  However,  data  are  insufficient  to  recommend  use  of  this  drug  to  treat
cryptosporidial  infection  (CIII).  Microsporidium  Albendazole  has  activity  against  many
species of microsporidia, but it is not effective against Enterocytozoon infections or V.
corneae  (499,500).  Albendazole  decreased  diarrhea  and  sometimes  eliminated  the
organism  (498,500).  Albendazole  is  recommended  for  initial  therapy  of  intestinal  and
disseminated  microsporidiosis  caused  by  microsporidia  other  than  Enterocytozoon
bieneusi  and  V.  corneae  (AII).  Although  two  drugs,  fumagillin  and  nitazoxanide,  have
been  studied  in  small  numbers  of  patients  for  treatment  of  Enterocytozoon  bieneusi
infection, neither has definitive evidence for efficacy in adequate and controlled trials.
Fumagillin  (Sanofi-Synthelabo  Laboratories,  Gentilly,  France),  a  water-insoluble
antibiotic made by Aspergillus fumigatus, and its synthetic analog TNP-470 (501) have
each
 been
 used
 to
 treat
 microsporidiosis
 in
 animals
 and
 humans.
 In
 a
placebo-controlled study of immunocompromised adults (including HIV-infected adults)
with  Enterocytozoon  bieneusi  microsporidiosis,  fumagillin  (20  mg/dose  orally  three
times  daily  for  2  weeks)  was  associated  with  decreased  diarrhea  and  clearance  of
microsporidial spores, which was not observed in placebo patients (501). No data are
available on use of fumagillin or TNP-470 among HIV-infected children, and neither drug
is available in the United States. Data are insufficient to make recommendations on the
use  of  these  drugs  in  children  (CIII).  One  report  indicated  that  treatment  with
nitazoxanide  for  60  days  might  resolve  chronic  diarrhea  caused  by  Enterocytozoon
bieneusi  in  the  absence  of  antiretroviral  therapy  (502),  but  this  effect  was  minimal
among  patients  with  low  CD4  counts  and  therefore  may  be  of  limited  utility  (CIII).
Keratoconjunctivitis  caused  by  microsporidia  among  HIV-infected  adults  responds  to
topical  therapy  with  investigational  fumagillin  eye  drops  prepared  from  Fumidil-B(r)
(fumagillin
 bicylohexylammonium,
 a
 commercial
 product
 used
 to
 control
 a
microsporidial disease of honeybees) in saline (to achieve a concentration of 70 µg/mL
of  fumagillin)  (BII)  (503).  The  combination  of  albendazole  and  fumagillin  has
demonstrated consistent activity against microsporidia in vitro and is recommended for
ocular  infections,  in  addition  to  topical  therapy,  because  microsporidia  may  remain
systemically  despite  clearance  from  the  eye  with  topical  therapy  alone  (BIII)  (504).
Metronidazole and atovaquone are not active in vitro or in animal models and should
not  be  used  to  treat  microsporidiosis  (EII).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including
IRIS Patients should be closely monitored for signs and symptoms of volume depletion,
electrolyte  and  weight  loss,  and  malnutrition.  In  severely  ill  patients,  total  parenteral
nutrition may be indicated (BIII). Nitazoxanide has not been associated with substantial
side effects. Albendazole side effects are rare but hypersensitivity (e.g., rash, pruritis,
fever), neutropenia (reversible), CNS effects (e.g., dizziness, headache), GI disturbances
(e.g., abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting), hair loss (reversible), and elevated
hepatic enzymes (reversible) have been reported. Dose-related bone marrow toxicity is
the  principal  adverse  effect  of  fumagillin,  with  reversible  thrombocytopenia  and
neutropenia  being  the  most  frequent  adverse  events;  topical  fumagillin  has  not  been
associated with substantial side effects. IRIS has not been described in association with
treatment  of  cryptosporidiosis  or  with  treatment  for  Enterocytozoon  bieneusi  or
non-Enterocytozoon  bieneusi  microsporidiosis.  Management  of  Treatment  Failure  The
only feasible approaches to managing treatment failure are supportive treatment and
optimization of ART to achieve full virologic suppression (AIII). Prevention of Recurrence
No pharmacologic interventions are known to be effective in preventing recurrence of
cryptosporidiosis  or  microsporidiosis.  However,  treatment  for  ocular  microsporidiosis
should be continued indefinitely because recurrence or relapse might follow treatment
discontinuation (BIII). Discontinuing Secondary Prophylaxis Not applicable. Malaria is an
acute  and  chronic  disease  caused  by  obligate,  intracellular  protozoa  of  the  genus
Plasmodium.  In  2005,  CDC  received  reports  of  1528  cases  of  malaria  in  the  United
States; of these, patient age was known for 1460, and 276 (18.9%) occurred in persons
aged  <18  years  (505).  For  220  pediatric  patients  aged  <18  years  for  whom  malarial
species was known, most infections were caused by P. falciparum (70.9%) and P. vivax
(19.5%)  (505).  Of  231  children  for  whom  country  of  exposure  was  known,  76%  of
malarial infections were acquired in Africa, 16% in Asia and the Middle East, and 6.1%
in the Americas (505). Most (82%) malaria becomes symptomatic within 30 days after
arrival in the United States; 99% of malaria cases become symptomatic within 1 year.
Typically, 75% of U.S. travel-associated malaria occurs in persons who have not taken
appropriate  malaria  chemoprophylaxis.  Approximately  50%  of  infections  among  U.S.
citizens are acquired during visits to friends and relatives in malaria-endemic regions
(505). U.S.-born children of immigrants returning to visit family are at highest risk for
malaria-associated death. In 2005, refugees or immigrants accounted for 28.3% of U.S.
pediatric malaria cases, and the proportion of malaria among refugees and immigrants
has not changed in the past decade (505--508). No reliable data exist on the prevalence
of HIV infection among immigrant and refugee children resettling in the United States
because  children  aged  <15  years  are  exempt  from  mandatory  screening.  Underlying
HIV prevalence rates in children relocating to the United States are assumed to reflect
the overall rates of HIV in the migrating population. For example, Somali refugees have
very low rates of HIV, whereas rates in Central and West Africa are substantially higher.
Presumably,  children  at  risk  for  coinfection  with  HIV  and  malaria,  particularly
asymptomatic  children  or  those  with  unrecognized  disease,  would  be  highest  in
populations  where  the  underlying  prevalence  of  both  HIV  and  malaria  are  excessive
(i.e.,  West,  Central,  and  portions  of  East  Africa).  In  contrast  to  data  suggesting
increased  frequency  of  both  parasitemia  and  clinical  malaria  in  HIV-infected  adults
(509,510), studies in young HIV-infected children in malaria-endemic areas usually have
not  found  increased  frequency  or  density  of  parasitemia  with  HIV  coinfection
(511--517), with one exception. Parasite density in children aged <5 years was higher
in  those  with  HIV  infection  than  in  those  without  HIV  infection  in  Uganda  (518).
Additionally, most studies have not found malarial episodes to be more frequent or to
present  differently  in  HIV-infected  than  uninfected  children  (511,513).  However,  one
study found that HIV-infected children aged >1 year may be more likely to have severe
or  complicated  malaria  (516).  A  study  in  Kenya  suggested  that  HIV-exposed  children
aged  <2  years  (regardless  of  their  infection  status)  were  more  likely  than  children
without  HIV  exposure  to  have  severe  anemia  with  malarial  episodes  (517).  Published
studies  on  HIV/malaria  coinfection  have  focused  on  adults  and  younger  HIV-infected
children;  whether  data  from  such  studies  applies  to  older  HIV-infected  children  is
uncertain.  In  a  study  in  Uganda,  HIV-infected  persons  aged  ≥5  years  with  lower  CD4
counts (<200 cells/mm3) had higher parasite counts during clinical malaria (518). Signs
and  symptoms  of  malaria  vary  and  depend  on  previous  exposure  (partial  immunity),
age of onset, and species of infecting organism but do not differ by HIV infection status
in  children.  Fever  is  the  most  common  symptom.  In  children,  nonspecific  symptoms
predominate  and  may  include  chills,  sweating,  headache,  myalgia,  malaise,  nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and cough (519,520). These symptoms might increase the potential
for  misdiagnosis  as  a  viral  syndrome,  upper  respiratory  tract  infection,  or
gastroenteritis.  Two  thirds  of  all  malaria  in  children  in  an  area  where  malaria  is
nonendemic  was  misdiagnosed;  children  had  two  to  four  clinical  visits  before  malaria
was  diagnosed  (508).  Non-P.  falciparum  will  be  responsible  for  75%  of  malaria
diagnoses in nonimmune persons >30 days after they return to or travel to the United
States  from  regions  with  malaria.  In  contrast,  the  epidemiology  in  partially  immune
children  may  vary  considerably.  In  one  study,  60%  of  children  migrating  from
malaria-holoendemic  regions  were  smear-positive  for  P.  falciparum  1  month  after
arrival  in  the  United  States  (521).  Since  these  data  were  collected,  CDC  has  issued
guidance  to  organizations  resettling  refugees  to  the  United  States  to  presumptively
treat all refugees from sub-Saharan Africa, except under special circumstances, before
they depart for the United States. This treatment should decrease malaria rates among
refugees but does not completely eliminate risk because predeparture treatment with
drugs  effective  against  blood-stage  parasites  do  not  eliminate  liver-stage  parasites.
However,  nonrefugee  immigrants  from  similar  areas  do  not  receive  this  presumptive
therapy and are at greater risk for clinical manifestations of malaria after arrival in the
United  States.  Therefore,  children  who  have  recently  migrated  from  regions  where
malaria is highly endemic should be either presumptively treated for malaria or tested
postarrival
 for
 malaria
 infection.
 CDC
 guidance
 can
 be
 found
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq/health.htm.  Chronic  symptoms  of  splenomegaly,  fever,
and  thrombocytopenia  are  highly  specific  for  malaria  in  immigrant  children  and  need
appropriate evaluation (519,522). Congenital malaria is rare but should be considered
in  febrile  neonates  whose  mothers  migrated  from  areas  where  malaria  is  endemic;
however,  empiric  therapy  should  not  be  administered  without  a  diagnosis  to  febrile
neonates of recent immigrants (519). Malaria is diagnosed by microscopic examination
of a patient's blood. A Giemsa-stained thick blood smear is the most sensitive smear
technique  for  detecting  infection,  with  a  thin  blood  smear  used  for  accurate  parasite
speciation. In nonimmune persons, because symptoms may develop before parasitemia
is detectable, several blood-smear examinations taken at 12- to 24-hour intervals may
be needed to positively rule out malaria in symptomatic patients. The sensitivity and
specificity of blood smear depends substantially on the laboratorian's skills. Assistance
with  microscopic  diagnosis  of  malaria  is  available  through  state  public  health
departments  and  the  CDC  Division  of  Parasitic  Diseases  diagnostic  service
(http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx).  Although  blood  smear  examination  remains  the  gold
standard  for  laboratory  confirmation  of  malaria,  FDA  has  approved  the  Binax  Now(r)
Malaria  Test,  a  rapid  malaria  antigen-capture  assay,  for  use  in  clinical  diagnosis  of
symptomatic  malaria  in  children  and  adults.  This  test,  which  uses  a  monoclonal
antibody to histidine-rich protein 2 to detect P. falciparum, and a monocloncal antibody
aldolase to detect all malaria species, can be performed within 15 minutes. The studies
presented to FDA show specificity approaching 100% for all malaria and a sensitivity of
>95% for P. falciparum and 85%--95% for P. vivax. However, sensitivity for P. ovale, a
less common form of human malaria, probably does not exceed 70%. Although this test
performs well in symptomatic persons, preliminary data suggest poor performance of
rapid  diagnostic  tests,  including  the  Binax  Now(r)  Malaria  Test  for  screening
asymptomatic  persons  for  malaria  (523,524).  Similarly,  among  asymptomatic
immigrants, the sensitivity of a single blood smear is relatively poor (<50%) (523,524).
Specific  guidelines  for  laboratory  diagnosis  are  summarized  elsewhere  and  are
available  at  the  CDC  malaria  website  (http://www.cdc.gov/malaria).  Preventing
Exposure  HIV-infected  children,  particularly  immunosuppressed  children,  should  be
advised to use personal protective measures to prevent mosquito bites when traveling
to  malaria-endemic  areas  (525).  Specifically,  clothing  can  be  impregnated  with
permethrin,  effective  for  weeks,  even  through  10  washings  (AI).  Long-acting  DEET
mosquito  repellents  (30%  concentration)  are  practical  and  99%  effective  when
combined  with  permethrin-treated  clothing  (AI).  DEET  should  be  applied  onto  young
children  by  caregivers  and  usually  should  not  be  applied  to  young  children's  hands
(AIII). Specific instructions by providers on product purchasing and use are invaluable.
Insecticide-treated  bed  nets  are  inexpensive  and  readily  available  in  countries  with
endemic  malaria.  All  children,  regardless  of  their  HIV  infection  status,  should  sleep
under an insecticide-treated bed net when traveling in malaria-endemic areas.  Primary
Prophylaxis  U.S.-born  children  of  immigrant  parents  traveling  to  malaria-endemic
regions  are  at  especially  high  risk  for  malaria  (525).  Child  immigrants,  or
second-generation  immigrant  children  whose  caregivers  are  from  malaria-endemic
areas, are likely to travel to high-risk destinations and be more susceptible than their
caregivers  because  of  lack  of  previous  malaria  exposure.  These  children  and  their
caregivers  are  at  especially  high  risk  for  acquiring  malaria.  Children  who  will  be
traveling  to  malaria-endemic  regions  should  receive  pretravel  counseling  on  avoiding
insects  and  appropriate  chemoprophylaxis  (AII)  (526,527).  Recommendations  for
chemoprophylaxis  are  the  same  for  HIV-infected  persons  as  for  noninfected  persons
and are available at the CDC website (http://www.cdc.gov/malaria). Potential exists for
antiretroviral
 and
 antimalarial
 drug-drug
 interactions.
 Specifically,
 mefloquine
significantly  decreases  steady-state  ritonavir  area-under-the-curve  plasma  levels  by
31%. In children receiving a boosted PI regimen with preexisting moderate resistance,
this decrease may be significant. In addition, antimalarial medications may need special
preparation, and some are not easily delivered to children. Therefore, patients planning
to travel to malaria-endemic areas are advised to visit a travel medicine specialist with
training and experience in pediatrics at least 2 weeks before departure (AII). Although
TMP-SMX prophylaxis, in combination with use of bed nets, resulted in >90% reduction
of  clinical  malaria  in  nonholoendmic  areas  in  one  study  (528),  CDC  does  not
recommend  TMP-SMX  as  an  antimalarial  prophylactic  regimen.  HIV-infected  travelers
must not rely on TMP-SMX for chemoprophylaxis against malaria because TMP--SMX has
not been studied in areas of high malaria transmission, and TMP--SMX most likely will
not provide adequate protection (DIII). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Travel-related
chemoprophylaxis  with  chloroquine,  mefloquine,  and  doxycycline  usually  should  be
discontinued  4  weeks  after  departure  from  a  malaria-endemic  area  because  these
drugs  are  not  effective  against  malarial  parasites  developing  in  the  liver  and  kill  the
parasite only once it has emerged to infect the red blood cells. Atovaquone-proguanil
should  be  discontinued  1  week  after  departure  from  malaria-endemic  areas.
Chemoprophylaxis  is  not  100%  effective,  and  malaria  should  be  included  in  the
differential  diagnosis  of  fever  or  other  signs  or  symptoms  consistent  with  malaria  in
anyone  who  traveled  to  malaria-endemic  areas  during  the  previous  12  months.
Treatment  of  Disease  Treatment  of  malaria  is  based  on  the  severity  of  disease,
patient's  age  at  onset,  parasite  species,  and  known  resistance  patterns  (AI).  HIV
infection status does not affect choice of therapy (AII), and no recommendations exist
for alternative dosing of antimalarial drugs in HIV-infected persons. Whether response
to antimalarial treatment differs in regard to HIV infection status is unclear, but it does
not  appear  to  be  appreciably  different  in  young  children  (BIII).  HIV-infected  or
HIV-exposed  children  frequently  are  excluded  from  drug  efficacy  trials  because  the
children  are  receiving  TMP--SMX  prophylaxis.  Published  studies  have  reported
conflicting  results,  have  used  older  antimalarials,  or  were  not  adequately  powered  to
answer  this  question  (529--531).  Treatment  dosing  for  adolescents  and  children  is
provided in 
Table  4.  P.  falciparum  Uncomplicated  chloroquine-sensitive  P.  falciparum  malaria
should  be  treated  with  chloroquine.  The  recommended  treatment  options  for
uncomplicated
 chloroquine-resistant
 P.
 falciparum
 in
 the
 United
 States
 are
atovaquone-proguanil  (Malarone(r)),  quinine  with  clindamycin  or  doxycycline  (in
children aged ≥8 years), or mefloquine (Lariam(r)) (AI). For dosages, refer to the CDC
website  above.  It  is  imperative  that  the  clinician  choose  a  medication  according  to
known sensitivity patterns from the area where the malaria was acquired. The current
drug  of  choice  for  uncomplicated  chloroquine-resistant  P.  falciparum  malaria  is
atovaquone-proguanil,  which  is  FDA-approved  for  use  in  children  weighing  >5  kg,  is
well  tolerated,  has  a  wide  therapeutic  window,  and  provides  simple  dosing  (pediatric
tablets are available) (AIII). Although mefloquine is FDA-approved for persons aged >6
months, pediatric tablets are not available. However, mefloquine is the only treatment
choice  for  uncomplicated  chloroquine-resistant  P.  falciparum  malaria  in  children
weighing <5 kg. Severe P. falciparum should be treated with IV quinidine gluconate (or
IV  quinine  when  available).  Duration  of  quinine/quinidine  therapy  is  typically  3  days
with  clindamycin,  or  doxycycline,  continued  for  7  days  (AI).  IV  quinidine  can  cause
hypoglycemia, ventricular arrhythmia, and QT prolongation; close monitoring, including
telemetry, is required during infusion. Increasingly, hospital pharmacies do not always
stock quinidine. Ritonavir inhibits quinidine metabolism and is therefore contraindicated
in patients being treated with quinidine. An alternative is artesunate, which is available
from CDC as an investigational new drug protocol (532). When signs or symptoms exist
of  severe  disease,  especially  with  indicators  of  a  poor  prognosis  (including  clinical
features of impaired level of consciousness, respiratory distress, jaundice, seizures, or
shock or laboratory features of hypoglycemia, elevated bilirubin, acidosis, elevated liver
aminotransferase levels, or renal insufficiency), a tropical medicine specialist should be
consulted.  For  artesunate  release  or  additional  assistance,  contact  the  24-hour  CDC
malaria hotline at 770-488-7788 during the day and 770-488-7100 after hours and on
weekends  and  holidays.  P.  vivax,  P.  ovale,  P.  malariae  The  medication  of  choice  for
non-P. falciparum malaria is chloroquine; the parasite usually is sensitive to this drug
(AI).  Chloroquine  usually  is  well  tolerated.  The  most  common  reaction  is  self-limited
itching (2%). However, among persons of African descent, the rate of this reaction is
substantially higher (50%). In certain areas---most notably in New Guinea---P. vivax has
known high rates of chloroquine resistance. A patient infected with known or suspected
chloroquine-resistant P. vivax malaria should receive an alternative first-line agent (i.e.,
quinine  plus  clindamycin  or  doxycycline,  atovaquone-proguanil,  mefloquine).  Both  P.
vivax and P. ovale have an intrahepatic stage (hypnozoite) that is not treated with the
medications mentioned for the acute blood stage. To prevent relapse of P. vivax or P.
ovale  infection,  patients  should  receive  presumptive  antirelapse  therapy  with
primaquine after the primary treatment for the blood stage (AI). Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency must be excluded before any use of primaquine because of
the risk for severe hemolytic anemia. Unknown species When reliable identification of
the malaria species is not possible or in a severely ill person, clinicians always should
treat  for  the  worst-case  scenario  of  chloroquine-resistant  P.  falciparum  malaria  (AIII).
PCR  assays  are  now  commercially  available  to  speciate  when  microscopy  is  not
sufficient.  Assistance  with  speciation  also  is  available  from  state  public  health
departments  and  the  CDC  Division  of  Parasitic  Diseases  diagnostic  service
(http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx). After completion of initial therapy, knowing the malaria
species is important because presumptive antirelapse therapy is necessary for P. ovale
and P. vivax. Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including IRIS Severe malaria commonly
induces  hypoglycemia  in  children,  especially  when  treated  with  IV  quinine/quinidine
because  of  the  inhibition  of  gluconeogenesis  and  induction  of  endogenous  insulin
production.  Therefore,  use  of  a  crystalloid  solution  containing  glucose  for  fluid
maintenance
 is
 prudent
 while
 closely
 monitoring
 glucose
 levels
 until
 IV
quinine/quinidine  therapy  has  been  completed.  Monitoring  glucose  is  especially
important  for  infants  and  for  persons  with  altered  mental  status.  Cardiac  and
intensive-care  monitoring  is  recommended  because  quinine/quinidine  can  cause
hypotension  and  may  widen  the  QRS  interval.  Another  common  (50%--75%)  adverse
reaction  to  quinine  is  tinnitus,  although  this  usually  resolves  after  treatment.
HIV-infected children may have more hematologic side effects, particularly neutropenia
and  anemia,  following  antimalarial  therapy.  IRIS  caused  by  malaria  has  not  been
reported. Management of Treatment Failure Treatment failure with P. falciparum among
children receiving a full course of appropriate antimalarial therapy occurs uncommonly.
Patients should be monitored for clinical response and for signs of recrudescence after
therapy completion. Published studies do not have the power to detect a difference in
treatment  outcomes  between  HIV-infected  and  HIV-uninfected  children  (529,530).
Relapse of P. vivax and P. ovale can occur from the dormant (hypnozoite) liver form but
is  less  common  with  primaquine  treatment.  Malaria  medications  purchased  in
sub-Saharan Africa or Southeast Asia may be counterfeit (533). When treatment failure
occurs, malaria speciation should be confirmed, as should the geography of where the
malaria  was  acquired.  Retreatment  with  an  appropriate  first-line  regimen  should  be
given. Discussion with a tropical medicine expert or a call to the CDC malaria hotline is
appropriate  when  complex  situations  arise.  Prevention  of  Recurrence  Except  for
reactivation  of  P.  vivax  and  P.  ovale  hypnozoites,  malaria,  once  successfully  treated,
does  not  recur.  Malaria  infection  does  not  infer  protective  immunity  and  continued
exposure to malaria parasites can result in repeated infection. Discontinuing Secondary
Prophylaxis  Not  applicable.  The  major  mode  of  transmission  of  Toxoplasma  gondii
infection among infants and young children is congenital, occurring almost exclusively
among  neonates  born  to  women  who  sustain  primary  Toxoplasma  infection  during
pregnancy. The estimated incidence of congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States is
one case per 1,000--12,000 live-born infants (534,535). The seroprevalence of T. gondii
in U.S.-born persons aged 12--49 years declined from 14.1% in the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey 1988--1994 to 9.0% in 1999--2004 (536). Older children,
adolescents, and adults typically acquire Toxoplasma infection by eating poorly cooked
meat that contains parasitic cysts or by unintentionally ingesting sporulated oocysts in
soil or contaminated food or water (537). Cats are the only definitive host for T. gondii.
However,  cats  excrete  sporulated  oocysts  in  their  feces  only  transiently  after  initial
infection,  and  studies  have  failed  to  show  a  correlation  between  cat  ownership  and
Toxoplasma infection in humans. Indeed, Toxoplasma infection in humans in the United
States  has  declined  despite  increased  cat  ownership  (537).  The  overall  risk  for
maternal-fetal transmission in HIV-uninfected women who acquire primary Toxoplasma
infection during pregnancy is 29% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 25%--33%) (538). The
risk for congenital infection is low among infants born to women who become infected
during the first trimester (range: 2%--6%) but increases sharply thereafter, with a risk
as high as 81% for women acquiring infection during the last few weeks of pregnancy
(538,539).  Infection  of  the  fetus  in  early  gestation  usually  results  in  more  severe
disease  than  does  infection  late  in  gestation.  The  prevalence  of  latent  Toxoplasma
infection  among  women  with  and  without  HIV  infection  in  the  United  States  was
assessed  in  a  cross-sectional  study  of  2525  nonpregnant  women  enrolled  in  the
Women's Interagency Health Study (540). The prevalence of Toxoplasma seropositivity
was  15%  and  did  not  differ  by  HIV  infection  status.  A  few  cases  of  mother-to-infant
transmission  of  Toxoplasma  in  HIV-infected  women  have  been  reported  (541--545).
Prenatal transmission of T. gondii from women without HIV infection who have chronic
Toxoplasma  infection  acquired  before  pregnancy  is  rare  (546).  However,  with  HIV
coinfection,  perinatal  transmission  of  Toxoplasma  has  been  observed  among  women
with  chronic  Toxoplasma  infection  (transmission  rate:  <4%),  presumably  because  of
reactivation  of  replication  of  the  organism  among  women  with  severe  immune
suppression (541--544). CNS infection with T. gondii was reported as an AIDS-indicator
condition in <1% of pediatric AIDS cases before the advent of HAART (547). During the
HAART  era,  this  condition  is  rarely  encountered  in  U.S.  children  with  HIV  infection.
Development  of  CNS  toxoplasmosis  in  HIV-infected  children  during  the  HAART  era
occurred  in  0.2%  (five  of  2767)  of  those  enrolled  in  the  long-term  follow-up  study
PACTG  219c  (3).  In  most  cases  of  Toxoplasma  encephalitis  (TE)  among  HIV-infected
children,  infection  is  considered  to  have  occurred  in  utero.  More  rarely,  it  has  been
reported  among  older  HIV-infected  children,  who  presumably  had  primary  acquired
toxoplasmosis  (548--550).  As  in  adults,  the  greatest  risk  is  among  severely
immunosuppressed  children  (e.g.,  CD4  count  <50  cells/mm3).  In  studies  of
nonimmunocompromised
 infants
 with
 congenital
 toxoplasmosis,
 most
 infants
(70%--90%) are asymptomatic at birth. However, most asymptomatic children develop
late  sequelae  (e.g.,  retinitis,  visual  impairment,  and  intellectual  or  neurologic
impairment), with onset of symptoms ranging from several months to years after birth.
Symptoms  in  newborns  take  either  of  two  presentations:  generalized  disease  or
predominantly  neurologic  disease.  Symptoms  might  include  maculopapular  rash;
generalized
 lymphadenopathy;
 hepatosplenomegaly;
 jaundice;
 hematologic
abnormalities,  including  anemia,  thrombocytopenia,  and  neutropenia;  and  substantial
CNS  disease,  including  hydrocephalus,  intracerebral  calcification,  microcephaly,
chorioretinitis, and seizures (551). Similarly, toxoplasmosis acquired after birth is most
often  initially  asymptomatic.  When  symptoms  occur,  they  are  frequently  nonspecific
and can include malaise, fever, sore throat, myalgia, lymphadenopathy (cervical), and a
mononucleosis-like syndrome featuring a maculopapular rash and hepatosplenomegaly.
TE should be considered among all HIV-infected children with new neurologic findings.
Although  focal  findings  are  more  typical,  the  initial  presentation  can  vary  and  reflect
diffuse  CNS  disease.  Other  symptoms  include  fever,  reduced  alertness,  and  seizures.
Isolated  ocular  toxoplasmosis  is  rare  and  usually  occurs  in  association  with  CNS
infection.  As  a  result,  a  neurologic  examination  is  indicated  for  children  in  whom
Toxoplasma chorioretinitis is diagnosed. Ocular toxoplasmosis appears as white retinal
lesions with little associated hemorrhage; visual loss might occur initially. Less frequent
presentations  among  HIV-infected  children  with  reactivated  chronic  toxoplasmosis
include
 systemic
 toxoplasmosis,
 pneumonitis,
 hepatitis,
 and
cardiomyopathy/myocarditis (544,552). HIV-infected women might be at increased risk
for transmitting T. gondii to their fetuses, and serologic testing for Toxoplasma should
be performed for all HIV-infected pregnant women. All infants whose mothers are both
HIV-infected  and  seropositive  for  Toxoplasma  should  be  evaluated  for  congenital
toxoplasmosis  (90).  Congenital  toxoplasmosis  can  be  diagnosed  by  EIA  or  an
immunosorbent assay to detect Toxoplasma-specific IgM, IgA, or IgE in neonatal serum
within the first 6 months of life or persistence of specific IgG antibody beyond age 12
months (553--556). IgA might be more sensitive for detecting congenital infection than
IgM  or  IgE  (554).  However,  approximately  20%--30%  of  infants  with  congenital
toxoplasmosis will not be identified during the neonatal period with IgA or IgM assays
(555). Serologic testing is the major method of diagnosis, but interpretation of assays
often is confusing and difficult. Using the services of a specialized reference laboratory
that  can  perform  serology,  isolation  of  organisms,  and  PCR  and  offers  assistance  in
interpreting results, especially when attempting to diagnose congenital toxoplasmosis,
can be helpful (554). Additional methods that can be used to diagnose infection in the
newborn  include  isolation  of  the  Toxoplasma  parasite  by  mouse  inoculation  or
inoculation  in  tissue  cultures  of  CSF,  urine,  placental  tissue,  amniotic  fluid,  or  infant
blood.  T.  gondii  DNA  can  be  detected  by  PCR  performed  on  clinical  specimens  (e.g.,
white blood cells, CSF, amniotic fluid, or tissue) in a reference laboratory (554,555). If a
possible  diagnosis  of  congenital  toxoplasmosis  at  delivery  is  uncertain,  the  neonate
should be evaluated, including ophthalmologic, auditory, and neurologic examinations;
lumbar puncture; and imaging of the head (either CT or magnetic resonance imaging
[MRI] scans) to determine whether hydrocephalus or calcifications are present. In the
United  States,  routine  Toxoplasma  serologic  screening  of  HIV-infected  children  whose
mothers do not have toxoplasmosis is not recommended because of its low prevalence.
However,  in  regions  with  high  incidence  of  Toxoplasma  infection  (≥1%  per  year),
serologic  testing  might  be  selectively  considered  for  HIV-infected  children  aged  >12
months.  HIV-infected  adolescents  without  previous  Toxoplasma  infection  should
undergo serologic testing. CNS toxoplasmosis is presumptively diagnosed on the basis
of
 clinical
 symptoms,
 serologic
 evidence
 of
 infection,
 and
 presence
 of
 a
space-occupying  lesion  on  imaging  studies  of  the  brain  (557).  TE  rarely  has  been
reported  in  persons  without  Toxoplasma-specific  IgG  antibodies;  therefore,  negative
serology  does  not  definitively  exclude  that  diagnosis.  CT  of  the  brain  might  indicate
multiple, bilateral, ring-enhancing lesions in CNS toxoplasmosis, especially in the basal
ganglia and cerebral corticomedullary junction. MRI is more sensitive and will confirm
basal ganglia lesions in most patients (558). F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose--positive emission
tomography reportedly is helpful in adults in distinguishing Toxoplasma abscesses from
primary  CNS  lymphoma,  but  the  accuracy  is  not  high,  and  this  test  is  not  widely
available.  Definitive  diagnosis  of  TE  requires  histologic  or  cytologic  confirmation  by
brain  biopsy,  which  might  demonstrate  leptomeningeal  inflammation,  microglial
nodules,  gliosis,  and  Toxoplasma  cysts.  Brain  biopsy  is  reserved  by  some  experts  for
patients who do not respond to specific therapy. Preventing Exposure All HIV-infected
children and adolescents and their caregivers should be counseled about sources of T.
gondii infection. They should be advised not to eat raw or undercooked meat, including
undercooked lamb, beef, pork, or venison (BIII). All meat (lamb, beef, pork, and chicken)
should be cooked to an internal temperature of 165°F--170°F (559) until it is no longer
pink inside. Hands should be washed after contact with raw meat and after gardening
or  other  contact  with  soil;  in  addition,  fruits  and  vegetables  should  be  washed  well
before  being  eaten  raw  (BIII).  Stray  cats  should  not  be  handled  or  adopted;  a  cat
already  in  the  household  should  be  kept  inside  and  the  litter  box  changed  daily,
preferably  by  an  HIV-negative,  nonpregnant  person  (BIII).  Cats  should  be  fed  only
canned  or  dried  commercial  food  or  well-cooked  table  food,  not  raw  or  undercooked
meats (BIII). Patients need not be advised to part with their cats or to have their cats
tested
 for
 toxoplasmosis
 (EII).
 Preventing
 First
 Episode
 of
 Disease
Toxoplasma-seropositive  adolescents  and  adults  who  have  a  CD4  count  of  <100
cells/mm3 should be administered prophylaxis against TE (AII) (435). Specific levels of
immunosuppression  that  increase  the  risk  for  TE  in  children  are  less  well  defined.
Toxoplasma-seropositive children with CD4 <15% should be administered prophylaxis
against TE (AIII). For children aged ≥6 years, the same absolute CD4 cell count level
used for HIV-infected adults can be used (AIII). In HIV-infected adolescents and adults,
the  double-strength  tablet  daily  dose  of  TMP-SMX  recommended  as  the  preferred
regimen  for  PCP  prophylaxis  is  effective  TE  prophylaxis  (AII)  (435).  TMP--SMX,  one
double-strength  tablet  three  times  weekly  (or  3  consecutive  days  a  week),  is  an
alternative (BIII). Data are limited on the efficacy of TMP--SMX as a primary preventive
agent  for  TE  in  children.  However,  data  on  adults  suggest  it  also  is  the  regimen  of
choice  in  children  (BIII)  (Table  1).  If  patients  cannot  tolerate  TMP--SMX,  the
recommended  alternative  is  dapsone-pyrimethamine,  which  also  is  effective  against
PCP (BI) (560,561). Atovaquone with or without pyrimethamine also can be considered
(CIII).  Single-drug  prophylaxis  with  dapsone,  pyrimethamine,  azithromycin,  or
clarithromycin cannot be recommended (DII). Aerosolized pentamidine does not protect
against  TE  and  is  not  recommended  (EI)  (435,436).  Toxoplasma-seronegative  adults
and  adolescents  who  are  not  taking  a  PCP-prophylactic  regimen  known  to  be  active
against  TE  should  be  retested  for  IgG  antibody  to  Toxoplasma  when  their  CD4  count
declines  to  <100  cells/mm3  to  determine  whether  they  have  seroconverted  and  are
therefore  at  risk  for  TE  (CIII).  Severely  immunosuppressed  children  who  are  not
receiving  TMP--SMX  or  atovaquone  who  are  seropositive  for  Toxoplasma  should  be
administered  prophylaxis  for  both  PCP  and  toxoplasmosis  (i.e.,  dapsone  plus
pyrimethamine) (BIII). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Prophylaxis against TE should
be  discontinued  among  HIV-infected  adults  and  adolescents  who  have  responded  to
HAART with an increase in CD4 count to >200 cells/mm3 for >3 months (AI). Multiple
observational studies (447,562,563) and two randomized trials (564,565) have reported
that  primary  prophylaxis  can  be  discontinued  with  minimal  risk  for  TE  recrudescence
among  patients  who  have  responded  to  HAART  with  an  increase  in  CD4  count  from
<200 cells/mm3 to ≥200 cells/mm3 for >3 months. Although patients with CD4 counts
of <100 cells/mm3 are at greatest risk for TE, the risk for TE when CD4 count increases
to  100--200  cells/mm3  has  not  been  studied  as  rigorously  as  an  increase  to  >200
cells/mm3.  Thus,  the  recommendation  specifies  discontinuing  prophylaxis  after  an
increase  to  >200  cells/mm3.  Discontinuing  primary  TE  prophylaxis  is  recommended
because  prophylaxis  adds  limited  disease  prevention  for  toxoplasmosis  and  because
discontinuing  drugs  reduces  pill  burden,  the  potential  for  drug  toxicity,  drug
interactions, selection of drug-resistant pathogens, and cost. Data do not exist on the
safety  of  discontinuing  primary  TE  prophylaxis  for  HIV-infected  children  whose  CD4
percentage rises above 15%. Data on adults suggest discontinuation of TMP-SMX may
be safe once a child responds to HAART with a sustained rise in CD4 percentage above
15%; for children aged ≥6 years, the same CD4 count used for HIV-infected adults can
be  used  (CIII).  Prophylaxis  should  be  reintroduced  in  HIV-infected  adults  and
adolescents  if  the  CD4  count  decreases  to  <100--200  cells/mm3  (AIII)  or  the  CD4
percentage  falls  below  15%  for  HIV-infected  children  (BIII).  Treatment  of  Disease
Pregnant  women  with  suspected  or  confirmed  primary  toxoplasmosis  and  newborns
with  possible  or  documented  congenital  toxoplasmosis  should  be  managed  in
consultation  with  an  appropriate  specialist.  Although  controversy  exists  about  the
efficacy  of  treating  pregnant  women  who  have  acute  toxoplasmosis  in  an  attempt  to
prevent infection of the fetus (566), most experts would recommend such therapy (BII)
(90).  For  an  HIV-infected  woman  with  a  symptomatic  Toxoplasma  infection  during
pregnancy, empiric therapy of the newborn should be strongly considered, regardless
of whether the mother was treated during pregnancy (BIII). The preferred treatment for
congenital
 toxoplasmosis
 is
 pyrimethamine
 combined
 with
 sulfadiazine,
 with
supplementary
 leucovorin
 (folinic
 acid)
 to
 minimize
 pyrimethamine-associated
hematologic  toxicity  (AII)  (551,567).  Although  the  optimal  duration  of  therapy  is
undefined,  the  recommended  duration  of  treatment  of  congenital  toxoplasmosis  for
infants without HIV infection is 12 months (AII) (567). For HIV-uninfected children who
have
 mild
 congenital
 toxoplasmosis,
 certain
 experts
 alternate
pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine/folinic acid monthly with spiramycin during months 7--12 of
treatment  (CIII).  However,  for  children  with  moderate  to  severe  disease  and  children
with HIV infection, the full 12-month regimen of pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine should be
administered  (AII).  HIV-infected  children  with  acquired  CNS,  ocular,  or  systemic
toxoplasmosis should be treated with pyrimethamine and leucovorin plus sulfadiazine
(AI). Acute therapy should be continued for 6 weeks, assuming clinical and radiologic
improvement (BII). Longer courses of treatment might be required for extensive disease
or poor response after 6 weeks. The primary alternative for sulfadiazine in patients who
develop sulfonamide hypersensitivity is clindamycin, administered with pyrimethamine
and  leucovorin  (AI).  Azithromycin  instead  of  clindamycin  also  has  been  used  with
pyrimethamine  and  leucovorin  among  sulfa-allergic  adults,  but  this  regimen  has  not
been  studied  among  children  (CIII).  Another  alternative  in  adults  is  atovaquone  plus
pyrimethamine  and  leucovorin,  or  atovaquone  with  sulfadiazine  alone,  or  atovaquone
as  a  single  agent  among  patients  intolerant  to  both  pyrimethamine  and  sulfadiazine
(BII); however, these regimens have not been studied in children (CIII). TMP-SMX alone
has  been  used  as  an  alternative  to  pyrimethamine-sulfadiazine  in  adults  but  not  in
children  (CIII).  For  isolated  ocular  toxoplasmosis  in  nonimmunocompromised  hosts,
TMP-SMX  alone  is  as  effective  as  pyrimethamine-sulfadiazine  (568).  However,  these
data have not been duplicated in HIV-infected persons; therefore, this regimen cannot
be recommended for this group of patients (DIII). Corticosteroids (e.g., dexamethasone
or  prednisone)  are  recommended  for  children  with  CNS  disease  when  CSF  protein  is
highly elevated (i.e., >1000 mg/dL) or with focal lesions with substantial mass effects
(BIII). Because of the potential immunosuppressive effects of steroids, they should be
discontinued  as  soon  as  possible.  Anticonvulsants  should  be  administered  to  children
with  TE  who  have  a  history  of  seizures  (AIII)  but  should  not  be  administered
prophylactically  to  children  without  a  history  of  seizures  (DIII).  Anticonvulsants,  if
administered,  should  be  continued  at  least  through  acute  therapy.  Monitoring  and
Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS  Children  with  TE  should  be  routinely  monitored  for
clinical  and  radiologic  improvement  and  for  adverse  effects  of  treatment;  changes  in
antibody
 titers
 are
 not
 useful
 for
 monitoring
 responses
 to
 therapy.
Toxoplasmosis-associated IRIS has been described rarely in HIV-infected adults and has
not  been  described  in  HIV-infected  children  (569).  Pyrimethamine  can  be  associated
with  rash  (including  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome)  and  nausea.  The  primary  toxicity  of
pyrimethamine is reversible bone marrow suppression (i.e., neutropenia, anemia, and
thrombocytopenia). A complete blood count should be performed at least weekly while
the child is on daily pyrimethamine and at least monthly while on less-than-daily dosing
(AIII).  Leucovorin  (folinic  acid)  always  should  be  administered  with  pyrimethamine;
increased doses of leucovorin might be required in the event of marrow suppression.
Because of the long half-life of pyrimethamine, leucovorin should be continued 1 week
after  pyrimethamine  has  been  discontinued.  Adverse  effects  of  sulfadiazine  include
rash, fever, leukopenia, hepatitis, GI symptoms (e.g., nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea),
and  crystalluria.  Clindamycin  can  be  associated  with  fever,  rash,  and  GI  symptoms
(e.g.,  nausea;  vomiting;  and  diarrhea,  including  pseudomembranous  colitis)  and
hepatotoxicity. Drug interactions between anticonvulsants and antiretrovirals should be
evaluated.  Patients  receiving  corticosteroids  should  be  closely  monitored  for
development  of  other  OIs.  Management  of  Treatment  Failure  Brain  biopsy  should  be
considered  in  the  event  of  early  clinical  or  radiologic  neurologic  deterioration  despite
adequate  empiric  treatment  or  in  children  who  do  not  clinically  respond  to
anti-Toxoplasma therapy after 10--14 days. For children who undergo brain biopsy and
have  confirmed  histopathologic  evidence  of  TE  despite  treatment,  a  switch  to  an
alternative regimen as previously described should be considered (BIII). Prevention of
Recurrence  Patients  who  have  completed  initial  therapy  for  acquired  TE  should  be
administered  lifelong  suppressive  therapy  (i.e.,  secondary  prophylaxis  or  chronic
maintenance  therapy)  (AI)  (570,571)  unless  immune  reconstitution  occurs  with
antiretroviral  therapy  (Table  3).  The  combination  of  pyrimethamine  plus  sulfadiazine
plus leucovorin is highly effective for this purpose (AI). A commonly used regimen for
patients  who  cannot  tolerate  sulfa  drugs  is  pyrimethamine  plus  clindamycin  (BI);
however, only the combination of pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine provides protection
against  PCP  as  well  (AII).  Data  on  adults  indicate  atovaquone  with  or  without
pyrimethamine also can be considered for children (CIII). Limited data support the use
of  TMP-SMX  for  secondary  prophylaxis  (572);  this  regimen  should  be  used  only  for
persons  who  do  not  tolerate  pyrimethamine  plus  sulfadiazine  or  pyrimethamine  plus
clindamycin  (CII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  Adults  and  adolescents
receiving  secondary  prophylaxis  for  acquired  TE  are  at  low  risk  for  recurrence  of  TE
when they have successfully completed their initial therapy, continue to have no signs
or  symptoms  of  TE,  and  have  a  sustained  increase  in  CD4  count  of  >200  cells/mm3
after
 HAART
 (e.g.,
 >6
 months)
 (562,563,565,573,574).
 Discontinuing
 chronic
maintenance therapy in HIV-infected adolescents and adults who meet these criteria is
a reasonable consideration (BI). Highest risk for relapse appears to occur within the first
6 months after stopping secondary prophylaxis. Certain specialists would obtain an MRI
of the brain as part of their evaluation to determine whether discontinuing therapy is
appropriate.  The  safety  of  discontinuing  secondary  prophylaxis  after  immune
reconstitution with HAART among children has not been studied extensively. However,
given the data in adults, clinicians caring for HIV-infected children aged 1--5 years can
consider  discontinuing  secondary  prophylaxis  against  T.  gondii  after  they  have
completed TE therapy and ≥6 months of stable HAART and are asymptomatic and once
the CD4 percentage has risen to ≥15% for >3 consecutive months. For children aged
≥6 years, the same CD4 count used in adults (CD4 >200 cells/mm3) also can be used
(BIII). Prophylaxis should be reinstituted if these parameters are not met. Infection with
human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is common and usually inapparent; CMV can be acquired
during infancy, early childhood, or adolescence. Transmission can occur vertically from
an  infected  woman  to  her  offspring  or  horizontally  by  contact  with  virus-containing
breast  milk,  saliva,  urine,  or  sexual  fluid  or  through  transfusion  of  infected  blood  or
transplantation of infected organs. During infancy and early childhood, infection usually
occurs secondary to ingestion of infected breast milk or exposure to infected saliva or
urine.  Infection  occurs  at  younger  ages  in  locations  where  sanitation  is  less  than
optimal. Among adolescents, sexual transmission is the major mode of CMV acquisition.
Age-related  prevalence  of  infection  varies  widely,  depending  on  living  circumstances
and  social  customs.  Breast-feeding,  child-rearing  practices,  crowding,  sanitation,  and
sexual behavior most likely influence age-related variations in CMV prevalence. Where
rates of maternal seropositivity are high and breast-feeding is common, more than half
of  infants  acquire  CMV  during  the  first  year  of  life  (575).  Group  care  of  children
facilitates  spread  of  CMV,  especially  in  toddlers,  and  leads  to  higher  prevalence  of
infection in children who attend child care centers and in their caregivers (576,577). In
Africa, Asia, and Latin America, most children are infected by CMV before adolescence.
In the United States and western Europe, the prevalence of antibody to CMV in adults
from middle and upper socioeconomic strata is 40%--60%, whereas the prevalence in
low-income adults is ≥80% (578). Overall, among U.S. women of childbearing age, the
prevalence  of  CMV  infection  is  50%--80%,  with  the  highest  prevalence  in  women  in
lower  socioeconomic  strata  (579,580).  The  prevalence  of  CMV  infection  among
HIV-infected  pregnant  women  is  higher  than  in  the  general  population,  with
approximately  90%  of  HIV-infected  pregnant  women  coinfected  with  CMV  (581,582).
CMV is the most common congenitally transmitted infection, occurring in 0.2%--2.2% of
live-born infants in the United States (583). Congenital (in utero) CMV infection occurs
most commonly among infants born to women who have primary CMV infection during
pregnancy.  Following  primary  infection  during  pregnancy,  the  rate  of  transmission  to
the fetus is approximately 30%--40% (579,584). In comparison, the rate of congenital
infection  after  nonprimary  CMV  infection  usually  is  believed  to  be  significantly  lower
(range:  0.15%--1.0%)  (583,585,586).  More  recent  studies  demonstrate  that  in  utero
transmission  of  nonprimary  maternal  infection  can  occur  because  of  reactivation  of
infection among women infected before pregnancy or reinfection with a different CMV
strain  among  CMV-seropositive  women  (587,588);  these  studies  challenge  the
traditional  understanding  of  transmission  risk  and  clinical  outcomes  following
nonprimary  maternal  CMV  infection.  CMV  also  can  be  transmitted  during  the
intrapartum or postpartum periods from mother to infant. Up to 57% of infants whose
mothers shed CMV at or around delivery become infected with CMV, and up to 53% of
children who are breast-fed milk containing infectious virus can become CMV infected.
Symptomatic  CMV  disease  in  the  infant  is  much  less  common  when  CMV  is  acquired
intrapartum  or  through  breast-feeding  than  when  acquired  antenatally  and  occurs
primarily in premature neonates. HIV-infected women with CMV infection have a higher
rate of CMV shedding from the cervix than do women without HIV infection (52%--59%
and 14%--35%, respectively) (589). The risk for mother-to-infant transmission of CMV
may be higher among infants born to women dually infected with CMV and HIV. In one
study  of  440  infants  born  to  HIV-infected  U.S.  women,  the  overall  rate  of  in  utero
infection was 4.5% (11), higher than the <2% rate of in utero infection in the general
U.S.  population.  HIV-infected  children  appear  to  be  at  higher  risk  for  CMV  infection
during early childhood than do HIV-uninfected children (11). The rate of CMV acquisition
in HIV-infected children appears to be particularly high during the first 12 months of life
but  remains  higher  among  HIV-infected  than  HIV-uninfected  children  through  age  4
years when they are exposed to CMV infection in other children in child care or school.
CMV  disease  occurs  less  frequently  among  HIV-infected  children  than  HIV-infected
adults but contributes substantially to morbidity and mortality. In the pre-antiretroviral
era, CMV caused 8%--10% of pediatric AIDS-defining illness (590). Data in HIV-infected
adults  have  shown  a  75%--80%  decrease  in  the  incidence  of  new  cases  of  CMV
end-organ  disease  with  the  advent  of  antiretroviral  therapy,  with  an  incidence  now
estimated  to  be  <6  cases  per  100  person-years  (591).  In  a  study  of  OIs  in
approximately 3000 children followed in PACTG studies during the pre-HAART era, the
frequency of CMV retinitis was 0.5 cases per 100 child-years and, of other CMV disease,
0.2 cases per 100 child-years (1). The rate varied significantly by CD4 percentage; the
incidence of CMV retinitis was 1.1 cases per 100 child-years in children with CD4 <15%,
compared with 0.1 case per 100 child-years in children with CD4 >25%. In data from
the same cohort during the HAART era, the overall rate of CMV retinitis was <0.5 per
100  child-years  (3).  In  the  Perinatal  AIDS  Collaborative  Transmission  Study,  the
incidence of nonocular CMV before and after January 1997 (pre- and post-HAART eras)
was 1.4 per 100 child-years and 0.1 per 100 child-years, respectively (4). Similarly, CMV
retinitis  declined  from  0.7  to  0.0  per  100  child-years  during  the  same  period.
Symptomatic  HIV-infected  children  coinfected  with  CMV  have  a  higher  rate  of  CMV
viruria than do asymptomatic HIV-infected or HIV-exposed children. Overall, up to 60%
of children with AIDS shed CMV. This compares with one third of HIV-infected children
shedding  CMV;  15%--20%  of  CMV-infected,  HIV-exposed  but  uninfected  children;  and
<15% of CMV-infected infants not exposed to HIV (592). Approximately 10% of infants
with  in  utero  CMV  infection  are  symptomatic  at  birth  with  congenital  CMV  syndrome
(CMV inclusion disease); mortality of children with symptomatic disease is as high as
30%.  About  half  of  neonates  with  symptomatic  congenital  CMV  disease  are  small  for
gestational  age;  additional  findings  may  include  petechiae  (76%),  jaundice  (67%),
hepatosplenomegaly  (60%),  chorioretinitis  (20%),  microcephaly  (53%),  intracranial
calcifications (55%), and hearing impairment (≤65%) (593,594). Approximately 90% of
infants  with  symptomatic  disease  at  birth  who  survive  have  late  complications,
including  substantial  hearing  loss,  mental  retardation,  chorioretinitis,  optic  atrophy,
seizures,  or  learning  disabilities  (579).  Although  most  children  with  in  utero  CMV
infection do not have symptoms at birth, 10%--15% are at risk for later developmental
abnormalities,  sensorineural  hearing  loss,  chorioretinitis,  or  neurologic  defects.
HIV-infected  children  coinfected  with  CMV  appear  to  have  faster  progression  of  HIV
disease  than  do  those  without  CMV  infection  (11,590,595).  In  one  study  from  the
pre-HAART era, 53% of infants coinfected with HIV and CMV had progression to AIDS or
had died by age 18 months, compared with 22% of HIV-infected children without CMV
infection;  those  with  HIV/CMV  coinfection  also  were  more  likely  to  have  CNS
manifestations  (36%  versus  9%).  The  relative  risk  for  HIV  disease  progression  in
children  coinfected  with  CMV  compared  with  children  without  CMV  was  2.6  (95%  CI:
1.1--6.0) (11). CMV retinitis is the most frequent severe manifestation of CMV disease
among HIV-infected children, accounting for approximately 25% of CMV AIDS-defining
illnesses. CMV retinitis among young HIV-infected children is frequently asymptomatic
and  discovered  on  routine  examination.  Older  children  with  CMV  retinitis  present
similarly to adults, with floaters, loss of peripheral vision, or reduction in central vision.
Diagnosis of CMV retinitis is based on clinical appearance with white and yellow retinal
infiltrates and associated retinal hemorrhages. A more indolent, granular retinitis also
can occur. HIV-infected children with CD4 counts <100 cells/mm3 are more likely than
those  with  higher  CD4  counts  to  develop  CMV  retinitis;  however,  CD4  count  is  less
predictive  of  risk  for  CMV  disease  in  young  infants,  and  systemic  and  localized  CMV
disease  can  occur  in  HIV-infected  infants  with  higher,  age-adjusted  CD4  counts
(592,596).  End-organ  CMV  disease  has  been  reported  in  the  lung,  liver,  GI  tract,
pancreas,  kidney,  sinuses,  and  CNS  (596--599).  In  children  with  extraocular  CMV
disease, predominantly nonspecific symptoms (e.g., fever, poor weight gain, and loss of
developmental milestones with laboratory abnormalities of anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and elevated lactic dehydrogenase) are initially observed, although the extent to which
CMV  or  HIV  infection  themselves  contribute  to  these  findings  is  unclear  (592).  GI
manifestations among HIV-infected children include CMV colitis (the most common GI
manifestation),
 oral
 and
 esophageal
 ulcers,
 hepatic
 involvement,
 ascending
cholangiopathy,  or  gastritis.  Odynophagia  is  a  common  presentation  of  CMV
esophagitis,  whereas  abdominal  pain  and  hematochezia  frequently  occur  with  CMV
colitis.  Sigmoidoscopy  in  CMV  colitis  is  nonspecific,  demonstrating  diffuse  erythema,
submucosal  hemorrhage,  and  diffuse  mucosal  ulcerations.  Esophageal  or  colonic
ulcerations  may  cause  perforation  or  hemorrhage.  The  role  of  CMV  in  pulmonary
disease  among  HIV-infected  children  is  difficult  to  assess  because  it  often  is  isolated
with other organisms (e.g., P. jirovecii). Histologic evidence of CMV disease is needed to
determine whether active disease is present. CMV pneumonia is an interstitial process
with gradual onset of shortness of breath and dry, nonproductive cough; auscultatory
findings may be minimal. CNS manifestations of CMV include subacute encephalopathy,
myelitis,  and  polyradiculopathy  (primarily  observed  in  adults  but  rarely  reported  in
children).  The  subacute  or  chronic  encephalopathy  of  CMV  can  be  difficult  to
differentiate  clinically  from  HIV  dementia,  with  symptoms  of  confusion  and
disorientation  attributable  to  cortical  involvement.  Focal  signs  can  be  attributed  to
lesions  in  the  brainstem.  CSF  findings  are  nonspecific  and  might  indicate  a
polymorphonuclear predominance (>50% of patients), elevated protein (75%), and low
glucose  (30%).  However,  up  to  20%  of  children  with  CMV  CNS  involvement  have
completely normal CSF indices. CMV also can cause a rapidly progressive, often fatal,
CNS disease with defects in cranial nerves, nystagmus, and increasing ventricular size
(600).  CMV  infection  (versus  disease)  can  be  difficult  to  differentiate  in  HIV-infected
children. Because of transplacental transfer of antibody from mother to child, a positive
CMV antibody assay in an infant aged <12 months can indicate maternal infection but
not necessarily infection of the infant. In an infant aged >12 months, a positive CMV
antibody assay indicates previous infection with CMV but not necessarily active disease.
In  children  of  any  age,  a  positive  CMV  culture  or  PCR  indicates  infection  but  not
necessarily  disease.  CMV  can  be  isolated  in  cell  culture  from  peripheral  blood
leukocytes, body fluids (e.g., urine), or tissues. Using centrifugation-assisted shell vial
culture  amplification  techniques,  CMV  can  be  detected  within  16--40  hours  of  culture
inoculation. A positive blood buffy-coat culture establishes CMV infection and increases
the  likelihood  that  disease  or  symptoms  were  caused  by  CMV  because  children  with
positive blood cultures are at higher risk for end-organ disease. Different methods have
been used to detect viral antigen or DNA directly and to identify patients at risk for CMV
disease, including detection of pp65 antigenemia, qualitative and quantitative PCR, and
DNA hybridization. The DNA assays are more sensitive than buffy-coat or urine cultures
for  detecting  CMV  and  can  be  used  to  identify  patients  at  higher  risk  for  clinically
recognizable disease. CMV DNA detection in CSF by DNA PCR is highly sensitive for CMV
CNS disease. Quantitative DNA PCR can be used as a marker of risk for disease and to
monitor response to therapy (601). Recovery of virus from tissues (e.g., endoscopically
guided biopsies of GI or pulmonary tissue) provides evidence of disease in symptomatic
patients. The limitation of this method is that detection of visible cytopathic effects in
cell  culture  takes  1--6  weeks.  Staining  of  shell  vial  culture  with  CMV  monoclonal
antibodies or immunostaining for CMV antigens can allow earlier diagnosis of infection.
Histopathology  demonstrates  characteristic  "owl's  eye"  intranuclear  and  smaller
intracytoplasmic  inclusion  bodies  in  biopsy  specimens;  staining  with  CMV  monoclonal
antibodies or immunostaining for CMV antigens also can be done. The same procedures
can  be  used  on  cells  obtained  from  bronchoalveolar  lavage.  Preventing  Exposure
HIV-exposed  infants  and  HIV-infected  children,  adolescents,  and  adults  who  are
seronegative for CMV and require blood transfusion should be administered only CMV
antibody-negative  or  leukocyte-reduced  cellular  blood  products  in  nonemergency
situations (BIII). Annual CMV antibody testing is recommended beginning at 1 year of
age  for  CMV-seronegative  HIV-infected  infants  and  children  who  are  severely
immunosuppressed (e.g., CD4 count <100 cells/mm3 or CD4 percentage <10%) (BII).
Annual  testing  allows  identification  of  children  who  have  acquired  CMV  infection  and
might benefit from screening for retinitis. HIV-infected adults and adolescents who are
child care providers or parents of children in child care facilities should be informed that
they  are  at  increased  risk  for  CMV  infection  (BI).  Risk  for  CMV  infection  can  be
diminished  by  optimal  hygienic  practices  (e.g.,  hand-washing)  (AII).  Preventing  First
Episode  of  Disease  The  primary  method  for  preventing  severe  CMV  disease  is
recognition  of  the  early  manifestations  of  the  disease  and  prevention  of  severe
immunosuppression by treating with HAART. HIV-infected children aged <5 years who
are CMV-infected and severely immunosuppressed (e.g., CD4 count <50 cells/mm3 or
CD4  percentage  <5%)  should  have  a  dilated  retinal  examination  performed  by  an
ophthalmologist every 6 months (AIII). Older children should be counseled to be aware
of  floaters  in  the  eye  and  visual  changes,  similar  to  the  recommendation  for  adults
(BIII). During the HAART era, CMV end-organ disease has diminished to such an extent
that primary prophylaxis with antiviral agents in CMV and HIV coinfected people usually
is not recommended (DIII). CMV end-organ disease is best prevented by antiretroviral
therapy to maintain CD4 count >100 cells/mm3. If this is not possible, prophylaxis with
valganciclovir
 can
 be
 considered
 for
 HIV-infected
 adolescents
 who
 are
CMV-seropositive, have a CD4 count of <50 cells/mm3, and weigh enough to receive
adult doses of valganciclovir (CIII). Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Because primary
prophylaxis  with  antiviral  agents  in  persons  coinfected  with  CMV  and  HIV  is  not
recommended  (as  discussed  above),  no  consideration  of  discontinuing  primary
prophylaxis  is  necessary.  Treatment  of  Disease  Treatment  of  newborns  who  have
symptomatic congenital CMV disease involving the CNS with IV ganciclovir for 6 weeks
has been evaluated in a series of clinical trials conducted by the National Institute of
Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  Collaborative  Antiviral  Study  Group  (602,603);  all
infants  in  these  studies  were  HIV-uninfected.  Infants  receiving  therapy  cleared  their
urine  of  CMV  by  culture  by  the  end  of  the  6-week  treatment  period,  although  all
experienced a rebound in their viruria after antiviral discontinuation (602). In a phase
III,  randomized,  controlled  trial,  infants  receiving  IV  ganciclovir  for  6  weeks  were  less
likely  to  have  hearing  deterioration  over  the  first  2  years  of  life  than  were  infants
receiving no antiviral therapy (603). Treated infants also had more rapid resolution of
liver  enzyme  abnormalities  and  a  greater  degree  of  growth  during  the  course  of
therapy. They also experienced fewer neurodevelopmental delays at 1 year of life than
did  nontreated  infants  (604).  However,  approximately  two  thirds  of  the  infants
developed  substantial  neutropenia  during  therapy  (603).  Among  patients  developing
neutropenia,  48%  required  dose  modification,  but  most  were  able  to  complete  the  6
weeks of therapy. On the basis of these results, IV ganciclovir therapy (6 mg/kg/dose
administered  every  12  hours)  for  6  weeks  should  be  offered  to  HIV-exposed  or
HIV-infected infants who have symptomatic congenital CMV disease involving the CNS
(BI).  If  during  the  6  weeks  of  therapy  an  infant  is  confirmed  as  HIV-infected,  some
experts would recommend longer duration of treatment (>6 weeks) (BIII). CMV retinitis
should be managed in concert with an experienced ophthalmologist. IV ganciclovir, oral
valganciclovir, IV foscarnet, IV cidofovir, and the ganciclovir intraocular implant coupled
with valganciclovir are all effective treatments for CMV retinitis in HIV-infected adults
(AI)  (605--609).  For  HIV-infected  children,  the  drug  of  choice  for  initial  treatment  for
CMV  retinitis---and  for  other  end-organ  disseminated  CMV  disease  (e.g.,  colitis,
esophagitis, and CNS disease)---is IV ganciclovir (AI). Oral valganciclovir, a prodrug of
ganciclovir, is one of the first-line treatments for HIV-infected adults with CMV retinitis
(AI)  (607).  The  drug  is  well  absorbed  from  the  GI  tract  and  rapidly  metabolized  to
ganciclovir in the intestine and liver. However, data on appropriate dosage of this drug
for  children  are  limited  (610).  Additionally,  a  valganciclovir  liquid  formulation  is  not
commercially  available.  Even  though  extemporaneously  compounded  valganciclovir
"recipes"  are  available,  the  pharmacokinetics,  bioavailability,  safety,  and  shelf-life  of
such  formulations  are  unknown,  and  they  should  not  be  used  in  children.  Thus,  oral
valganciclovir is an option primarily for older children who weigh enough to receive the
adult dose and tablet formulation of valganciclovir (CIII). An alternative drug for treating
CMV disease or for use in ganciclovir-resistant CMV infections in HIV-infected children is
foscarnet  (AI).  Foscarnet  used  as  suppressive  therapy  has  been  associated  with
increased length of survival relative to ganciclovir in HIV-infected adults. Doses should
be  modified  among  patients  with  renal  insufficiency.  Combination  therapy  with
ganciclovir  and  foscarnet  delays  progression  of  retinitis  in  certain  patients  in  whom
monotherapy fails (596,607,611,612) and can be used as initial therapy among children
with sight-threatening disease (BIII). Combination therapy also has been used for adults
with  retinitis  that  has  relapsed  on  single-agent  therapy.  Combination  therapy  with  IV
ganciclovir and foscarnet also can be considered in initial therapy of CMV CNS disease
(BII).  However,  substantial  rates  of  adverse  effects  are  associated  with  combination
therapy. Before the availability of valganciclovir, oral ganciclovir in combination with an
intraocular  ganciclovir  implant  had  been  used  for  maintenance  treatment  of  CMV
retinitis in adults. Given the lack of commercial availability of oral ganciclovir, its use in
children  can  no  longer  even  be  considered.  In  adults,  the  combination  of  oral
valganciclovir with a ganciclovir sustained-release intraocular implant, replaced every
6--9 months, was superior to daily IV ganciclovir in preventing relapse of retinitis and is
preferred by some adult HIV specialists for patients who have CMV lesions adjacent to
the optic nerve or fovea (AI) (605--609). This regimen can be considered for treatment
and chronic suppression of CMV retinitis in older children who weigh enough to receive
the adult dose and tablet formulation of valganciclovir. Cidofovir is effective in treating
CMV  retinitis  among  adults  who  are  intolerant  of  other  therapies.  However,  cidofovir
has  not  been  studied  in  children  with  CMV  disease  (CIII).  Intravitreous  injections  of
ganciclovir,  foscarnet,  or  cidofovir  have  been  used  to  control  retinitis  but  require
biweekly  intraocular  injections.  Data  are  limited  in  children,  and  biweekly  injection  is
impractical for use in most children (DIII). Implantation of an intravitreous ganciclovir
medication-release device in the posterior chamber of the eye also has been used in
HIV-infected  adults  and  adolescents.  In  HIV-infected  adults  with  CMV  retinitis,
ganciclovir  intraocular  implant  plus  oral  valganciclovir  is  superior  to  once  daily  IV
ganciclovir for preventing relapse of CMV retinitis (605--607). Intraocular implant plus IV
ganciclovir or oral valganciclovir may be the preferred initial treatment for patients with
immediate  sight-threatening  infections  (e.g.,  adjacent  to  the  optic  nerve  or  fovea).
Small peripheral lesions can be treated with systemic therapy without local treatment
(BII). Intraocular implants should not be used in children aged <3 years because of the
small  size  of  their  eyes  (EIII).  Intraocular  cidofovir  is  not  recommended  in  children
because of lack of data and the risk for hypotonia in adults (EIII). For CMV neurologic
disease,  prompt  initiation  of  therapy  is  critical  for  an  optimal  clinical  response.
However, levels of ganciclovir in the CNS are 24%--70% of plasma levels, and levels in
the brain are approximately 38% of plasma levels (613); hence, combination treatment
with ganciclovir and foscarnet might be preferred as initial therapy to stabilize disease
and  maximize  response  (BII).  However,  this  approach  is  associated  with  substantial
rates  of  adverse  effects,  and  optimal  treatment  for  neurologic  disease  in  children
receiving optimized HAART is unknown. Monitoring and Adverse Events, Including IRIS
CMV  retinitis  should  be  managed  in  concert  with  an  experienced  ophthalmologist.
Recommendations  for  HIV-infected  adults  include  indirect  ophthalmoscopy  through  a
dilated  pupil  performed  at  diagnosis  of  CMV  retinitis,  after  completion  of  induction
therapy, 1 month after initiation of therapy, and monthly thereafter while the patient is
on  anti-CMV  treatment;  recommendations  should  be  similar  for  HIV-infected  children
with  CMV  retinitis  (AIII).  Monthly  fundus  photographs,  using  a  standardized
photographic  technique  that  documents  the  appearance  of  the  retina,  provide  the
optimum method for following patients and detecting early relapse (AIII). For patients
who  have  experienced  immune  recovery  (Table  3),  the  frequency  of  ophthalmologic
follow-up  can  be  decreased  to  every  3  months.  However,  because  relapse  of  the
retinitis occurs among patients with immune recovery, regular ophthalmologic follow-up
still  is  needed.  The  major  side  effects  of  ganciclovir  and  valganciclovir  are
myelosuppression (i.e., anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia) and renal toxicity.
Dose reduction or interruption because of hematologic toxicity might be necessary in
up to 40% of patients receiving IV ganciclovir; granulocyte colony-stimulating factor can
be  used  to  ameliorate  marrow  suppression.  The  main  toxicities  of  foscarnet  are
decreased  renal  function  and  metabolic  derangements.  Renal  toxicity  and  foscarnet
binding  to  divalent  metal  ions,  such  as  calcium,  lead  to  metabolic  abnormalities  in
approximately  one  third  of  patients,  and  serious  electrolyte  imbalances  (including
abnormalities  in  calcium,  phosphorus,  magnesium,  and  potassium  levels)  and
secondary  seizures,  cardiac  dysrhythmias,  abnormal  liver  transaminases,  and  CNS
symptoms  can  occur.  Metabolic  disturbances  can  be  minimized  if  foscarnet  is
administered by slow infusion, with rates not exceeding 1 mg/kg/minute. Concomitant
use of other nephrotoxic drugs increases the likelihood of renal dysfunction associated
with foscarnet therapy. For patients receiving ganciclovir or foscarnet, complete blood
counts  and  serum  electrolytes  and  renal  function  should  be  monitored  twice  weekly
during  induction  therapy  and  once  weekly  thereafter  (AIII).  The  major  side  effect  of
cidofovir is potentially irreversible nephrotoxicity; the drug produces proximal tubular
dysfunction  including  Fanconi  syndrome  and  acute  renal  failure.  Renal  toxicity
manifests as proteinuria and glycosuria. To minimize nephrotoxicity, probenicid should
be  administered  before  each  infusion,  and  IV  hydration  with  normal  saline  should  be
administered  before  and  after  each  cidofovir  infusion.  For  patients  receiving  IV
cidofovir,  blood  urea  nitrogen,  creatinine,  and  urinalysis  should  be  performed  before
each  infusion;  administration  of  the  drug  is  contraindicated  if  renal  dysfunction  or
proteinuria  is  detected.  Other  reported  adverse  events  include  anterior  uveitis  and
ocular  hypotony;  serial  ophthalmologic  monitoring  for  anterior  segment  inflammation
and  intraocular  pressure  is  needed  while  receiving  the  drug  systemically.  Cidofovir
should  not  be  administered  concomitantly  with  other  nephrotoxic  agents.  Cidofovir
therapy must be discontinued if serum creatinine increases ≥0.5 mg/dL above baseline.
Immune recovery uveitis after initiation of effective HAART is an immunologic reaction
to CMV associated with inflammation in the anterior chamber and/or the vitreous (614).
Ocular complications of uveitis include macular edema and development of epiretinal
membranes, which can cause loss of vision. Immune recovery uveitis may respond to
periocular corticosteroids or a short course of systemic steroids. Oral valganciclovir was
beneficial  in  one  small  uncontrolled  study  (615).  Management  of  Treatment  Failure
Resistant strains of CMV should be suspected when progressive disease and continued
recovery  of  virus  occurs  despite  ganciclovir  therapy.  Foscarnet  is  the  drug  of  choice
when  ganciclovir  resistance  is  suspected  (AI).  In  patients  with  CMV  retinitis,  although
drug resistance occurs among patients receiving long-term therapy, early relapse might
be caused by the limited intraocular penetration of systemically administered drugs; in
HIV-infected adults, the placement of a ganciclovir implant in a patient whose retinitis
has relapsed during systemic treatment is recommended because it achieves greater
drug  levels  in  the  eye  and  often  will  control  the  retinitis  for  6--8  months  until  the
implant requires replacement (BIII). Because of the size requirements of the implants,
this  option  would  be  limited  to  older  children  with  CMV  retinitis.  Many  experts  would
initially treat early first relapse of retinitis with reinduction with the same drug, followed
by reinstitution of maintenance therapy (AII). However, if drug resistance is suspected
or if side effects or toxicities interfere with optimal courses of the initial agent, change
to an alternative drug is reasonable (AIII). Combination ganciclovir and foscarnet can be
considered but is accompanied by greater toxicity. Prevention of Recurrence Courses of
antiviral agents (e.g., ganciclovir, foscarnet, or cidofovir) do not cure CMV disease. After
induction  therapy,  the  standard  recommendation  has  been  to  provide  secondary
prophylaxis (chronic maintenance therapy) for the remainder of the patient's life (AI).
Regimens  that  can  be  considered  for  chronic  suppression  in  adults  and  adolescents
include  IV  ganciclovir,  oral  valganciclovir,  IV  foscarnet,  combined  IV  ganciclovir  and
foscarnet,  parenteral  cidofovir,  and  (for  retinitis  only)  ganciclovir  administration  by
intraocular implant (AI) (616--623). Because of limited data on drug pharmacokinetics
and  dosing  in  children,  IV  ganciclovir  or  foscarnet  are  the  preferred  secondary
prophylaxis  regimens  for  children;  oral  valganciclovir  can  be  considered  for  older
children able to receive adult dosing. Repetitive intravitreous injections of ganciclovir,
foscarnet,  and  cidofovir  reportedly  are  effective  for  secondary  prophylaxis  of  CMV
retinitis (624,625), although intraocular therapy alone does not protect the contralateral
eye  or  other  organ  systems  and  therefore  typically  is  combined  with  systemic
treatment (616). Additionally, frequent intravitreous injections are impractical for use in
most  children  (DIII).  A  chronic  maintenance  regimen  for  patients  treated  for  CMV
disease  should  be  chosen  in  consultation  with  a  specialist.  Chronic  maintenance
therapy  is  not  routinely  recommended  for  GI  disease  but  should  be  considered  if
relapses occur (BII). A role for maintenance therapy for CMV pneumonitis has not been
established (CIII). For patients with retinitis, decisions should be made in consultation
with an ophthalmologist and should take into consideration the anatomic location of the
retinal lesion, vision in the contralateral eye, and the immunologic and virologic status
of the patient (BIII). Intraocular implants should not be used in children aged <3 years
because  of  the  small  size  of  their  eyes  (EIII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis
Multiple  case  series  have  reported  that  maintenance  therapy  can  be  discontinued
safely in adults and adolescents with CMV retinitis whose CD4 counts have increased
substantially in response to HAART (626--631). These patients have remained disease
free  for  >30  to  95  weeks,  whereas  during  the  pre-HAART  era,  retinitis  typically
reactivated in <6 to 8 weeks after stopping CMV therapy. Plasma HIV RNA levels varied
among  these  patients,  supporting  the  hypothesis  that  the  CD4  count  is  the  primary
determinant  of  immune  recovery  to  CMV.  CMV  retinitis  can  occur  in  HAART-treated
adults  with  high  CD4  counts,  however  (632),  suggesting  that  CMV-specific  cellular
immunity  may  be  important  in  controlling  CMV  in  immune-reconstituted  HIV-infected
adults  (633,634).  In  HIV-infected  adults  with  CMV  retinitis,  discontinuing  secondary
prophylaxis is considered for patients with a sustained increase in CD4 count to >100
cells/mm3 in response to treatment. The safety of discontinuing secondary prophylaxis
after immune reconstitution with HAART in HIV-infected children has not been as well
studied. Low or undetectable HIV replication in children is the strongest correlate with
CMV immune reconstitution, being associated with a higher frequency of CMV-specific
CD4  cells  (635).  Early  institution  of  HAART  may  help  control  CMV  infection  by
maintaining  normal  CD4  count  and  cytotoxic  T-lymphocyte  responses  in  HIV-infected
children  (636).  In  deciding  whether  to  discontinue  secondary  prophylaxis,  the
significant toxicities associated with antiviral drugs active against CMV, including those
in in vitro and animal models, need to be considered. Recognizing the limitations of the
data  in  children  but  drawing  on  the  growing  experience  in  adults,  discontinuing
prophylaxis may be considered for children aged 1--5 years who are receiving HAART
and have a sustained (e.g., >6 months) increase in CD4 count to >500 cells/mm3 or
CD4 percentage to >15%, and for children aged ≥6 years, an increase in CD4 count to
>100  cells/mm3  as  for  adults  (CIII).  Such  decisions  should  be  made  in  close
consultation with an ophthalmologist and should account for such factors as magnitude
and duration of CD4 cell increase, anatomic location of the retinal lesion, vision in the
contralateral  eye,  and  the  feasibility  of  regular  ophthalmologic  monitoring  (CIII).  All
patients  in  whom  anti-CMV  maintenance  therapy  has  been  discontinued  should
continue  to  undergo  regular  ophthalmologic  monitoring  at  at  least  3-  to  6-month
intervals for early detection of CMV relapse and for immune reconstitution uveitis (AII).
CMV viral load or other markers of CMV infection (e.g., antigenemia or viral DNA tests)
are  not  well  standardized;  their  role  in  predicting  relapse  remains  to  be  defined,  and
they  are  not  recommended  for  routine  monitoring  (DIII)  (637,638).  Reinitiating
Secondary  Prophylaxis  CMV  retinitis  relapses  among  adults  whose  anti-CMV
maintenance therapies have been discontinued and whose CD4 counts have decreased
to  <50  cells/mm3  (624);  reinstitution  of  secondary  prophylaxis  is  recommended  for
HIV-infected adults when CD4 count falls to <100 cells/mm3. For HIV-infected children
in  whom  secondary  prophylaxis  has  been  discontinued  because  of  immune
reconstitution, secondary prophylaxis should be reinstituted in children aged 1--5 years
when the CD4 count decreases to <500 cells/mm3 or CD4 percentage to <15%, and for
children  aged  ≥6  years  when  the  CD4  count  decreases  to  <100  cells/mm3  or  CD4
percentage  to  <15%  (BIII).  Chronic  hepatitis  B  infection  is  defined  as  persistence  of
hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg) for >6 months. Risk of developing chronic hepatitis
B infection after acute infection correlates with age at time of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection. Among HBV-infected persons, chronic hepatitis B infection develops in ≤90%
of  infants,  25%--50%  of  children  aged  1--5  years,  and  6%--10%  of  older  children  and
adolescents  (639--641).  Childhood  HBV  infection  can  be  acquired  parenterally,
perinatally,  or  through  sexual  transmission.  Horizontal  transmission  of  HBV  can  occur
secondary  to  frequent  interpersonal  contact  of  nonintact  skin  or  mucus  membranes
with  blood  or  body  fluids  that  contain  blood  (e.g.,  saliva)  or  from  sharing  household
objects, such as toothbrushes or razors. Universal hepatitis B vaccination of newborns
has dramatically lowered chronic HBV infection among children and reduced the rates
of HBV-related morbidity and mortality in the United States. Adolescents are at risk for
HBV infection through sexual activity or injection-drug use. In a study of HIV-infected
adolescents  at  43  PACTG  centers,  19%  had  evidence  of  current  or  resolved  HBV
infection; the rate of current or resolved HBV infection in HIV-infected adolescent girls
was twice the U.S. population-based rates for HIV-uninfected adolescent girls and, for
adolescent boys, nearly seven times higher (642). Substance abuse and sexual activity
increase the risk for HIV/HBV coinfection in adolescents, particularly among males who
have  sex  with  other  males  (643).  Most  children  who  acquire  HBV  perinatally  are
immunotolerant to HBV. Although they have high HBV DNA levels, serum transaminase
levels  are  usually  normal,  and  necroinflammatory  liver  disease  is  minimal.
Childhood-acquired  HBV  infection  is  characterized  by  lower  HBV  DNA  levels,  greater
serum  transaminase  elevation,  and  higher  necroinflammatory  liver  disease  than  in
perinatally acquired HBV infection (644). Data from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 1999--2004, indicate that 0.51% (95% CI: 0.3%--0.9%) of children
aged  6--19  years  had  ever  been  infected  with  HBV  (645).  Data  are  limited  on  the
prevalence of chronic HBV infection in HIV-infected children in the United States. In a
study of 228 HIV-infected children at an inner-city hospital, six HIV-infected children had
chronic  HBV  infection  (2.6%  [95%  CI:  1.1%--5.9%])  (646).  The  mean  age  of
HIV/HBV-coinfected  children  was  17  years;  33%  had  acquired  both  HIV  and  HBV
infection through blood transfusion; and 84% were HBV early antigen-positive (HBeAg),
indicating  infectiousness.  Half  of  coinfected  children  had  normal  serum  transaminase
levels, and half had mild elevations of up to twofold above upper limit of normal. Most
acute  HBV  infections  in  children  are  asymptomatic.  Prodromal  symptoms  of  lethargy,
malaise,  fatigue,  nausea,  and  anorexia  can  occur.  Jaundice  and  right  upper  quadrant
pain can follow and, less commonly, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Gianotti-Crosti
syndrome (papular acrodermatitis), urticaria, macular rash, or purpuric lesions may be
seen  in  acute  HBV  infection.  Extrahepatic  manifestations  associated  with  circulating
immune  complexes  that  have  been  reported  in  HBV-infected  children  include
arthralgias,  arthritis,  polyarteritis  nodosa,  thrombocytopenia,  and  glomerulonephritis.
Most  children  with  chronic  HBV  infection  are  asymptomatic.  However,  rare  cases  of
fulminant  hepatic  failure  have  occurred  during  childhood  HBV  infection  (647).  Most
children  with  chronic  HBV  infection  are  asymptomatic.  One  quarter  of  infants  and
children with chronic HBV eventually will develop cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC)  (648,649).  However,  these  sequelae  usually  develop  over  2--3  decades  and
rarely  occur  during  childhood  (650).  Development  of  HCC  correlates  with  HBV  DNA
levels and duration of HBV infection, with the highest risk in persons infected in early
life (651). HIV/HBV-coinfected adults are at increased risk for cirrhosis, end-stage liver
disease,  and  liver-related  mortality  (652).  Testing  for  HBV  infection  should  be
performed  in  any  child  whose  mother  is  known  to  be  infected  with  HBV.  Adolescents
and  young  adults  with  histories  of  injection-drug  use  or  high-risk  sexual  contact  also
should undergo testing for HBV infection. HBsAg is the first marker detectable in serum,
appearing 30 days after infection; it precedes the elevation of serum aminotransferase
levels  and  the  onset  of  symptoms.  Necroinflammatory  liver  disease  then  can  occur,
during which serum transaminase levels increase, along with high HBV DNA levels and
HBeAg  positivity.  HBeAg  correlates  with  viral  replication,  DNA  polymerase  activity,
infectivity, and increased severity of liver disease. Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen
(anti-HBc)  appears  2  weeks  after  HBsAg  and  persists  for  life.  Passively  transferred
maternal anti-HBc can be detectable in the infant up to age 12 months. In self-limited
infections, HBsAg is usually eliminated in 1--2 months, and hepatitis B surface antibody
(anti-HBs)  develops  during  convalescence.  Anti-HBs  indicates  immunity  from  HBV
infection. After recovery from natural infection, both anti-HBs and anti-HBc usually are
present.  In  persons  who  become  chronically  infected  (i.e.,  persistently  positive  for
HBsAg  beyond  24  weeks),  anti-HBs  is  not  detectable.  Persons  who  have  been
vaccinated  may  have  detectable  anti-HBs  but  not  anti-HBc.  HBeAg  seroconversion,
defined  as  loss  of  HBeAg,  followed  by  the  production  of  antibodies  to  HBeAg  (e.g.,
anti-HBe),  heralds  transition  of  the  HBV-infected  person  to  the  inactive  carrier  state.
HBeAg seroconversion is infrequent in children aged <3 years and may not occur until
the third or fourth decade of HBV infection (653). Less than 10% of children infected
perinatally with HBV undergo HBeAg seroconversion. In contrast, higher rates of HBeAg
seroconversion  occur  in  childhood-acquired  HBV  infection,  with  70%--80%  of  children
acquiring anti-HBe by the second decade of life (650). HBeAg seroconversion usually is
followed by reduction of serum HBV DNA levels, an initial increase and then subsequent
normalization
 of
 serum
 transaminase
 levels,
 followed
 by
 resolution
 of
necroinflammatory liver disease (650). Development of cirrhosis and HCC occur more
commonly  in  patients  with  delayed  HBeAg  seroconversion  (654).  HBeAg-negative
infection (precore mutant) occurs uncommonly in children (641). HBV DNA is a marker
for HBV replication. In the active phase of chronic hepatitis B, high HBV DNA levels have
been  associated  with  necroinflammatory  liver  disease.  Children  infected  perinatally,
however, may remain in an immunotolerant phase with high levels of HBV DNA without
evidence of liver damage. Quantitative DNA assays may help determine the need for
treatment  and  for  evaluating  treatment  response.  Although  not  necessary  for
diagnostic purposes, liver biopsy may be useful to assess the degree of liver damage
and  determine  the  need  for  treatment.  Prevention  Recommendations  Prevention  of
Exposure All pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg during an early prenatal visit
in  each  pregnancy  (AI).  Testing  should  be  repeated  in  late  pregnancy  for
HBsAg-negative women at high risk for HBV infection (e.g., injection-drug users, women
with  intercurrent  sexually  transmitted  infections,  and  women  with  multiple  sex
partners). Pregnancy is not a contraindication to hepatitis B vaccination for women who
have not previously been vaccinated; current hepatitis B vaccines contain noninfectious
HBsAg  and  should  cause  no  risk  to  the  fetus.  Preventing  First  Episode  of  Disease  All
infants  born  to  HBV-infected  women,  including  HIV-coinfected  women,  should  receive
hepatitis B vaccine and hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) within 12 hours after birth,
a  second  dose  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  at  age  1--2  months,  and  a  third  dose  at  age  6
months (A1) (Figures 1 and 
2) (38). For preterm infants weighing <2000 g, the initial vaccine dose (birth dose)
should not be counted as part of the vaccine series because of the potentially reduced
immunogenicity  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  in  these  infants;  three  additional  doses  of
vaccine  (for  a  total  of  four  doses)  should  be  administered  beginning  when  the  infant
reaches  age  1  month  (AI)  (38).  A  three-dose  hepatitis  B  vaccine  regimen  is  95%
effective  in  preventing  HBV  infection  in  HBV-exposed  infants.  Postvaccination  testing
for  anti-HBs  and  HBsAg  should  be  performed  at  age  9--18  months  in  infants  born  to
HBsAg  positive  women.  The  level  of  anti-HBs  that  is  considered  protective  is  >10
mIU/mL. Infants who are HBsAg negative and have anti-HBs levels <10 mIU/mL should
be  revaccinated  with  a  second  three-dose  series  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  and  retested
1--2  months  after  the  final  vaccine  dose  (38).  The  three-dose  series  of  hepatitis  B
vaccine also is recommended for all children and adolescents aged <19 years who were
not previously vaccinated. However, antibody responses to hepatitis B vaccination may
be diminished in HIV-infected children, especially in older children or children with CD4
counts <200 cells/mm3 (655,656). For this reason, HIV-infected infants, children, and
adolescents should be tested for anti-HBs 1--2 months after completing the vaccination
series and, if anti-HBs levels are <10 mIU/mL, revaccinated with a second three-dose
series  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  (AIII).  Modified  hepatitis  B  vaccine  dosing  regimens,
including  a  doubling  of  the  standard  antigen  dose,  might  increase  response  rates.
However, although a current randomized trial is evaluating use of various hepatitis B
vaccine  preparations  and  doses  in  HIV-infected  youth,  no  data  are  available  yet.  The
need  for  booster  doses  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  in  HIV-infected  persons  has  not  been
determined.  Annual  anti-HBs  testing  and  booster  doses  when  the  anti-HBs  levels
decline to <10 mIU/mL should be considered in persons with ongoing risk for hepatitis B
exposure (CIII) (38). In addition to hepatitis B vaccine, hepatitis A vaccine can prevent
hepatitis infection and its potential devastating long-term sequelae and thus all children
should receive hepatitis A vaccination at age 12--23 months with the two doses in the
series administered ≥6 months apart (39). Children who are not fully vaccinated by age
2  years  can  be  vaccinated  at  subsequent  visits.  Hepatitis  A  vaccine  is  also
recommended  for  children  aged  ≥24  months  who  live  in  areas  where  vaccination
programs target older children or those who are at increased risk for infection (Figures
1 and 
2).  HBV-infected  children  should  be  advised  not  to  share  toothbrushes  or  other
personal-care  articles  that  might  be  contaminated  with  blood.  Although  efficiency  of
sexual transmission of HBV is relatively low, safe-sex practices should be encouraged
for  all  HIV-infected  adolescents  and  young  adults;  barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  latex
condoms)  are  recommended  to  reduce  the  risk  for  exposure  to  sexually  transmitted
pathogens,  including  HBV.  Treatment  of  Disease  General  issues  Individualization  of
therapy is essential for any HBV-infected child and should be based on the child's age,
age  at  acquisition  of  infection,  HBV  DNA  levels,  and  serum  transaminase  levels.
Antiviral therapy regimens for chronic hepatitis B are approved only for children aged
>2  years  who  have  compensated  liver  disease.  HIV-infected  children  who  are  not
receiving  anti-HBV  therapy  should  be  closely  monitored  with  determination  of  serum
aminotransferase levels every 6 months. If serum transaminase levels are persistently
elevated (more than twofold the upper limit of normal for ≥6 months), HBeAg, anti-HBe,
and HBV DNA levels should be obtained. Monitoring of serum transaminases and HBV
DNA levels  over time is  important before the initiation  of  antiviral  therapy  to  identify
patients who may be in the process of spontaneous HBeAg seroconversion who would
not  require  treatment.  Liver  biopsy  is  not  required  before  treatment  but  may  help  to
determine the severity of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis and to exclude other causes
of  liver  disease.  No  clear  recommendations  exist  for  treating  chronic  childhood  HBV
infection. HBV-infected children often have milder disease than adults and may show
spontaneous  HBeAg  seroconversion.  Few  large  randomized  controlled  trials  exist  of
antiviral  therapies  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  infection  in  childhood.  Moreover,  the
long-term  safety  of  many  of  the  agents  used  to  treat  chronic  hepatitis  B  infection  in
adults is not known in children. However, a 2004 consensus meeting of pediatric liver
experts  recommended  that  antiviral  treatment  be  considered  in  children  with  chronic
HBV  infection  and  a  duration  of  necroinflammatory  liver  disease  >6  months  (657).
Indications  for  treatment  of  chronic  HBV  infection  in  HIV-coinfected  children  are  the
same  as  in  HBV-infected  children  without  HIV  infection:  1)  evidence  of  ongoing  HBV
viral  replication,  as  indicated  by  detectable  serum  HBV  DNA,  with  or  without  HBeAg
positivity,  for  >6  months  and  persistent  elevation  of  serum  transaminase  levels  (at
least twice the upper limit of normal for >6 months); or 2) evidence of chronic hepatitis
on liver biopsy (BII) (641,657). Children without necroinflammatory liver disease usually
do not warrant antiviral therapy (DIII). Treatment is not recommended for children with
immunotolerant chronic HBV infection (i.e., normal serum transaminase levels despite
detectable HBV DNA) (DIII). The goals of treatment for children with chronic hepatitis B
infection are identical to those for adults: suppression of HBV replication; normalization
of  serum  transaminase  levels;  acceleration  of  HBeAg  seroconversion;  preservation  of
liver architecture; and prevention of long-term sequelae, such as cirrhosis and HCC. The
optimal  agent  and  duration  of  therapy  for  childhood  hepatitis  B  infection  remain
unclear.  Treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  infection  is  evolving;  consultation  with
providers  with  expertise  in  treating  chronic  hepatitis  B  infection  in  children  is
recommended.  Treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  infection  in  adults  and  adolescents
Seven medications have been approved to treat chronic hepatitis B infection in adults:
interferons  (both  standard  and  pegylated);  nucleoside  analogues  (i.e.,  lamivudine;
telbivudine; and entecavir); and the nucleotide analogues, adefovir and tenofovir. The
FDA-approved  HIV  antiretroviral  medication  emtricitabine  also  has  significant  activity
against HBV, although it is not approved for this indication. Preferred initial therapies
for  adults  who  have  chronic  hepatitis  B  without  HIV  infection  include  pegylated
interferon-alfa, entecavir, or adefovir monotherapy. In adults who have chronic hepatitis
B  infection  with  or  without  HIV  infection,  treatment  for  hepatitis  B  is  considered  in
HBeAg-positive
 persons
 with
 HBV
 DNA
 ≥20,000
 IU/mL
 (>105
 copies/mL),
HBeAg-negative persons with HBV DNA ≥2000 IU/mL (>104 copies/mL), patients with
persistent  serum  transaminase  elevation,  or  patients  with  evidence  of  cirrhosis  or
fibrosis (652). Treatment options for HBV in HIV-infected persons must account for the
goals of therapy and the impact treatment might have on both HIV and HBV replication.
In coinfected patients who require treatment for chronic hepatitis B, HIV, or both, many
experts would initiate a fully suppressive regimen to treat HIV infection that includes a
dual nucleoside analogue backbone with drugs active against both HIV and HBV plus a
third agent active against HIV; this approach might reduce the risk for IRIS, particularly
in  patients  with  advanced  immune  deficiency.  Tenofovir  plus  lamivudine  or
emtricitabine would be the first choice for the nucleoside backbone; the combination of
tenofovir with lamivudine was demonstrated to be more effective in suppressing HBV
than  either  drug  alone  and  prevents  development  of  lamivudine  resistance  (658).  In
instances in which HIV treatment is not an option but treatment of hepatitis B infection
is  needed,  pegylated  interferon-alfa  can  be  used  alone  because  it  does  not  lead  to
development  of  drug-resistant  HIV  or  HBV  mutants.  Use  of  tenofovir,  lamivudine,  or
emtricitabine without a fully suppressive HAART regimen should be avoided because of
the rapid development of drug-resistant HIV mutations. Treatment of chronic hepatitis B
infection  in  children  without  HIV  infection  Only  two  drugs  (monotherapy  with
interferon-alfa [standard] or lamivudine) are FDA-approved to treat chronic hepatitis B
in children (AI). The limited pediatric trials of these agents show that although they are
well-tolerated  by  children,  response  rates  are  low,  and  treatment  does  not  fully
eliminate  HBV  infection  (659,660).  In  HIV-uninfected  children,  HBeAg  seroconversion
rates  after  1  year  of  treatment  are  similar  (641).  Interferon-alfa  treatment  is
administered for only 6 months but requires subcutaneous administration and has more
frequent
 side
 effects,
 including
 growth
 impairment.
 Although
 lamivudine
 is
administered orally and has a lower rate of side effects, it requires a longer duration of
therapy and has a high rate of resistance if taken for an extended time (641). Although
various  combination  regimens  involving  sequential  or  concurrent  lamivudine  and
standard  or  pegylated  interferon-alfa  have  been  studied  in  children  or  adults  with
chronic  hepatitis  B,  the  superiority  of  combination  therapy  over  monotherapy  with
standard  or  pegylated  interferon-alfa  or  lamivudine  has  not  been  demonstrated;
however,  lamivudine  resistance  rates  may  be  lower  (661--670).  A  recent  study  of
children with immunotolerant HBV infection suggested possible benefit from sequential
lamivudine and interferon-alfa therapy, with 78% of patients clearing HBV DNA by the
end  of  treatment  (664).  However,  combination  therapy  cannot  be  recommended  for
pediatric
 HBV
 infection
 until
 more
 data
 are
 available
 (DII).
 Treatment
 of
HBV/HIV-coinfected  children  None  of  the  clinical  studies  of  treatment  of  chronic
hepatitis B infection have specifically studied children with HIV/HBV coinfection. As in
coinfected adults, choice of antiviral therapy for the HIV/HBV-coinfected child involves
consideration of whether concurrent HIV treatment is warranted. Interferons Standard
interferon-alfa-2a  or  -2b  has  received  the  most  study  in  children  who  have  chronic
hepatitis B (without HIV infection) and is recommended for treating chronic hepatitis B
infection with compensated liver disease in HIV-uninfected children aged ≥2 years who
warrant treatment (BII). In a review of six randomized clinical trials in 240 HBV-infected
children aged >1.5 years, interferon-alfa therapy resulted in HBV DNA clearance in 35%
of treated children, HBeAg clearance in 10%, and normalization of serum transaminase
levels  in  39%  at  treatment  completion  (671).  Six  to  18  months  after  therapy
discontinuation,  29%  of  children  had  persistent  HBV  DNA,  and  23%  demonstrated
HBeAg  clearance.  Children  most  likely  to  respond  to  interferon  treatment  are  of
younger age, higher baseline serum transaminase levels, and lower baseline HBV DNA
levels  (659,672--674).  Response  is  less  likely  (10%)  in  those  with  normal  serum
transaminase levels, high HBV DNA levels, HBV genotypes C or D, or HBeAg-negative
chronic  HBV  infection.  Interferon-alfa  therapy  might  be  considered  to  treat  chronic
hepatitis B in HIV-coinfected children who do not require antiretroviral therapy for their
HIV infection (BIII). The standard course of interferon-alfa therapy for children without
HIV  infection  is  24  weeks.  Pegylated  interferon-alfa,  which  results  in  more  sustained
plasma interferon concentrations and can be administered by injection once weekly for
48  weeks,  has  proven  superior  to  standard  interferon-alfa  in  treating  HBV-infected
adults  (667,675).  However,  the  limited  data  on  use  of  pegylated  interferon-alfa  in
children  come  from  treatment  of  hepatitis  C  infection,  and  appropriate  dosing
information is not available for use of pegylated interferon-alfa to treat chronic hepatitis
B  in  children  (DIII)  (676--678).  Lamivudine  Lamivudine  (3TC)  is  an  oral  nucleoside
analogue  that  inhibits  HBV  replication.  It  is  approved  for  use  in  children  aged  2--17
years  who  have  compensated  liver  disease  from  chronic  hepatitis  B.  In  a
placebo-controlled trial in children who have chronic hepatitis B without HIV infection,
lamivudine  was  well  tolerated,  with  virologic  response  (clearance  of  HBV  DNA  and
HBeAg) in  23% of children  receiving  52 weeks of lamivudine therapy,  compared  with
13%  in  placebo  recipients  (679).  Response  rates  were  higher  (35%)  for  children  with
baseline  serum  transaminases  more  than  two  times  normal  (679).  In  a  2-year,
open-label extension of this study, 213 children who remained HBeAg-positive after 1
year of therapy were continued on lamivudine treatment; virologic response was seen
in  21%  of  the  original  lamivudine  recipients,  compared  with  30%  of  prior  placebo
recipients,  indicating  that  additional  clinical  response  could  occur  over  time  with
prolonged  treatment  (680).  However,  longer  duration  of  lamivudine  therapy  also  was
associated  with  progressive  development  of  lamivudine-resistant  HBV,  with  base  pair
substitutions at the tyrosine-methionine-aspartate-aspartate (YMDD) locus of HBV DNA
polymerase. Accordingly, lamivudine should not be used as a single agent for treatment
of chronic hepatitis B in HIV-infected children because of the risk for HIV resistance to
lamivudine
 (EIII);
 as
 discussed
 above,
 lamivudine
 should
 be
 used
 only
 in
HIV/HBV-coinfected children in combination with other antiretroviral drugs in a HAART
regimen (BIII). The dose of lamivudine required to treat HIV infection is higher than to
treat  pediatric  chronic  hepatitis  B  alone;  therefore,  the  higher  dose  of  lamivudine
should
 be
 used
 in
 HIV/HBV-coinfected
 children
 to
 avoid
 development
 of
lamivudine-resistant HIV (AIII). Lamivudine resistance should be suspected if HBV DNA
levels  increase  during  antiviral  therapy.  Such  increases  may  precede  increases  in
serum
 transaminase
 levels
 (hepatic
 flare)
 and
 liver
 decompensation
 (674).
Emtricitabine  Emtricitabine  is  structurally  similar  to  lamivudine  and  is  active  against
HBV  and  HIV,  although  not  approved  for  treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  B.  Like
lamivudine, emtricitabine also is associated with relatively rapid onset of HBV and HIV
drug resistance, and patients with suspected lamivudine resistance should be assumed
to  have  cross-resistance  to  emtricitabine.  Lamivudine  and  emtricitabine  should  be
considered interchangeable for treatment of chronic hepatitis B and not additive (BIII).
As  with  lamivudine,  emtricitabine  should  not  be  used  to  treat  chronic  hepatitis  B  in
coinfected children who are not being treated with combination antiretroviral therapy
for their HIV infection because of the risk for HIV-associated resistance mutations (EIII).
Adefovir Adefovir dipivoxil is an oral nucleotide analogue active against HBV. Although
active against HBV, adefovir has minimal anti-HIV activity, and HIV resistance has not
been observed in patients receiving a 10-mg daily dose of adefovir for 48 weeks (681).
HBV  resistance  to  adefovir  is  much  lower  than  in  lamivudine,  being  reported  as  2%
after 2 years, 4% after 3 years, and 18% after 4 years of therapy in adults (682). These
adefovir-associated  mutations  in  HBV  Pol  gene  result  in  only  a  modest  (threefold  to
eightfold) increase in the 50% inhibitory concentration and are partially cross-resistant
with  tenofovir.  Adefovir  is  now  FDA-approved  for  adults  who  require  treatment  for
chronic hepatitis B but do not yet require treatment for their HIV infection. Adefovir has
been studied in HIV/HBV-coinfected adults with lamivudine-resistant HBV infection, and
HBV  suppression  was  demonstrated  (681).  Safety  and  effectiveness  of  adefovir  for
treating  chronic  hepatitis  B  in  children  has  not  yet  been  established,  but  an  ongoing
randomized  clinical  trial  is  evaluating  its  use  in  HIV-uninfected  children  aged  2--17
years  who  have  chronic  hepatitis  B  (659).  Tenofovir  Tenofovir  is  a  nucleotide  analog
structurally  similar  to  adefovir  that  reduces  HBV  DNA  levels  in  adults  with
lamivudine-resistant and wild-type HBV infection. A study in HIV/HBV-coinfected adults
receiving stable antiretroviral therapy comparing treatment with tenofovir or adefovir
found similar efficacy in suppression of HBV DNA without differences in toxicity (683).
Another study of HIV/HBV-coinfected adults receiving tenofovir in addition to lamivudine
as part of their antiretroviral regimen found that HBV DNA became undetectable in 30%
of  HBeAg-positive  and  82%  of  HBeAg-negative  patients,  most  of  whom  had
lamivudine-resistant HBV infection (681). As noted earlier, tenofovir is not approved for
use in HIV-infected children aged <18 years, and no pediatric formulation is available.
However, for HIV/HBV-coinfected adolescents who require treatment of both infections
and who can receive adult doses, tenofovir in combination with an anti-HBV nucleoside
(either lamivudine or emtricitabine) can be considered for treatment (BIII); a combined
formulation  of  emtricitabine  and  tenofovir  (Truvada)  is  available  for  adults.  As  with
lamivudine  and  emtricitabine,  tenofovir  should  not  be  used  for  treatment  of  chronic
hepatitis B in HIV-coinfected patients who are not receiving combination antiretroviral
therapy  for  their  HIV  infection  because  of  the  risk  for  HIV-associated  resistance
mutations  (EIII).  Entecavir  Entecavir  is  an  oral  nucleoside  analogue  that  inhibits  HBV
DNA polymerase. Compared with lamivudine, entecavir therapy results in greater HBV
viral suppression, increased normalization of serum transaminase levels, improved liver
histology, and lower HBV resistance rates (684). HBV viral suppression also has been
demonstrated  in  HIV/HBV-coinfected  adults.  Entecavir  treatment  is  approved  for
treatment of chronic hepatitis B in adults and is preferred for lamivudine-resistant HBV
infections. However, it recently was demonstrated to have suppressive activity against
HIV  (685).  Entecavir  should  not  be  used  in  HIV/HBV-coinfected  patients  who  are  not
receiving  combination  antiretroviral  therapy  for  their  HIV  infection.  No  data  are
available  on  safety  and  efficacy  of  entecavir  in  children.  Telbivudine  Telbivudine  is  a
thymidine nucleoside analogue that was approved to treat chronic hepatitis B in adults.
It is well tolerated, but like lamivudine, resistance emerges over time, and telbivudine is
not  active  against  lamivudine-resistant  HBV.  No  data  are  available  on  telbivudine  in
HIV/HBV-coinfected  adults.  No  data  on  children  exist  on  safety  and  efficacy  of
telbivudine. Duration of therapy The optimal duration of therapy in HIV/HBV-coinfected
children  is  not  known.  The  duration  of  interferon-alfa  treatment  in  HIV-uninfected
children with chronic hepatitis B is 6 months. At least 1 year of lamivudine therapy is
recommended  for  HIV-uninfected  children  who  have  chronic  hepatitis  B,  with
continuation  of  medication  for  ≥6  months  after  documented  HBeAg  seroconversion
(659). However, because lamivudine would be administered only to HIV/HBV-coinfected
children who need HIV treatment and as part of a suppressive antiretroviral regimen,
treatment  with  lamivudine  (or  other  anti-HBV  drugs  with  anti-HIV  activity)  should  be
continued  indefinitely  in  children  with  HIV/HBV  coinfection,  even  in  the  instance  of
HBeAg  seroconversion  (CIII).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS  The
parameters  of  successful  therapy  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  are  not  well  defined,  but
markers  of  improvement  include  decreased  hepatic  necroinflammatory  disease,
normalization of serum transaminase levels, reduction of HBV DNA levels, and HBeAg
seroconversion.  In  children  starting  treatment  for  chronic  hepatitis  B,  serum
transaminase  levels  should  be  measured  every  3--6  months.  If  the  child  also  is
beginning  HAART,  some  experts  would  monitor  transaminase  levels  more  frequently
during the first few months of therapy (e.g., monthly for 3 months) because of the risk
for IRIS (see below). Monitoring of response to treatment for chronic hepatitis B is based
on  testing  for  HBV  DNA  and  HBeAg  and  anti-HBe  antibody  on  the  same  schedule  as
transaminase  evaluations  (every  3--6  months).  Among  HBeAg-positive  persons,
treatment for chronic hepatitis B should be continued until HBeAg seroconversion has
been  achieved  and  ≥6  months  of  additional  treatment  has  been  completed  after  the
appearance of anti-HBe (BIII). Close monitoring for relapse is needed after withdrawal of
therapy. Among persons who are HBeAg negative, treatment should be continued until
HBsAg  clearance  has  been  achieved.  In  HIV/HBV-coinfected  persons  starting  HAART,
serum  transaminase  elevations  ("flares")  can  occur  as  part  of  IRIS  or  secondary  to
HAART-associated  hepatotoxicity.  HBV-associated  liver  injury  is  thought  to  be
immune-mediated, and restoration of immunocompetence with antiretroviral treatment
may  reactivate  liver  inflammation  and  damage.  Initiation  of  HAART  without  anti-HBV
therapy can lead to reactivation of HBV. This does not represent a failure of HAART but
rather  a  sign  of  immune  reconstitution.  IRIS  manifests  by  an  increase  in  serum
transaminase levels as the CD4 count increases during the first 6--12 weeks of HAART.
Thus,  serum  transaminase  levels  should  be  monitored  closely  after  introduction  of
HAART. In such situtations, HAART should be continued and treatment for HBV initiated.
The prognosis for most IRIS cases is favorable because a robust inflammatory response
may  predict  an  excellent  response  to  HAART  in  terms  of  immune  reconstitution  and,
perhaps,  improved  survival.  In  a  patient  experiencing  a  hepatic  flare,  differentiating
between IRIS and drug-induced liver toxicity may be difficult, and no reliable clinical or
laboratory  predictor  exists  to  distinguish  between  the  two.  Close  collaboration  of  the
HIV specialist with a specialist in hepatic disease is recommended for such patients; a
hepatologist  should  be  consulted  promptly  if  elevated  aminotransferases  levels  are
associated with clinical jaundice or other evidence of liver dysfunction (e.g., low serum
albumin). Clinical and laboratory exacerbations of hepatitis and hepatic flare can occur
in  children  receiving  HAART  if  agents  with  anti-HBV  activity  are  discontinued.  Some
experts  recommend  that  once  antiretroviral  drugs  with  anti-HBV  activity  are  begun,
they should be continued unless contraindicated or until the child has been treated for
>6  months  after  HBeAg  seroconversion  and  can  be  closely  monitored  after
discontinuation  (BIII).  If  discontinuation  of  therapy  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  results  in
hepatic  flare,  therapy  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  should  be  reinstituted  (BIII).  Some
clinicians  recommend  monitoring  HBV-infected  children  or  adolescents  for  HCC  with
baseline  screening  and  then  yearly  determinations  of  serum  alpha  fetoprotein  levels
and  abdominal  ultrasonography;  however,  no  data  support  the  benefit  of  such
surveillance  (641,657,659,660).  Adverse  effects  of  interferon-alfa  use  in  children,
although frequent, usually are not severe or permanent; however, approximately 5% of
children  require  treatment  discontinuation.  The  most  common  side  effects  include  an
influenza-like  syndrome,  cytopenias,  and  neuropsychiatric  effects.  Influenza-like
symptoms  comprising  fever,  chills,  headache,  myalgia,  arthralgia,  abdominal  pain,
nausea, and vomiting are seen in 80% of patients during the first month of treatment.
These  side  effects  decrease  substantially  during  the  first  4  months  of  therapy;
premedication  with  acetaminophen  or  ibuprofen  might  reduce  side  effects.  Subtle
personality changes, which resolve when therapy is discontinued, have been reported
in 42% of children (686). Depression and suicidal ideation have also been reported in
clinical trials of children treated with interferon-alfa (687). Neutropenia, which resolves
after discontinuation of therapy, is the most common laboratory abnormality; anemia
and
 thrombocytopenia
 are
 less
 common.
 Abnormalities
 in
 thyroid
 function
(hypothyroidism  or  hyperthyroidism)  have  been  reported  with  interferon-alfa  therapy
(688).  Loss  of  appetite  with  transient  weight  loss  and  impaired  height  growth  might
occur but usually resolves after completion of therapy (689). Less commonly observed
side effects of interferon-alfa include epistaxis and transient mild alopecia. Antinuclear
autoantibodies  have  been  detected  in  some  children  treated  with  interferon-alfa.
Interferon-alfa  therapy  is  contraindicated  for  children  with  decompensated  liver
disease;  severe  cytopenia;  severe  renal,  cardiac,  or  neuropsychiatric  disorders;  and
autoimmune  disease  (EII)  (690).  Elevation  of  serum  transaminase  levels  has  been
reported  during  interferon-alfa  therapy  in  children  and  adults  but  usually  is  not  an
indication  to  stop  therapy;  these  flares  may  herald  impending  HBeAg  seroconversion
(659). Children receiving interferon-alfa therapy should be monitored with a complete
blood count and serum level of thyroid stimulating hormone at baseline and periodically
(e.g.,  at  least  every  3  months)  for  the  duration  of  treatment.  Lamivudine  usually  is
well-tolerated  in  children;  rare  cases  of  lactic  acidosis  and  pancreatitis  have  been
reported in HIV/HBV-coinfected adults. Tenofovir and adefovir can cause renal tubular
disease.  Patients  receiving  either  drug  should  have  baseline  urinalysis  and  periodic
serum creatinine and phosphate monitoring. Administration of other nephrotoxic agents
increases the risk for renal toxicity. Management of Treatment Failure Treatment failure
is defined as ongoing HBV replication, persistent serum transaminase elevations, and
the failure of HBeAg seroconversion in HBeAg-positive persons. Flares of liver disease
with  increasing  HBV  DNA  levels  can  be  seen  with  the  development  of  resistance  to
lamivudine  or  emtricitabine.  In  some  children  who  have  received  initial  treatment  for
chronic hepatitis B with standard-dose interferon-alfa monotherapy, use of higher-dose
interferon-alfa for retreatment improves response (665,691,692). Lamivudine has also
been  used  as  secondary  therapy  for  children  without  HIV  infection  who  have  not
responded to standard interferon-alfa therapy (CII) (693--695); in HIV-infected children,
initiation  of  a  lamivudine-based  HAART  regimen  could  be  considered  (CIII).  For
HIV/HBV-coinfected
 children
 developing
 lamivudine
 resistance
 during
 therapy,
treatment  options  are  more  limited  because  of  the  lack  of  data  on  use  of  adefovir,
entecavir,  and  tenofovir  in  children.  Because  these  HBV  drug-resistant  isolates  may
have  lower  replicative  capacity  than  wild-type  HBV,  some  experts  recommend
continuing lamivudine or emtricitabine therapy in such cases. Alternatively, the addition
of  interferon-alfa  therapy  could  be  considered  or,  in  children  old  enough  to  receive
adult  doses  of  tenofovir  or  adefovir,  addition  of  tenofovir  or  adefovir  to  the  regimen
could  be  considered  (CIII).  Not  applicable.  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  Not
applicable. In the United States, the prevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is
0.2% among children aged 1--11 years and 0.4% among adolescents aged 12--19 years
(696,697). The prevalence of HCV infection among HIV-infected children may be higher.
In a serostudy of 535 HIV-infected children followed in pediatric HIV clinical trials, the
prevalence  of  HCV  infection  by  HCV  antibody  and  RNA  testing  was  1.5%  (698).  In  a
more recent study of 228 HIV-infected children at an inner-city hospital in the Bronx,
seven  HIV-infected  children  had  chronic  HCV  infection  (3.1%  [95%  CI:  1.4%--6.5%]),
defined  as  a  reactive  HCV  antibody  and  positive  HCV  real-time  PCR  (646).  The  mean
age of HIV/HCV-coinfected children was 16 years, and 57% had mild elevation (up to
twofold  above  upper  limit  of  normal)  in  serum  transaminase  levels.  Mother-to-child
transmission is the predominant mode of HCV acquisition in children (699,700). Other
potential  sources  of  HCV  infection  in  older  children  include  injection-drug  use,  body
piercing,  tattoos,  unintentional  needlestick  injury,  household  contact,  and  sexual
exposure  (701,702).  Before  1992,  blood  transfusion  was  a  source  of  HCV  infection  in
children; a recent retrospective study found that 3% of infants who had received blood
transfusions in a neonatal intensive-care unit during 1975--1992 were anti-HCV-positive
(703).  However,  the  incidence  of  HCV  infection  from  transfusion  has  dramatically
declined  since  1992,  when  second-generation  HCV  EIA  screening  was  implemented.
With  the  current  additional  use  of  nucleic  acid  amplification  testing,  the  risk  for  HCV
infection through transfusion is approximately 1 per 2 million (704). The overall risk for
mother-to-infant  transmission  of  HCV  from  a  woman  infected  with  HCV  alone  ranges
from 4% to 10% (699,705--712). The primary risk factor for perinatal HCV transmission
is  maternal  HCV  viremia  at  delivery,  although  an  absolute  threshold  for  HCV
transmission  has  not  been  identified  (706,713--717).  Data  do  not  indicate  that  HCV
genotype  is  related  to  risk  for  perinatal  HCV  transmission  (706,712).  Although  a  few
studies  have  suggested  that  vaginal  delivery  increases  risk  for  HCV  transmission
(705,707,709,713)  and  that  HCV  can  be  transmitted  during  the  intrapartum  period
(718), most studies have found mode of delivery does not appear to influence perinatal
HCV  transmission  (700,707,708,710,719--722).  Additionally,  even  though  HCV  can  be
detected  in  breast  milk,  studies  of  infants  born  to  HCV-infected  women  have  not
demonstrated a higher HCV transmission risk for breast-fed infants than for formula-fed
infants  (700,705--708,710,716,718,719,723).  Maternal  HIV  coinfection  increases  the
risk  for  perinatal  transmission,  with  perinatal  HCV  transmission  rates  of  6%--23%
reported
 for
 infants
 born
 to
 women
 coinfected
 with
 HCV
 and
 HIV
(699,705--707,711,717,720--722,724--729).  Furthermore,  a  few  studies  suggest  that
children who acquire perinatal HIV infection may be more likely than children who did
not  acquire  HIV  to  acquire  HCV  infection  from  HIV/HCV-coinfected  mothers
(720,721,727,729). Reported dual virus transmission has been reported in 4%--10% of
children  born  to  HIV/HCV-coinfected  mothers  (705,720,725,727,728).  HCV  RNA  levels
are hypothesized to be higher among women coinfected with HIV than women infected
with HCV alone, which could account in part for the increased risk for mother-to-child
HCV transmission from HIV/HCV-coinfected women; however, not all studies have found
higher levels of HCV viremia among HIV-infected mothers (715,721,724). One European
study suggested that HCV perinatal transmission may be reduced among HIV-infected
women receiving HAART (722). Chronic HCV infection, defined as the presence of HCV
RNA  for  >6  months,  appears  to  spontaneously  resolve  in  15%--40%  of  adults  (730).
Findings  from  a  limited  number  of  longitudinal  studies  suggest  that  HCV  infection
resolves  spontaneously  in  17%--59%  of  children  with  perinatal  HCV  infection
(731--736). Viral clearance occurs by age 3 years in most children and may be more
frequent  in  children  infected  with  HCV  genotype  3  (735,737).  Children  with  perinatal
HCV infection appear to have a more benign clinical course than do adults with newly
acquired  HCV  infection  (701,738,739).  Most  HCV-infected  children  are  asymptomatic,
with minor abnormalities, such as hepatomegaly, or mild nonspecific symptoms, such
as  fatigue,  myalgias,  and  poor  weight  gain  (701,739,740);  however,  intermittent
asymptomatic elevations in transaminase levels are common during the first 2 years of
life (734,740,741). In a large European cohort of HCV-infected children, about 20% of
children  had  apparent  clearance  of  HCV  viremia;  50%  had  chronic  asymptomatic
infection, characterized by intermittent viremia, rare hepatomegaly, and usually normal
liver transaminase levels; and 30% had chronic active infection with persistent viremia
and  abnormal  transaminase  levels  (735).  Histopathologic  inflammatory  changes  of
chronic hepatitis may be present in persons with chronic HCV infection despite lack of
symptoms, normal serum transaminase levels, and low HCV RNA levels (740). However,
most  children  with  chronic  HCV  infection  who  have  undergone  liver  biopsy  and  are
included  in  published  studies  typically  have  mild-to-moderate  liver  disease  as
determined  by  signs  of  structural  alterations,  inflammatory  activity,  and  necrosis
(701,715,739,741). A small subset of children may develop more severe liver disease.
In a study of 60 children with perinatally acquired or transfusion-acquired HCV infection
who were infected for a mean duration of 13 years, 12% had significant fibrosis on liver
biopsy
 (739).
 Older
 age
 at
 time
 of
 infection
 and
 elevated
 serum
gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase  correlated  with  fibrosis;  serum  transaminase  levels
correlated with inflammation (739). In HIV/HCV-coinfected adults, the natural history of
HCV  infection  appears  to  be  accelerated,  with  more  rapid  progression  to  cirrhosis,
decompensated  liver  disease,  HCC,  and  death  (742,743).  Data  are  minimal  on  the
effect of HIV/HCV coinfection on the natural history of HCV infection in children and are
insufficient  to  draw  conclusions  about  HCV  disease  progression  in  coinfected  children
(699). Data on the impact of HCV infection on HIV disease progression in adults conflict;
some  studies  suggest  higher  rates  of  HIV  progression,  and  others  do  not  (699).  The
effect of pediatric  coinfection  on  HIV disease progression  also  is unclear because the
number  of  coinfected  children  is  small,  and  few  studies  have  evaluated  this.  Two
studies  of  children  with  perinatal  HIV/HCV  coinfection  found  no  increase  in  HIV
progression, but a study of older HIV/HCV-coinfected children with thalassemia infected
through transfusion observed more rapid disease progression and higher mortality than
in  children  infected  only  with  HIV  (720,728,744).  Testing  for  HCV  infection  should  be
considered for any child whose mother is known to have HCV infection. All HIV-infected
adults  or  adolescents  should  be  tested  for  HCV  infection.  Serologic  and  nucleic  acid
tests are used to diagnose HCV infection. HCV RNA first becomes detectable 1--3 weeks
after HCV infection and precedes serologic response to HCV (730). A third-generation
EIA is available for detecting antibody to HCV (anti-HCV). Passively transferred maternal
anti-HCV can be detected for up to 18 months in infants born to HCV-infected mothers.
In a large cohort of HCV-exposed but HCV-uninfected children, anti-HCV was present in
15% of children at 12 months, 5% at 15 months, and 2% at 18 months (715). Therefore,
only the presence of persistent HCV viremia can be used to reliably verify HCV infection
in  at-risk  infants  aged  <18  months  (745).  HCV  infection  can  be  diagnosed  in  such
infants using a nucleic acid test to detect HCV RNA after 1 month of age; the sensitivity
of the HCV RNA testing is low at birth (22%), but increases to 85% at 6 months (746).
Most children with perinatal HCV infection will have a positive HCV RNA test by age 12
months. However, because of intermittent viremia, a single negative HCV RNA test is
not conclusive evidence of lack of infection, and HCV RNA should be tested on at least
two  occasions  between  age  2  months  and  6  months  to  definitively  exclude  HCV
infection in an HCV-exposed infant (746). A positive anti-HCV test in a child aged >18
months indicates HCV infection. Supplemental testing with a more specific assay, such
as HCV RNA testing, is recommended to prevent the reporting of a false-positive result.
A positive HCV RNA test confirms HCV infection and, if positive for >6 months, suggests
chronic infection. HCV RNA can be measured qualitatively or quantitatively. Qualitative
nucleic  acid  tests  include  qualitative  PCR  and  transcription-mediated  amplification.
Quantitative  tests  include  branched-chain  DNA  amplification,  quantitative  PCR,  and
real-time PCR and are most useful for monitoring response to anti-HCV therapy (730).
Quantitative HCV RNA level (i.e., HCV viral load) does not correlate with degree of liver
damage and does not serve as a surrogate for measuring disease severity, but it does
provide  important  information  about  the  response  to  antiviral  therapy.  Assays  vary
substantially,  and  if  serial  values  are  required  to  monitor  antiviral  therapy,  continued
use of the same quantitative assay for all assessments is strongly recommended. Liver
biopsy  is  the  most  accurate  test  to  assess  the  severity  of  hepatic  disease  and
quantitate  the  amount  of  hepatic  fibrosis  present.  A  liver  biopsy  may  be  useful  for
determining whether to initiate therapy for chronic HCV infection (652,657). However,
liver  biopsy  is  not  required  before  the  initiation  of  anti-HCV  therapy,  particularly  in
patients with a high probability of responding to therapy. At least six HCV genotypes
are  known,  with  genotype  1  occurring  most  commonly  in  the  United  States  (730).
Persons  with  HCV  genotypes  2  and  3  are  more  likely  than  those  with  genotype  1  to
achieve  sustained  virologic  response  to  anti-HCV  therapy;  thus,  results  from  a  liver
biopsy may be less likely to affect decisions about the need for treatment in patients
with genotypes 2 or 3 (657,687). Prevention of Exposure All HIV-infected persons should
be screened for HCV. No reliable strategy exists to prevent perinatal HCV transmission.
Cesarean  delivery  is  not  associated  with  reduced  perinatal  transmission  of  HCV
infection  and  is  not  recommended  for  this  purpose  for  women  with  chronic  HCV
infection  who  are  HIV-uninfected.  Scheduled  cesarean  delivery  is  recommended  for
HIV-infected  women  who  have  HIV  RNA  levels  >1000  copies/mL  near  delivery  to
prevent perinatal HIV transmission (AII). Limited data suggest that breast-feeding does
not  transmit  HCV.  However,  to  prevent  HIV  transmission  in  the  United  States,  where
safe infant formula is available, HIV-infected women should not breast-feed (AII) (747).
No vaccines are available to prevent HCV infection. Adolescents considering tattooing
or  body-piercing  should  be  informed  about  potential  risks  for  acquiring  HCV,  which
could be transmitted if equipment is not sterile or if proper infection-control procedures
are  not  followed,  and  to  avoid  injection-drug  use  and  unprotected  sex  (BIII)  (748).
HCV-infected persons should be advised not to share toothbrushes, razors, and other
personal-care articles that might be contaminated with blood to prevent transmission of
HCV. Preventing First Episode of Disease Patients with chronic liver disease can develop
fulminant hepatitis from hepatitis A or B infection; all children (regardless of HIV and
HCV  infection  status)  should  receive  standard  vaccination  with  hepatitis  A  and  B
vaccines  (AIII)  (39,40,748).  Treatment  of  Disease  Published  studies  are  limited  on
treatment  recommendations  for  HCV-infected  children.  Current  pediatric  trials  in  the
United
 States---including
 the
 PEDS-C
 study,
 a
 randomized,
 double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of pegylated interferon-alfa with and without ribavirin---should
provide additional data. Data on treating children coinfected with HCV and HIV are even
more limited. Consultation with experts in treating chronic HCV infection in children is
recommended.  HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults  and  adolescents  Treatment  should  be
considered in any nonpregnant HCV-infected adult, regardless of HIV coinfection status,
who  has  abnormal  serum  transaminase  levels  with  a  liver  biopsy  showing  chronic
hepatitis  with  significant  fibrosis  and  compenstated  liver  disease  (749).  Treatment
should  be  considered  for  HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults  for  whom  potential  benefits  of
treatment  are  judged  to  outweigh  potential  risks,  including  those  infected  with  HCV
genotype 2 or 3, those with stable HIV infection not requiring antiretroviral therapy, and
those with cryoglobulinemic vasculitis or glomerulonephritis (652,750). Baseline serum
HCV RNA level and HCV genotype are the primary predictors of response to treatment;
younger age, higher CD4 count, elevated transaminase levels, lack of liver fibrosis, low
body  mass  index,  lack  of  insulin  resistance,  and  white  race  are  other  variables
associated  with  better  treatment  response  (750).  The  recommended  treatment  is
combined  pegylated-interferon-alfa-2a  or-2b  plus  daily  oral  ribavirin  for  48  weeks
regardless of HCV genotype. In HIV/HCV-coinfected adults, rates of sustained virologic
response range from 44% to 73% for treatment of HCV genotype 2 and 3 infection and
from  14%  to  29%  for  HCV  genotype  1  infection  (641,751,752).  Although  some
preliminary  data  from  clinical  treatment  trials  suggest  better  rates  of  sustained
virologic response, these may result from better preselection of patients for therapy or
improved  adherence  after  dose  adjustment(s).  Response  to  anti-HCV  treatment
improves  in  HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults  with  CD4  count  >200  cells/mm3;  therefore,
HAART should be considered before anti-HCV therapy is initiated in HIV/HCV-coinfected
patients  with  CD4  count  <200  cells/mm3.  Anti-HCV  treatment  usually  is  not
recommended  during  pregnancy  for  HCV-infected  women  because  ribavirin  is
teratogenic.  HCV-infected  children  without  HIV  infection  Treatment  of  HIV-uninfected
children aged <3 years who have HCV infection usually is not recommended because
spontaneous  HCV  clearance  can  occur  in  this  age  group  (DIII).  All  decisions  about
treatment  of  HCV  infection  in  children  should  be  individualized  because  HCV  usually
causes mild disease in children, and few data exist to identify risk factors differentiating
those  at  greater  risk  for  progression  of  liver  disease  (641,753).  The  only  currently
FDA-approved  therapy  for  HCV-infected  children  aged  3--17  years  with  compensated
liver  disease  is  combined  standard  interferon-alfa-2b  and  ribavirin.  Standard
interferon-alfa  is  administered  by  subcutaneous  injection  three  times  per  week.
Ribavirin oral solution has been approved for treatment of chronic HCV infection among
children  aged  ≥3  years.  For  HIV-uninfected  children  with  HCV  infection,  a  24-week
course  of  therapy  is  recommended  for  genotypes  2  and  3;  48-week  courses  are
administered
 for
 other
 HCV
 genotypes.
 Combination
 therapy
 with
 standard
interferon-alfa  and  ribavirin  results  in  overall  rates  of  sustained  virologic  response  of
46%--65%  and  is  well-tolerated  in  children  (657,687,754--757).  Similar  to  adults,
children  infected  with  genotype  1  were  less  likely  to  have  a  sustained  virologic
response  (36%)  than  those  infected  with  genotype  2  or  3  (84%)  (687).  Other  factors
associated  with  favorable  response  to  anti-HCV  treatment  in  children  include  lower
pretreatment  HCV  RNA  levels,  white  race,  and  possibly  younger  age  (657).
HIV/HCV-coinfected children No specific treatment studies have been done of children
with  HIV/HCV-coinfection,  and  recommendations  are  based  primarily  on  data  from
adults.  Because  therapy  for  HCV  infection  is  more  likely  to  be  effective  in  younger
patients and in those without advanced disease or immunodeficiency, treatment should
be  considered  for  all  HIV/HCV-coinfected  individuals,  including  HIV-infected  children
aged  >3  years  who  have  no  contraindications  to  treatment  (BIII).  Some  specialists
would treat children infected with HCV genotypes 2 or 3 without first obtaining a liver
biopsy (BIII). Pegylated interferon-alfa, which is administered by injection once weekly
for 48 weeks combined with ribavirin, is recommended for treatment of HCV infection in
adults. However, pegylated interferon-alfa is not FDA-approved for use in HCV-infected
children---although  it  is  under  study.  On  the  basis  of  the  increased  efficacy  of
combination therapy with ribavirin and either standard or pegylated interferon-alfa and
on  data  from  adults,  treatment  of  HCV-infected  children,  regardless  of  HIV  status,
should  include  combination  therapy  with  ribavirin  and  interferon-alfa  (BIII).  In
HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults,  the  recommended  duration  of  treatment  is  48  weeks  for
infections with all HCV genotypes, including 2 and 3, because coinfected adults may not
respond  as  well  as  those  without  HIV  infection  and  may  have  greater  relapse  rates.
Moreover,  the  efficacy  of  shorter  treatment  duration  has  not  been  adequately
evaluated in HIV-infected persons (750). By extrapolation, 48 weeks of therapy also are
recommended  for  HIV/HCV-coinfected  children  (BIII).  Potential  drug  interactions
complicate  the  concomitant  use  of  antiretroviral  therapy  and  anti-HCV  therapy.
Ribavirin  enhances  phosphorylation  of  didanosine,  which  could  increase  the  risk  for
toxicity;  therefore,  these  drugs  should  not  be  used  together  (EIII).  Ribavirin  and
zidovudine  both  are  associated  with  anemia  and,  when  possible,  should  not  be
administered  together  (DII)  (750).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS
Although  no  evidence-based  long-term  monitoring  guidelines  exist  for  children  with
perinatally  acquired  HCV,  many  experts  monitor  HCV  RNA  levels  and  serum
transaminase  levels  every  6--12  months  and  hemogram  and  serum  alpha  fetoprotein
levels annually (748). Serum transaminase levels can fluctuate and do not necessarily
correlate with histologic liver damage because significant liver disease can be present
in  patients  with  normal  serum  transaminase  levels.  In  HCV-infected  persons  without
HIV,  HCC  rarely  is  seen  in  the  absence  of  cirrhosis.  The  benefits  of  serum  alpha
fetoprotein  and  abdominal  sonography  as  screening  tools  for  HCC  have  not  been
studied  in  children.  Some  experts  will  perform  periodic  sonographic  screening  at
defined intervals (every 2--5 years) in children with chronic HCV infection; others will do
these  tests  only  in  those  with  advanced  liver  disease  and/or  rising  serum  alpha
fetoprotein  concentrations  (748).  The  risk  for  HCC  in  HCV-infected  children,  with  or
without HIV infection, is not known. HCV RNA quantitation is used to monitor response
to antiviral therapy. HCV RNA levels should be performed at baseline, after 12 and 24
weeks  of  antiviral  therapy,  at  treatment  completion  (48  weeks),  and  6  months  after
treatment cessation. Some experts continue to perform serial HCV RNA testing at 6- to
12-month  intervals  for  an  additional  1--5  years  to  exclude  late  virologic  relapse.
Decreases in HCV RNA ≥2 logs below the baseline during the first 12 weeks of therapy
constitute an early virologic response (730). A sustained virologic response is defined
as  absence  of  detectable  HCV  RNA  using  an  HCV  RNA  assay  with  a  lower  limit  of
detection of ≥50 IU/mL at 24 weeks after antiviral treatment ends. Relapse is defined
as  HCV  RNA  rebound  at  the  end  of  therapy  after  an  initial  response  to  undetectable
HCV  RNA  levels.  Nonresponse  is  defined  as  failure  to  suppress  HCV  RNA  below
detection at any time during treatment; breakthrough is the reemergence of detectable
HCV  RNA  after  suppression  below  the  limits  of  detection  despite  the  continuation  of
therapy. In the absence of data from HIV/HCV-coinfected children, the same criteria for
determining  response  to  therapy  in  HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults  should  be  used.  If  an
early virologic response is observed after the first 12 weeks of treatment, completion of
additional HCV therapy is recommended. Adults who do not achieve an early virologic
response  by  week  12  have  a  limited  chance  (<3%)  of  achieving  sustained  virologic
response, regardless of duration of therapy, and treatment can be discontinued after 12
weeks in such patients. Persons who achieve a ≥2 log10 reduction in HCV RNA level but
who  have  detectable  HCV  RNA  after  12  weeks  of  therapy  should  be  retested  after
completion  of  24  weeks  of  therapy.  If  HCV  RNA  remains  detectable  after  24  weeks,
anti-HCV treatment should be stopped, whereas an additional 24 weeks of therapy is
indicated (total 48 weeks) if HCV RNA is not detected at that time. Persons who achieve
an  undetectable  HCV  RNA  level  after  12  weeks  of  therapy  should  complete  an
additional  36  weeks  of  anti-HCV  treatment  (total  48  weeks).  In  addition  to  HCV  RNA
quantitation,  patients  receiving  antiviral  therapy  for  HCV  infection  should  be  closely
monitored for medication side effects with complete blood count, serum transaminase
levels, and tests of thyroid function. If the child also is initiating HAART, some experts
would  monitor  transaminase  levels  more  frequently  during  the  first  few  months  of
therapy  (e.g.,  monthly  for  3  months)  because  of  the  risk  for  IRIS  (see  below).  Side
effects  of  interferon-alfa  in  children,  although  frequent,  usually  are  not  severe;
approximately 5% of children require treatment discontinuation because of side effects.
The  most  common  side  effects  include  influenza-like  symptoms  (e.g.,  fever,  chills,
headache,  myalgias,  arthralgias,  abdominal  pain,  nausea,  and  vomiting)  in  80%  of
patients during the first month of treatment. However, these symptoms usually resolve
over time and usually are not treatment-limiting; premedication with acetaminophen or
ibuprofen might reduce the incidence of side effects. Subtle personality changes that
resolve  when  therapy  is  discontinued  have  been  reported  in  42%  of  children  (686).
Depression  and  suicidal  ideation  also  have  been  reported  in  clinical  trials  of  children
treated with interferon-alfa (687). Neutropenia, which resolves after discontinuation of
therapy,  is  the  most  common  laboratory  abnormality;  anemia  and  thrombocytopenia
are less common. Abnormalities in thyroid function (hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism)
have been reported with interferon-alfa therapy (688). Loss of appetite, with transient
weight loss and impaired height growth, can occur but usually resolves after completion
of  therapy  (689).  Less  commonly  observed  side  effects  of  interferon-alfa  include
epistaxis  and  transient  mild  alopecia.  Certain  children  have  developed  antinuclear
autoantibodies.
 Interferon-alfa
 therapy
 is
 contraindicated
 for
 children
 with
decompensated  liver  disease;  substantial  cytopenias;  severe  renal,  cardiac,  or
neuropsychiatric disorders; and autoimmune disease (EII) (690). Side effects of ribavirin
include  hemolytic  anemia  and  lymphopenia.  Ribavirin-induced  hemolytic  anemia  is
dose-dependent and usually presents with a substantial decrease in hemoglobin within
1--2 weeks after ribavirin initiation, but the trend usually stabilizes. Significant anemia
(hemoglobin <10 g/dL) occurs in about 10% of ribavirin-treated children (753). Use of
erythropoietin for managing clinically significant anemia during HCV treatment can be
considered (BIII). Coadministration of didanosine is contraindicated in children receiving
ribavirin because this combination can increase the risk for mitochondrial toxicity and
hepatic decompensation (EIII). Children receiving concomitant zidovudine may be more
likely to experience bone marrow suppression; if possible, zidovudine should be avoided
in  children  receiving  ribavirin  (DIII).  If  zidovudine  and  ribavirin  are  administered
together, the child should be monitored closely for neutropenia and anemia. Ribavirin is
teratogenic  and  should  not  be  used  in  pregnant  women.  Sexually  active  adolescent
boys  and  girls  or  those  likely  to  become  sexually  active  who  are  receiving  ribavirin
should be counseled about the risks and need for consistent contraceptive use during,
and for 6 months after completion of, ribavirin therapy. As with HIV/HBV coinfection, the
institution of HAART in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients can worsen hepatitis, with increases
in serum transaminase levels and clinical signs of liver disease, including hepatomegaly
and jaundice. This does not represent a failure of HAART but rather a sign of immune
reconstitution. IRIS manifests by an increase in serum transaminase levels as the CD4
count increases during the first 6--12 weeks of HAART. Thus, serum transaminase levels
should be monitored closely after introduction of HAART in HIV/HCV-coinfected children.
The prognosis for most persons with IRIS is favorable because a robust inflammatory
response  may  predict  an  excellent  response  to  HAART  in  terms  of  immune
reconstitution  and,  perhaps,  improved  survival.  In  a  patient  experiencing  a  hepatic
flare, differentiating between IRIS and drug-induced liver toxicity may be difficult, and
no reliable clinical or laboratory predictors exist to distinguish between the two. Close
interaction of the HIV specialist with a specialist in hepatic disease is recommended for
such  patients;  prompt  consultation  with  a  hepatologist  should  be  sought  if  elevated
aminotransferases  are  associated  with  clinical  jaundice  or  other  evidence  of  liver
dysfunction (e.g., low serum albumin). Management of Treatment Failure No data exist
on  which  to  base  recommendations  for  treatment  of  HIV/HCV-coinfected  children  or
adults  in  whom  initial  HCV  treatment  fails.  In  HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults,  a  second
course  of  treatment  for  nonresponders  (those  who  do  not  achieve  early  virologic
response  by  week  12  or  undetectable  HCV  load  at  week  24)  or  patients  whose  HCV
relapses has limited chances of resulting in sustained virologic response. Therapeutic
interventions  for  such  patients  need  to  be  individualized  according  to  prior  response,
tolerance, and adherence to therapy; severity of liver disease; viral genotype; and other
underlying  factors  that  might  influence  response.  Some  experts  might  extend  the
duration of treatment (e.g., to 72 weeks) for adults who experience a virologic response
followed by relapse after adequate HCV therapy or for patients with advanced fibrosis,
long-term  administration  of  low-dose  pegylated  interferon.  No  data  exist  for
HIV/HCV-coinfected  children  on  which  to  base  a  recommendation.  Prevention  of
Recurrence Not applicable. Discontinuing Secondary Prophylaxis Not applicable. Human
herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) and herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7) are closely related members of the
Roseolovirus genus of herpesviruses. Humans are the only known natural host for these
two viruses. The cellular reservoir is believed to be peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) and possibly epithelial cells of the salivary glands and the bronchial tree. The
infection  is  believed  to  be  transmitted  primarily  through  saliva;  sexual  transmission
may occur, and presumptive in utero infection has been described. Reactivation, with
salivary  shedding,  occurs  frequently  among  immunocompetent  children  and  adults
(758). HHV-6 has two subtypes, A and B. HHV-6B is the etiologic agent of most primary
infections;  HHV-6A  has  been  linked  to  neurologic  syndromes.  The  vast  majority  of
children  become  infected  with  HHV-6  early  in  childhood,  with  70%--90%  of  children
HHV-6 seropositive by age 2 years, and virtually 100% by age 3 years (759,760). In a
large  prospective  study  of  North  American  children,  the  peak  age  of  acquisition  of
HHV-6  was  6--9  months  (761).  Such  infection  is  associated  with  varied  clinical
manifestations,  viremia,  and  the  frequent  persistence  of  the  viral  genome  in  PBMCs
(762). HHV-6 also can be transmitted from mother to child. In several recent studies,
virtually  100%  of  pregnant  women  were  HHV-6--seropositive.  During  pregnancy,
2%--9% of women shed virus in the genital tract (763,764). Congenital HHV-6 infection
has  been  documented  in  ≤2%  of  newborns  (760,761,765,766).  In  one  large  study  of
approximately  5000  births,  1%  of  cord  blood  samples  were  positive  for  HHV-6  DNA.
None of the congenitally infected infants were symptomatic (761). The virus does not
appear to be transmitted by breast-feeding. HHV-6 infects the same target cells as HIV,
and HHV-6 and HIV can simultaneously infect the same CD4 cells under experimental
conditions. Some evidence exists for interactions between HHV-6 and HIV at the cellular
or  molecular  levels.  Some  studies  have  suggested  that  HHV-6  upregulates  HIV
expression in coinfected cells in vitro (767,768). In a study of HHV-6 infection in 227
children  born  to  HIV-infected  mothers,  three  (7%)  of  41  HIV-uninfected  infants  were
positive  for  HHV-6  DNA  in  the  first  month  of  life,  suggesting  possible  intrauterine
infection (759). The cumulative infection rates of HHV-6 at ages 6 and 12 months were
significantly  lower  in  HIV-infected  children  (11%  and  33%,  respectively)  than  in
HIV-uninfected children (28% and 78%, respectively), and high CD4 percentage (>15%)
in  the  child  before  HHV-6  infection  was  associated  with  high  HHV-6  infection  rate.
However,  HIV  disease  progressed  longitudinally  in  all  10  infants  with  HIV/HHV-6
coinfection  and  in  58%  of  those  without  HHV-6  coinfection,  suggesting  that  HHV-6
coinfection might increase risk for HIV disease progression. HHV-7 is acquired later in
life than HHV-6. In contrast to HHV-6, seropositivity to HHV-7 is approximately 50% at
age 2 years. Reactivation and/or persistent shedding also can occur. Salivary shedding
is common, noted in up to 90% of seropositive adults, and HHV-7 DNA has been found
in breast milk (unlike HHV-6) (769). Many cases of primary infection with HHV-6, which
usually occurs by age 2 years, are asymptomatic or accompanied by mild, nonspecific
symptoms.  The  most  common  symptom  is  fever,  which  can  be  high  and  abrupt,
associated with crankiness and rhinitis. In several studies, primary HHV-6 infection was
associated with infants presenting for care of acute febrile illness. Among children aged
<3  years  presenting  for  evaluation  of  a  febrile  illness,  10%  had  primary  HHV-6
infection; the incidence was 20% for febrile infants aged 6--8 months (770). HHV-6 is
the  causative  agent  of  most  cases  of  exanthem  subitum  (also  known  as  roseola
infantum), a febrile illness of early childhood, associated with a distinctive exanthem.
The  incidence  of  HHV-6--related  exanthem  subitum  peaks  at  age  6--9  months  and  is
associated  with  fever  of  4--5  days,  with  rash  developing  as  the  fever  subsides  (771).
Ten percent to 20% of infants with primary HHV-6 infection will present with exanthem
subitum.  HHV-7  also  has  been  associated  with  exanthem  subitum.  Both  primary
infection  with  and  reactivation  of  HHV-6  has  been  associated  with  several  CNS
syndromes  in  immunocompetent  children  and  adults,  including  febrile  and  nonfebrile
seizures,
 encephalitis/encephalopathy
 and
 acute
 necrotizing
 encephalopathy
(770,772,773).  Convulsions,  a  feature  of  severe  HHV-6  infection,  often  can  be
prolonged  and  complicated  (774).  Reactivation  of  HHV-6  occurs  in  adults  with
immunodeficiency or in patients on immunosuppressive therapy after transplantation.
Although  the  exact  frequency  of  HHV-6  reactivation  in  transplant  recipients  (bone
marrow and solid organ) is difficult to determine, it appears to be common and occurs
within the first 12 weeks after transplantation (775). Most reactivation involves HHV-6B.
Many episodes of reactivation are asymptomatic, but when symptoms occur, they can
include  fever,  skin  rash,  and  leukopenia.  Pneumonitis,  encephalitis,  bone  marrow
suppression,  and  graft  versus  host  disease  have  been  associated  with  reactivation  of
HHV-6  after  bone  marrow  transplantation  (775,776).  HIV-infected  persons  exhibit
frequent reactivation of HHV-6 (775); whether this causes symptoms or progression of
illness  is  controversial.  Symptoms  most  likely  to  be  associated  with  HHV-6  are
pneumonitis and encephalitis. Reactivation of HHV-7 also occurs in immunocompetent
and  immunodeficient  persons.  The  relation  of  HHV-7  reactivation  to  disease  states  is
still  poorly  understood.  Many  primary  infections  result  in  a  nonspecific  febrile  illness.
The  10%--20%  of  primary  infections  that  manifest  as  exanthem  subitum  can  be
clinically  diagnosed  on  the  basis  of  symptomatology  and  distinctive  rash.  Diagnosing
HHV-6--related  illness  can  be  difficult  because  of  the  frequent  reactivation  in
immunocompetent healthy children and adults. Specific testing for HHV-6 or -7 infection
may  be  performed  using  such  laboratory  methods  as  serology,  culture,  antigen
detection,  PCR,  in  situ  hybridization,  and  immunohistochemistry.  The  latent  nature  of
these herpesviruses must be considered, and the differing capability of these tests to
distinguish nonreplicating latent virus from replicating active virus must be understood
(777). Laboratory evaluations (e.g., serology and PCR) to diagnose HHV-7 infections are
rarely  used  and  typically  limited  to  research.  Demonstration  of  an  HHV-6--specific
antibody  seroconversion  or  significant  change  in  antibody  titer  between  acute  and
convalescent paired serum samples can diagnose infection with HHV-6; delay can occur
between initial infection and seropositivity, especially in immunodeficient patients. The
sensitivity  of  serology  varies  and  does  not  distinguish  between  HHV-6A  and  HHV-6B.
Some cross reactivity may occur with HHV-7. Identification of HHV-6 or -7 in PBMCs by
virus  culture  firmly  establishes  the  presence  of  active  infection  in  immunocompetent
hosts,  but  association  with  specific  disease  is  problematic  in  immunocompromised
patients  because  of  a  low  background  rate  of  viremia.  Virus  culture  requires
cocultivation with PBMCs or cord blood and requires 1--3 weeks (777). Therefore, it is
available  only  in  specialized  research  laboratories.  PCR  can  be  used  to  detect  HHV-6
DNA  or  RNA.  A  positive  serum,  plasma,  or  PBMC  viral  DNA  or  RNA  PCR  assay,  in  the
absence  of  measurable  antibody,  indicates  a  primary  infection.  HHV-6  is  found  in
cellular material such as PBMCs and tissue even during latency; therefore, after primary
infection  a  positive  DNA  PCR  cannot  be  used  to  establish  reactivation,  whereas
detection  of  cell-free  viral  DNA  or  RNA  in  plasma,  serum,  or  CSF  by  PCR  (776)  is
considered evidence of active viral replication---and thus reactivation---in a seropositive
patient.  Evidence  of  reactivation  and  clinical  disease  must  be  correlated  cautiously
because  of  the  frequent  asymptomatic  reactivation  in  most  adults  and  children
(775,776).  Preventing  Exposure  Because  HHV-6  and  HHV-7  infections  are  ubiquitous,
prevention  of  primary  infection  is  not  possible.  Among  transplant  recipients,
prophylactic ganciclovir may decrease the number of episodes and severity of HHV-6
reactivation (778,779). Preventing First Episode of Disease Given the ubiquity of HHV-6
and -7 during early childhood and the lack of an effective vaccine, prevention of HHV-6
disease is not feasible. Discontinuing Primary Prophylaxis Not applicable. Treatment of
Disease Most HHV-6 primary infections result in a mild, self-limited febrile illness. For
the  immunodeficient  adult  or  child  with  possible  HHV-6--associated  lung  or  CNS
disease,  care  must  be  used  to  exclude  other  diagnostic  possibilities.  No  clear
indications  exist  for  treating  HHV-6  infection  in  HIV-infected  children,  although
treatment might be considered for the rare instance of severe encephalitis proven to
result from HHV-6 (CIII). However, no clinical trials or proven therapies exist for HHV-6.
On the basis of data in adults, drugs that might be considered for severe HHV-6 disease
are  ganciclovir,  foscarnet,  and  cidofovir.  However,  even  though  in  vitro  data  suggest
ganciclovir and foscarnet are active against HHV-6, data are limited that support their
use
 among
 HIV-infected
 patients
 with
 possible
 HHV-6
 related
 illness
 (CIII)
(776,780,781).  Ganciclovir  has  been  used  to  treat  HHV-6  encephalitis  in  adult
transplant patients (782). However, limited success of ganciclovir therapy in preventing
fatal outcome has been reported; in the patients who died, ganciclovir did not reduce
HHV-6  load  in  CSF  (783).  Case  reports  have  documented  both  successful  and
disappointing  results  of  foscarnet  treatment  for  HHV-6  encephalitis  in  transplant
recipients  (783--785).  Cidofovir  followed  by  foscarnet  has  been  used  in  a  stem  cell
transplant  recipient  who  developed  HHV-6  encephalitis  with  evidence  of  a  significant
reduction in HHV-6 load in CSF and in plasma after cidofovir administration (786). One
case of successful use of high-dose ganciclovir to treat HHV-6 encephalitis was reported
in a pediatric bone marrow transplant patient (787). Given the lack of data in children,
no  specific  recommendations  can  be  made.  HHV-7  has  not  been  recognized  as
responsible  for  any  specific  disease  in  HIV-infected  persons,  and  no  treatment  is
indicated.  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS  The  major  side  effect  of
ganciclovir  is  myelosuppression  (i.e.,  anemia,  neutropenia,  and  thrombocytopenia).
Dose  reduction  or  interruption  because  of  hematologic  toxicity  may  be  necessary  in
≤40% of patients receiving IV ganciclovir; granulocyte colony-stimulating factor can be
used to ameliorate marrow suppression. The main toxicities of foscarnet are decreased
renal  function  and  metabolic  derangements.  For  patients  receiving  ganciclovir  or
foscarnet,  complete  blood  counts,  serum  electrolytes,  and  renal  function  should  be
monitored  twice  weekly  during  induction  therapy  and  once  weekly  thereafter.  The
major  side  effect  of  cidofovir  is  potentially  irreversible  nephrotoxicity;  the  drug
produces  proximal  tubular  dysfunction,  including  Fanconi  syndrome  and  acute  renal
failure.  When  present,  renal  toxicity  manifests  as  proteinuria  and  glycosuria.  To
minimize nephrotoxicity, probenicid should be administered before each infusion, and
IV hydration with normal saline should be administered before and after each cidofovir
infusion.  For  patients  receiving  IV  cidofovir,  blood  urea  nitrogen,  creatinine,  and
urinalysis  should  be  performed  before  each  infusion;  administration  of  the  drug  is
contraindicated if renal dysfunction or proteinuria is detected. Other reported adverse
events include anterior uveitis and ocular hypotony; serial ophthalmologic monitoring
for anterior segment inflammation and intraocular pressure is needed while the drug is
being  received  systemically.  Cidofovir  should  not  be  administered  concomitantly  with
other  nephrotoxic  agents.  Cidofovir  therapy  must  be  discontinued  if  serum  creatinine
increases ≥0.5 mg/dL above baseline. HHV-6 and HHV-7 have not been associated with
IRIS with HAART treatment in HIV-infected children or adults. Management of Treatment
Failure Mutations conferring resistance of HHV-6 to ganciclovir, cidofovir, and foscarnet
have  been  described  (788).  Whether  a  change  from  one  drug  to  the  other  would  be
beneficial is unknown. There are currently no recommendations for the management of
treatment  failure.  Prevention  of  Recurrence  No  data  exist  on  preventing  HHV-6  or
HHV-7  reactivation  from  latency  in  HIV-infected  patients.  Discontinuing  Secondary
Prophylaxis Not applicable. Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) is a transmissible DNA virus,
with similarities in DNA structure to Epstein-Barr virus. HHV-8 has been causally linked
to all forms of KS (HIV-related and endemic KS) and with two rare neoplastic conditions
usually  associated  with  HIV  infection,  body  cavity-based  lymphoma  and  multicentric
Castleman disease. The exact mechanism by which HHV-8 infection leads to neoplastic
disease has not been fully elucidated, but seroconversion to HHV-8 antibody positivity
virtually always precedes development of the tumors (789). Higher plasma HHV-8 DNA
titers are associated with increased risk for KS (790). The prevalence of antibodies to
HHV-8 varies widely with age and geography. In the United States and Europe, 1%--3%
of the general adult population is seropositive, with higher rates (8%) among men who
have  sex  with  men  (791).  Among  other  adult  men  in  the  general  population,
HHV-8--seropositivity was marginally associated with duration of heterosexual activity
and positively associated with the number of lifetime sex partners and coinfection with
HBV and HSV type 2 viruses; none of these were significantly associated with risk for
women. In contrast, the seropositivity rate in some areas of Africa is >80% (792--795).
HHV-8  is  transmitted  through  oral  and  genital  secretions.  Immunocompetent
HHV-8--infected  adults  frequently  shed  HHV-8  in  their  oropharyngeal  secretions,  with
virus detected in saliva on 22% of test days (796). In areas where HHV-8 infection is
endemic, the seroprevalence increases quickly during the first 5 years of life, especially
when other family members are HHV-8--positive, then plateaus until adolescence and
young  adult  years.  In  a  study  in  rural  Tanzania,  the  rate  of  positivity  for  HHV-8  was
3.7% among infants, 58% among children aged 4--5 years, and 89% among adults aged
>45 years (797). The incidence among infants and children increased with the number
of HHV-8-positive parents and siblings in the home, indicating nonsexual transmission
for prepubertal children, with a limited role for perinatal transmission (797--803). In the
United States, among a cohort of high-risk HIV-infected and HIV-negative adolescents,
with  a  median  age  of  19  years,  11.2%  were  HHV-8--positive  (804).  The  highest  rates
were  in  adolescent  HIV-infected  males  reporting  sex  with  males  (23%).  Seropositivity
was associated with HIV infection, men who have sex with men, a history of syphilis,
and injection-drug use (804,805). HHV-8 also may be transmitted through exposure to
infected  blood.  Adult  injection-drug  users  have  an  increased  rate  of  HHV-8  positivity
(804,805).  In  addition,  recent  evidence  suggests  that  HHV-8  may  be  transmitted
through  blood  product  transfusions.  In  one  study  in  an  area  of  Uganda  with  a  high
incidence  of  HHV-8--seropositivity,  the  excess  risk  for  acquiring  HHV-8  through
transfusion was nearly 3%, recipients of HHV-8 antibody-positive blood were compared
with  those  receiving  HHV-8--negative  blood  (806).  A  small  study  suggested  that
maternal HHV-8 infection might increase risk for perinatal transmission of HIV, although
no evidence of HHV-8 infection was identified among HIV-infected infants (801). Women
coinfected with HHV-8 and HIV had increases in both HHV-8 and HIV viral load in serum
and/or  cervical  fluid  during  pregnancy  (807).  During  the  pre-HAART  era,  the  overall
incidence  of  KS  among  HIV-infected  adults  was  as  high  as  20%.  However,  the  rate
among  children  was  low.  In  the  United  States  and  England,  KS  represented  <1%  of
pediatric AIDS-defining illnesses. The incidence of KS appeared to decline even before
the widespread use of HAART. The reason for this decline was unclear but may have
been related to the use of other antiviral agents, such as those used to treat CMV (i.e.,
foscarnet, ganciclovir, and cidofovir), which may inhibit HHV-8 (808--814). KS, primary
effusion lymphoma, and multicentric Castleman disease are described most frequently
among  HIV-infected  persons  with  more  advanced  immunosuppression  (CD4  count  of
<200 cells/mm3), but they can occur at any CD4 count. With the advent of earlier and
more aggressive HAART, the incidence of KS in adults has continued to decrease (815).
Although  KS  occurs  primarily  in  adults,  the  incidence  in  children  has  increased
substantially as a result of the HIV pandemic, particularly in Africa, and the frequent use
of  immunosuppressive  drugs.  One  series  reported  a  40-fold  increase  in  incidence  of
childhood KS in Uganda in the era of AIDS (816). A febrile illness with mild respiratory
symptoms  and  a  maculopapular  rash  has  been  associated  with  primary  infection  in
young  immunocompetent  children  (817).  A  similar  self-limited  illness  has  been
described  in  adults  with  primary  infection.  Evidence  suggests  more  significant
symptomatology  among  immunodeficient  adults  with  primary  infection,  including
reports of fever, arthralgia, splenomegaly, and bone marrow suppression (818,819). KS
presentation varies widely, but most persons have nontender, purplish, indurated skin
lesions; intraoral lesions can be seen and visceral dissemination can occur, occasionally
without  skin  lesions.  Multicentric  Castleman  disease  presents  with  generalized
adenopathy and fever and may progress to multiorgan failure. The laboratory diagnosis
of HHV-8 is most commonly based on serologic assays, such as immunofluorescence,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and Western blot. However, without a standard
for diagnosing HHV-8 infection, these tests range in sensitivity from 80% to ≥90% and
demonstrate  poor  interassay  agreement  (820).  Combination  assays  containing  both
lytic  and  late-phase  antigens  may  improve  detection  rates.  Nucleic  acid-based  tests,
such  as  in  situ  DNA  hybridization  and  PCR,  are  important  for  pathologic  diagnoses  in
biologic specimens. Although these tests have high levels of sensitivity, specificity and
reproducibility  are  highly  variable.  Routine  screening  for  HHV-8  by  PCR  or  serologic
testing is not indicated for HIV-infected persons. Preventing Exposure For HIV-infected
persons, coinfection with HHV-8 places them at risk for KS. The risk is highest in adults
(compared with children) and in persons with severe immunodeficiency. Routine testing
of  children  and  adults  for  HHV-8  is  not  recommended;  therefore,  the  serostatus  of
newly identified HIV-infected persons usually is not known. For adolescents in whom KS
is  diagnosed,  counseling  should  include  the  possibility  of  transmitting  HHV-8  to  their
sexual contacts through intercourse and possibly kissing. Although efficacy of condom
use  for  preventing  HHV-8  exposure  has  not  been  established,  HIV-infected  persons
should use latex condoms during every act of sexual intercourse to reduce exposure to
sexually transmitted pathogens. HIV-infected injection-drug users should be counseled
not  to  share  drug-injection  equipment,  even  if  both  users  are  already  HIV-infected,
because of the risk of becoming infected with HHV-8 or other bloodborne pathogens. In
the  future,  HHV-8  testing  of  donated  blood  products,  before  use  for  immunodeficient
patients,  might  be  considered.  In  addition,  the  routine  use  of  leukocyte  reduction  for
red  cell  transfusions  may  lower  the  transmission  risk.  Infants  can  acquire  HHV-8
perinatally  or  through  contact  with  infected  family  members  and  playmates.  No
effective  intervention  is  known  to  prevent  childhood  acquisition  of  HHV-8.  Preventing
First  Episode  of  Disease  The  use  of  HAART  with  suppression  of  HIV  replication  has
markedly decreased the incidence of KS among HIV-infected adults and should be the
goal of treatment wherever possible (AII). Routine testing to identify HHV-8 seropositive
HIV-infected  persons  is  not  recommended  (DIII).  Although  several  antiviral  agents
inhibit HHV-8 replication in vitro (e.g., ganciclovir, foscarnet, cidofovir), no data exist on
their use to prevent KS in persons coinfected with HIV and HHV-8. Treatment of Disease
Because  the  HIV-related  clinical  entities  associated  with  HHV-8,  such  as  KS  and
Castleman's disease, are oncologic and traditionally have been treated with cytotoxic
chemotherapy,  specific  treatment  is  not  included  in  this  report.  However,  effective
suppression of HIV replication with HAART among HIV-infected patients with KS might
prevent KS progression or occurrence of new lesions and should be considered for all
persons  with  evidence  of  active  KS  and  other  HHV-8--associated  malignant
lymphoproliferative  disorders  (AII).  In  HIV-infected  adults,  HHV-8  cellular  viremia  and
higher viral load have been associated with disease progression (821). Treatment with
specific  antiviral  agents,  such  as  ganciclovir,  foscarnet,  and  cidofovir,  which  have  in
vitro  activity  against  the  lytic  but  not  latent  phase  of  HHV-8,  has  not  been  widely
studied.  Additionally,  the  vast  majority  of  infected  cells  are  not  undergoing  lytic
replication, and antiherpes medications have had little or no effect on established KS or
HHV-8  cellular  viremia.  Efforts  to  induce  lytic  replication  or  to  attack  the  episomal
(latent) HHV-8 genome are in progress (822,823). In contrast to KS, many of the cells in
Castleman  disease  support  lytic  replication  of  HHV-8,  and  treatment  of  Castleman
disease with antiherpesvirus drugs has led to substantial clinical improvement in some
studies  (823).  The  use  of  IV  ganciclovir  or  oral  valganciclovir  is  recommended  for
treating  multicentric  Castleman  disease  (BII)  (824)  and  may  be  a  useful  adjunct  for
treating  primary  effusion  lymphoma  (BII)  (825,826).  Appropriate  chemotherapy,  in
combination with potent antiretroviral therapy, should be considered for patients with
visceral  KS  or  primary  effusion  lymphoma  (BII).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  IRIS
Rapid  progression  of  KS  after  initiation  of  HAART  and  after  a  change  from  a  failing
regimen to a more potent one have been reported. Progression of KS, representing IRIS,
usually appeared within 8 weeks after start of a potent HAART regimen. Most patients
experienced  rapid  progression  of  cutaneous  lesions;  however,  sudden  worsening  of
pulmonary KS, with resultant deaths, was reported in at least four patients. All reported
fatalities  were  linked  to  pulmonary  KS.  In  most  cases,  HAART  was  continued  with
stabilization  and  then  regression  of  lesions.  In  more  severe  cases,  especially  those
involving  visceral  lesions,  chemotherapy  was  instituted  and,  in  combination  with
HAART,  led  to  regression  of  the  KS  (827,828).  Management  of  Treatment  Failure  No
recommendations exist for management of treatment failure. Prevention of Recurrence
Effective suppression of HIV replication with HAART among HIV-infected patients with
KS  might  prevent  KS  progression  or  occurrence  of  new  lesions  and  should  be
considered  for  all  persons  with  evidence  of  active  KS  (BII).  Discontinuing  Secondary
Prophylaxis  Not  applicable.  HSV-1  and  HSV-2  affect  all  populations.  HSV-1  is
transmitted primarily through contact with infected oral secretions; HSV-2 is acquired
primarily  through  contact  with  infected  genital  secretions.  In  developed  countries,
urban poor populations acquire HSV-1 at a younger age (70%--80% seropositive by age
20 years) than do the rest of the population (30%--40%) (829). In a large U.S. study,
HSV-1 seroprevalence in children aged 6--13 years was 31% and increased with age,
from  26%  in  6-  to  7-year-olds  to  36%  in  12-  to  13-year-olds,  and  varied  by
race/ethnicity,  birthplace,  and  poverty  levels  (higher  in  non-Hispanic  blacks,  children
born  in  Mexico,  and  children  living  below  poverty  level)  (830).  The  seroprevalence  of
HSV-1  approaches  60%  among  the  general  older  adult  population  (831).  HSV-2
seroprevalence in persons aged 14--49 years was 17% and increased with age, from 2%
in 14- to 19-year-olds to 26% in 40- to 49-year-olds. HSV-2 seroprevalence was higher
in non-Hispanic blacks, persons with large numbers of sex partners, and females and
varied by birthplace and poverty level (831,832). An HSV-infected mother can transmit
HSV to her infant, resulting in neonatal infection. In older children and adults, classic
HSV  transmission  is  person  to  person  through  direct  contact  with  infected  oral
secretions or lesions. Neonatal HSV infection rate is 1 case per 2000--15,000 deliveries
(833).  Neonatal  transmission  occurs  primarily  through  exposure  of  the  infant  to
HSV-infected  maternal  genital  fluids  during  passage  through  the  birth  canal;  by
ascending  infection;  or  through  use  of  invasive  procedures,  such  as  fetal  scalp
monitoring, that disrupt fetal skin integrity during labor (834). Congenital (in utero) HSV
acquisition  is  rare  but  can  result  in  devastating  cutaneous,  ocular,  and  CNS  damage.
Maternal  HSV  antibody  status  before  delivery  influences  both  the  severity  and
likelihood  of  transmission  to  the  infant  (834).  The  risk  for  neonatal  HSV  infection  is
greatest in an infant born to a woman with primary HSV infection (range: 30%--50%)
(829). The risk is much lower (0%--5%) for infants born to women shedding HSV caused
by  reactivated  infection  (589).  Genital  shedding  of  HSV  at  delivery  increases  risk  for
transmission,  and  prolonged  rupture  of  membranes  (>6  hours)  increases  the  risk,
probably  because  of  ascending  HSV  infection  from  the  cervix.  Cesarean  delivery
substantially lowers the risk for transmission (829,834,835). Importantly, many mothers
of  neonates  with  HSV-related  illness  will  have  pregnancy  histories  void  of  either  past
HSV infection or primary lesions (834). In the United States, 75% of neonatal infections
are caused by genital herpes, HSV type 2, and the remainder by HSV type 1. In a study
of  seroprevalence  among  pregnant  U.S.  women,  overall  HSV-1  seroprevalence  was
63%; HSV-2 seroprevalence, 22%; and infection with both HSV-1 and 2, 13% (836). HSV
seroprevalence  differed  by  race/ethnicity  and  number  of  lifetime  sex  partners.  HSV-2
infection  rates  might  be  higher  in  HIV-infected  than  HIV-uninfected  women.  Women
infected with HIV, particularly those with low CD4 count, shed HSV from the vulva and
cervix  more  commonly  than  do  HIV-uninfected  women;  most  of  this  shedding  is
asymptomatic (589,837). Among HIV-uninfected women, the rate of HSV reactivation is
approximately 25% during the last month of pregnancy, but 2%--3% will be shedding on
the  day  of  delivery  (838).  In  comparison,  in  women  coinfected  with  HIV  and  HSV,  an
estimated 10% have cervical shedding of HSV on the day of delivery (839). The risk for
genital  HSV  reactivation  and  shedding  increases  as  HIV-related  immunosuppression
progresses  (837,839).  No  evidence  indicates  that  in  utero  HSV  infection  of  the  infant
occurs  more  frequently  in  HIV-infected  pregnant  woman  or  whether  infants  born  to
women coinfected with HIV and HSV-2 are at increased risk for perinatal (intrapartum)
HSV  infection.  However,  HSV  infection  may  increase  the  risk  for  mother-to-child  HIV
transmission.  In  a  study  in  Kenya  of  women  receiving  zidovudine  prophylaxis,  the
presence  of  HSV-2--related  genital  ulcers  in  late  pregnancy  was  associated  with
increased plasma HIV RNA levels and increased risk for intrapartum HIV transmission,
even  after  adjustment  for  plasma  HIV  RNA  levels  (840).  Recurrent  or  persistent  HSV
infection is the AIDS-indicator condition in approximately 6% of children with AIDS. In a
study in HIV-infected children in the United States during the HAART era, the incidence
of systemic HSV infection was 0.9 per 100 child-years and was most common among
children  with  reduced  CD4  percentage  (<25%)  (3).  As  in  HIV-infected  adults,
HIV-infected children have more frequent and severe episodes of HSV reactivation. Five
percent to 10% of children with AIDS and primary gingivostomatitis develop frequent
recurrences,  which  can  be  associated  with  severe  ulcerative  disease  and  symptoms
similar to primary infection (841). HIV-infected children also can shed virus longer with
both primary and reactivation HSV infection than can HIV-uninfected children. Neonatal
HSV can appear as disseminated multiorgan disease (approximately 25% of neonates
with HSV infection); localized disease of the CNS (approximately 35% of neonates); or
CNS disease localized to the skin, eyes, and mouth (approximately 40% of neonates)
(842). Infants with disseminated disease usually present at age 9--11 days; encephalitis
occurs  in  60%--75%  of  these  infants.  Vesicular  rash  occurs  in  approximately  80%  of
children with localized disease of the skin, eyes, and mouth, but in only approximately
60% of children with CNS or disseminated disease (842,843). Localized disease usually
presents by the 10th day of life, and even with treatment, neonates with skin lesions
commonly have cutaneous recurrences during the first 6 months after treatment (842).
Infants  with  localized  CNS  disease,  or  CNS  disease  with  skin,  eyes,  and  mouth
involvement, usually are ill by day 16--19 of life (843). Although treatment has reduced
morbidity  and  mortality,  infants  with  neonatal  HSV  infection  remain  at  risk  for
neurologic sequelae, with the most severe neurologic sequelae seen in those with CNS
disease.  Two  percent  to  6%  of  infants  with  localized  skin,  eye,  or  mucus  membrane
disease  have  later  neurologic  sequelae  after  apparently  successful  treatment
(844,845). After the neonatal period, the most common appearance of HSV infection in
children is orolabial disease. Fever; irritability; tender submandibular lymphadenopathy;
and  superficial,  painful  ulcers  in  the  gingival  and  oral  mucosa  and  perioral  area
characterize  primary  HSV  gingivostomatitis.  HIV-infected  children  who  experience
primary infection when they are immunocompromised can have severe local lesions or,
more rarely, disseminated HSV with visceral involvement and generalized skin lesions
with  primary  infection.  Other  sites  of  involvement  among  HIV-infected  children  with
severe immunocompromise include the esophagus, CNS, and genitals and disseminated
disease  involving  the  liver,  adrenals,  lung,  kidney,  spleen,  and  brain.  HSV  genitalis  is
the  more  common  manifestation  of  HSV-2  infection.  Painful,  ulcerative  lesions  on  the
perineum  and  on  vaginal  and  urethral  mucosal  surfaces  are  common  during  primary
infection.  Local  symptoms  include  pain  and  pruritis.  Mucosal  disease  usually  is
accompanied by dysuria, or vaginal or urethral discharge; inguinal lymphadenopathy,
particularly  in  primary  infection,  is  common  with  perineal  disease  (846).  Among
HIV-infected  persons,  HSV  keratitis,  neonatal  HSV,  HSV  encephalitis,  and  herpetic
whitlow are similar in presentation and treatment to diseases in HIV-uninfected persons
but might be more severe. HSV retinitis occurs as acute retinal necrosis, occasionally in
patients  with  HSV  encephalitis.  HSV  encephalitis  occurs  among  HIV-infected  persons,
but  no  evidence  indicates  it  is  more  severe  or  common  than  among  HIV-uninfected
persons.  Clinical  diagnosis  is  based  on  the  typical  appearance  of  vesicles  and  ulcers.
The virus can be isolated in culture and usually can be detected in tissue culture cells
within 1--3 days. HSV DNA by PCR also can be used to establish the presence of HSV
infection in skin lesions or infected mucosal sites of perinatally exposed newborns. To
diagnose neonatal HSV infection, specimens for HSV culture or HSV DNA PCR should be
obtained from blood and skin vesicles, mouth or nasopharynx, eyes, urine, and stool or
rectum; positive cultures from any of the latter sites >48 hours after birth indicate viral
replication rather than contamination after intrapartum exposure. CSF should be tested
for HSV DNA by PCR amplification of an HSV DNA sequence common to both HSV-1 and
HSV-2. Direct immunofluorescence for HSV antigen can be conducted on cells collected
from  skin,  conjunctiva,  or  mucosal  lesion  scrapings.  Giemsa  staining  (Tzanck
preparation)  of  lesion  cell  scrapings  might  show  multinucleated  giant  cells  and
eosinophilic  intranuclear  inclusions,  but  this  test  is  insensitive,  nonspecific,  and  not
routinely recommended. Among children with suspected HSV encephalitis, cultures of
the  CSF  for  HSV  usually  are  negative.  Detection  of  HSV  DNA  by  PCR  in  the  CSF  has
replaced brain biopsy as the diagnostic test of choice for such patients. The reported
sensitivity  of  the  CSF  PCR  in  neonatal  CNS  HSV  disease  is  75%--100%,  with  the
specificity 70%--100% (847). During therapy for HSV-proven encephalitis, the CSF HSV
PCR  remains  positive  for  a  mean  of  10  days  (848).  Definitive  diagnosis  of  HSV
esophagitis requires endoscopy with biopsy (histologic evidence of multinucleated giant
cells with intranuclear viral inclusion) and culture. Preventing Exposure The rate of HSV
transmission to the fetus and neonate among HIV-infected pregnant women coinfected
with  HSV  is  not  known.  Although  isolated  cases  of  in  utero  HSV  transmission  with
primary  HSV  infection  during  pregnancy  among  HIV-uninfected  women  have  been
reported, the predominant risk, regardless of HIV coinfection, is from maternal genital
shedding  at  delivery.  Effective  HAART  regimens  may  decrease,  but  not  prevent,
maternal genital HSV shedding and recurrence of genital lesions (849). Use of acyclovir
or  valacyclovir  near  term  suppresses  genital  herpes  outbreaks  and  shedding  in  late
pregnancy among HIV-uninfected women with HSV infection and appears to reduce the
need  for  cesarean  delivery  for  recurrent  HSV  (850--852).  However,  the  safety  and
efficacy of this strategy have not been evaluated among HIV-infected women who are
more  likely  to  have  antibody  to  HSV-2  and  to  have  both  symptomatic  and
asymptomatic  reactivation  of  genital  HSV.  Therefore,  the  use  of  acyclovir  or
valacyclovir
 specifically
 to
 reduce
 the
 need
 for
 cesarean
 delivery
 among
HIV/HSV-coinfected  women  is  not  recommended  (DIII)  (853).  In  addition,  cases  have
been  reported  of  HSV-infected  neonates  born  to  women  who  received  suppressive
antiviral therapy near term (854). For pregnant women who have active genital HSV at
the onset of labor, delivery by elective cesarean delivery, preferably before rupture of
membranes, is recommended (AI) (855). For the HIV-infected child, exposure to HSV-1
is an inevitable part of childhood, and no proven ways exist to prevent exposure. Direct
contact of children with secretions from active HSV lesions, such as herpes labialis, on
the mother, household member, or other persons should be avoided. Among sexually
active  HIV-infected  adults,  latex  condoms  should  be  used  during  every  act  of  sexual
intercourse  to  reduce  the  risk  for  exposure  to  HSV  and  other  sexually  transmitted
pathogens  (AII).  They  should  specifically  avoid  sexual  contact  when  herpetic  lesions
(genital  or orolabial) are evident (AII).  Data  suggest that chronic  suppressive therapy
with  valacyclovir  in  persons  with  genital  herpes  reduced  HSV-2  transmission  to
susceptible  heterosexual  partners  by  50%.  HIV-infected  adults  receiving  HAART  had
fewer symptomatic herpetic lesions than did HIV-infected adults not receiving HAART,
but  mucosal  HSV-2  shedding  was  similar  (856).  Preventing  First  Episode  of  Disease
Antiviral  prophylaxis  after  exposure  to  HSV,  or  to  prevent  initial  episodes  of  HSV
disease among persons with latent infection, is not recommended (DIII). Treatment of
Disease  Acyclovir  is  the  drug  of  choice  for  treatment  of  local  and  disseminated  HSV
among  infants  and  children,  regardless  of  HIV-infection  status  (AI).  Both  oral  and  IV
preparations are available. Neonatal HSV disease should be treated with high-dose IV
acyclovir  (20  mg/kg/dose  three  times  daily)  administered  for  21  days  for  CNS  and
disseminated  disease,  and  for  14  days  for  disease  of  the  skin,  eyes,  and  mouth  (AI)
(857).  Acyclovir  therapy  should  not  be  discontinued  in  neonates  with  CNS  disease
unless a repeat CSF HSV DNA PCR assay is negative near the end of treatment (BIII).
Orolabial  lesions  in  HIV-infected  children  can  be  treated  with  oral  acyclovir  for  5--10
days (AI). Moderate-to-severe mucocutaneous HSV lesions are best treated initially with
IV acyclovir (AI). Patients may be switched to oral therapy after the lesions have begun
to regress, and therapy continued until lesions have completely healed. Acyclovir is the
drug  of  choice  for  disseminated  HSV  and  HSV  encephalitis  in  children.  Regardless  of
patient age, HSV encephalitis should be treated for 21 days (AII). Genital HSV should be
treated  with  oral  acyclovir  for  5--14  days  (AI).  Trifluridine,  a  fluorinated  pyrimidine
nucleoside, is the treatment of choice for herpes keratoconjunctivitis, one drop onto the
cornea (858) every 2 hours, not to exceed nine drops/day; it is not recommended for
longer  than  21  days  (AII).  Alternatives  to  acyclovir  in  older  adolescents  and  adults
include valacyclovir, famciclovir, and foscarnet (AI) (859-862). Valacyclovir is a prodrug
of  acyclovir  with  improved  bioavailability  that  is  rapidly  converted  to  acyclovir  after
absorption.  Data  are  limited  on  valacyclovir  use  in  children  (863);  bioavailability  is
approximately 45% and independent of age in children. Limited data indicate pediatric
blood levels of acyclovir (from the prodrug valacyclovir) similar to levels achieved with
valacyclovir tablets in adults can be achieved by an oral dose of valacyclovir of 20−25
mg/kg/dose  administered  two  to  three  times  a  day  (864).  However,  no  pediatric
formulation is available; thus, this drug is an alternative only for children old enough to
swallow  the  large  valacyclovir  tablets.  The  tablets  can  be  crushed,  but  they  have  an
unpleasant  taste.  No  specific  data  exist  on  the  pharmacokinetics  and  dosing  of
famciclovir  in  children,  and  no  pediatric  preparation  is  available  (864).  Intravenous
foscarnet may be used in cases of acyclovir-resistant herpes infection (BIII). Monitoring
and Adverse Events, Including IRIS Acyclovir is excreted primarily by the kidney; as a
result, dose adjustment based on creatinine clearance is needed in patients with renal
insufficiency or renal failure. Primary toxicities of acyclovir are phlebitis, renal toxicity,
nausea, vomiting, and rash. Toxicities are similar for valacyclovir. In infants receiving
high-dose acyclovir for neonatal disease, the major side effect was neutropenia (e.g.,
absolute  neutrophil  count  <1000/mm3)  (857).  Grade  3  or  higher  nephrotoxicity  was
observed in 6%. For infants and children receiving high-dose IV acyclovir, monitoring of
complete  blood  counts  and  renal  function  is  recommended  at  initiation  of  treatment
and  once  or  twice  weekly  for  the  duration  of  treatment,  particularly  for  those  with
underlying  renal  dysfunction  or  those  receiving  prolonged  therapy.  Management  of
acyclovir-resistant  herpes  with  foscarnet  is  associated  with  decreased  renal  function;
≤30%  of  patients  experience  increases  in  serum  creatinine  levels.  Renal  toxicity  and
foscarnet  binding  to  divalent  metal  ions  such  as  calcium  leads  to  metabolic
abnormalities in approximately one third of patients, and serious electrolyte imbalances
(including abnormalities in calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and potassium levels) and
secondary seizures, or cardiac dysrhythmias can occur. Abnormal liver transaminases
and  CNS  symptoms  also  can  occur.  For  patients  receiving  foscarnet,  complete  blood
counts, serum electrolytes, and renal function should be monitored twice weekly during
induction therapy and once weekly thereafter. Atypical lesions that may have a delayed
response  to  therapy  have  been  reported  in  adults  initiating  HAART  and  attributed  to
IRIS (856). Management of Treatment Failure Treatment failure related to resistance to
antiviral drugs should be suspected if lesions do not indicate signs of resolution within
7--10 days after initiation of therapy. In immunocompromised patients with suspected
acyclovir-resistant  HSV,  a  lesion  culture  should  be  obtained  and,  if  virus  is  isolated,
susceptibility  testing  performed  to  confirm  drug  resistance  (858).  The  treatment  of
choice for acyclovir-resistant HSV is IV foscarnet (AI) (858,865). All acyclovir-resistant
HSV strains are resistant to valacyclovir, and most are resistant to famciclovir. Topical
trifluridine  or  cidofovir  also  have  been  used  successfully  for  lesions  on  cutaneous
surfaces,  although  prolonged  application  for  21--28  days  or  longer  might  be  required
(866). IV cidofovir has been used to treat a child with acyclovir and foscarnet resistant
HSV  (867).  Prevention  of  Recurrence  Administration  of  oral  acyclovir  prevented
cutaneous  recurrences  of  HSV  after  neonatal  disease  of  the  skin,  eyes,  and  mouth.
However,  the  effect  of  such  therapy  on  neurologic  outcome  needs  assessment,  and
additional investigation is necessary before routine use of suppressive therapy can be
recommended  for  children  (845).  Because  episodes  of  HSV  disease  can  be  treated
successfully,  chronic  therapy  with  acyclovir  is  not  required  after  lesions  resolve.
However,  children  who  have  frequent  or  severe  recurrences  (e.g.,  four  to  six  severe
episodes a year) can be administered daily suppressive therapy with oral acyclovir (AI)
(864).  Valacyclovir  or  famciclovir  also  are  options  for  older  children  (AI).  Effective
HAART may decrease recurrences. Discontinuing Secondary Prophylaxis Not applicable,
secondary  prophylaxis  not  usually  recommended  in  children.  Human  papillomavirus
(HPV)  infects  cutaneous  and  mucosal  squamous  epithelium.  More  than  100  distinct
types of HPV exist (868). They can be categorized on the basis of the site at which they
occur  (genital,  cutaneous)  and  as  high-  or  low-risk  on  the  basis  of  their  potential  to
induce  malignant  proliferation.  Of  the  approximately  40  genital  (i.e.,  muscosal)  HPV
types, 12 types are identified as established high risk (HPV 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45,
51, 52, 56, 58, 59), and six, as probable high risk (HPV 26, 53, 66, 68, 73, 82) (868).
Genital HPV types can infect the genitals, conjunctiva, mouth, throat, and respiratory
tract. Nongenital (i.e., cutaneous) HPV types that cause skin warts (such as HPV 2) are
distinct  from  those  causing  genital  infections.  Children  with  compromised  cellular
immunity  might  have  intense  and  widespread  appearance  of  both  cutaneous  and
mucosal
 warts.
 HPV-associated
 cutaneous
 warts
 are
 transmitted
 by
 close
person-to-person contact that is facilitated by minor trauma to the skin. HPV-associated
anogenital  warts  are  transmitted  by  sexual  contact  but  also  might  be  acquired  at
delivery.  There  is  some  evidence  that  transmission  may  occur  from  nongenital  sites.
Genital  warts  (condyloma  accuminatum)  in  young  children  might  be  a  sign  of  sexual
abuse  (869,870).  Mother-to-child  transmission  of  HPV  is  not  surprising  because
pregnant  women  have  high  rates  of  HPV  infection  (871,872).  HPV  DNA  has  been
identified in 5%--42% of pregnant women without HIV infection (873--875). Although a
few studies have demonstrated an increased prevalence of detectable HPV DNA during
pregnancy,  this  finding  has  not  been  consistent  across  studies  (874,875).  Among
nonpregnant  women,  HPV  DNA  is  detected  more  frequently  among  HIV-infected  than
HIV-uninfected  women,  with  reported  prevalence  rates  of  12%--77%  (876,877).  Few
data have been reported about HPV prevalence in HIV-infected pregnant women, with
one  study  reporting  a  prevalence  of  35%  (878).  HPV  DNA  has  been  detected  in  cord
blood  and  amniotic  fluid,  indicating  the  potential  for  in  utero  infection  (879,880).
Duration  of  membrane  rupture  has  been  associated  with  mother-to-child  HPV
transmission,  and  reports  of  HPV  transmission  to  infants  born  by  cesarean  delivery
suggest that HPV can cross the placental barrier (881,882). Most transmission studies
report  on  the  detection  of  HPV  DNA  because  clinical  disease  (i.e.,  warts)  is  rare  in
infants. Reported rates of HPV DNA detection in nasopharyngeal aspirates, buccal brush
swabs, or genital swabs from infants born to HPV-infected mothers have varied from 2%
to  80%  (871,872,881).  Neonatal  clinical  abnormalities  at  birth  are  rare.  Genital
condylomata  can  occur  within  weeks  to  months  after  birth  but  are  rare.  Respiratory
papillomatosis,  a  rare  condition  in  which  respiratory  papillomas  develop  and  typically
recur (i.e., juvenile onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis), usually manifests within
2--5 years after birth. Respiratory papillomatosis in children is thought to be secondary
to  HPV  transmitted  from  mother  to  child  through  aspiration  of  infectious  maternal
genital secretions during delivery; however, other methods of transmission are possible
(871). A recent parent-child study found that the cumulative detection rate for high-risk
HPV from the child's  genital  samples  was  53% over 3 years;  1.5% persisted  with  the
same HPV type at the end of study. During the same period, HPV was detected more
commonly  from  oral  samples,  with  a  cumulative  rate  of  63%  with  10%  persistence
(871).  Persistence  in  infant  oral  samples  was  associated  with  persistent  oral  HPV
detection  in  the  mothers.  Persistent  genital  infections  were  associated  with  the
mother's history of genital warts. The prevalence of HPV DNA in the oropharynx in 1235
children in Iowa was assessed in one study; a bimodal age distribution was found, with
highest HPV prevalence in the youngest and oldest groups: 2.5% at age <1 year, 0.8%
at  1--4  years,  1.2%  at  5--11  years,  1.5%  at  12--15  years,  and  3.3%  at  16--20  years
(883). These data support the high rate of HPV clearance in children, even if the infant
is exposed to HPV during infancy. Although perinatal transmission is possible, genital
HPV is most commonly sexually transmitted. Young age at first intercourse and a higher
number of recent sex partners are strong risk factors for HPV (884--888). Prevalence of
HPV  is  common  in  sexually  active  adolescent  girls,  with  prevalences  of  12%--64%
compared  with  2%--7%  in  women  aged  >35  years  (885,889--891).  Cervical  HPV  is
acquired shortly after onset of sexual activity, with 50% cumulative exposure within 3
years (884,886), even among young women with one sex partner (892). Although the
incidence  of  anogenital  HPV  infection  in  sexually  active  youth  is  high,  longitudinal
studies  have  demonstrated  that  80%--90%  of  infections  among  youth  without  HIV
infection might be transient and spontaneously regress (890,893). Repeated infections
with  new  types  are  common  (889),  but  whether  repeat  detection  of  same  HPV  type
infections  result  from  new  exposures  or  from  reactivation  of  latent  infection  is  not
known (894). Even though the prevalence of HPV consistently has been higher among
HIV-infected  men  and  women,  acquisition  rates  of  HPV  appear  similar  among
HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected persons (895). The higher prevalence results from the
increased rate of HPV persistence in HIV-infected persons. In one study of adolescents
with  HIV,  only  50%  cleared  their  HPV  infections  (895).  Other  possible  risk  factors  for
persistence  have  included  multiple  types  or  high-risk  types  of  HPV  (e.g.,  16  and  18),
older  age,  smoking  cigarettes,  and  duration  of  HPV  detection  for  >12  months  (896).
Detection  of  anal  HPV  also  is  higher  among  HIV-infected  youth  (897).  Receptive  anal
sex is a risk for anal HPV among HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected men; the association
between anal HPV infection and anal sex is not as clear for women (897,898). In one
study  of  HIV-infected  women,  anal  HPV  infection  was  more  prevalent  than  cervical
infection (899). Persistent infection with high-risk HPV is associated with increased risk
for  cervical  intraepithelial  neoplasia  (CIN)  and  cervical  and  vulvovaginal  carcinoma  in
women  and  for  anal  intraepithelial  neoplasia  and  anal  carcinoma  in  both  women  and
men. Rates of all these HPV-associated cancers are higher among HIV-infected persons
(900)  and  believed  to  result  predominantly  from  the  increased  risk  for  persistent
infection  in  this  group.  Interestingly,  the  risk  for  these  HPV-associated  cancers  is
highest among young persons with HIV (900). Adolescent girls differ biologically from
adult  women  (e.g.,  cervical  squamous  metaplasia)  that  might  increase  their
susceptibility  to  either  persistent  infection  or  disease  (877,901).  The  risk  for
HPV-associated  cervical  abnormalities  increases  among  HIV-infected  youth.  In  one
study,  33%  of  HPV-infected  youth  with  HIV  progressed  to  high-grade  squamous
intraepithelial
 lesions
 (HSIL)
 within
 3
 years
 of
 observation
 (902).
 CD4
immunosuppression  correlated  with  HPV  persistence  but  not  with  HSIL.  Even  though
HAART  has  dramatically  altered  HIV's  natural  history,  its  impact  on  HPV  and
HPV-associated  neoplasia  is  less  clear.  Other  risks  associated  with  cervical  cancers
include lack of cervical cancer screening, prolonged hormonal contraceptive use, parity,
smoking,  and  immunocompromising  conditions  (other  than  HIV)  (888).  Genital  HPV
types cause hyperplastic, papillomatous, and verrucous squamous epithelial lesions on
skin  and  mucus  membranes,  including  anal,  genital,  oral,  nasal,  conjunctival,  GI,
bladder,  and  respiratory  tract  mucosa.  Wart  lesions  can  appear  as  papules,  flat,
smooth,  or  pedunculated  lesions.  Sometimes  they  can  be  soft,  pink,  or  white
"cauliflower-like" sessile growths on moist mucosal surfaces (condyloma accuminatum),
or  keratotic  lesions  on  squamous  epithelium  of  the  skin  with  a  thick,  horny  layer.
Because  HPV  requires  access  to  basal  epithelial  cells  through  disruption  of  the
squamous  epithelium,  common  sites  for  skin  warts  are  the  hand,  elbows,  knees,  and
feet. Most cutaneous and anogenital warts can be diagnosed by physical examination.
Diagnosis of laryngeal papillomas requires laryngoscopy, and children with suspected
respiratory  tract  papillomas  need  to  be  evaluated  by  a  pediatric  otolaryngologist.
Whether  all  cervical  HPV  infections  result  in  microscopic  abnormalities  described  as
squamous intra-epithelial lesions (SIL) remains debatable. Most HPV DNA detected from
cervical  samples  is  associated  with  normal  cervical  cytology.  These  infections  either
have  microscopic  lesions  not  detected  by  the  insensitive  cytologic  test  or  are  truly
latent. The Pap test (conventional or liquid-based) is a screening test for HPV-associated
disease,  including  cervical  cancer.  However,  histology  remains  the  gold  standard  for
confirming HPV-associated cervical and anal precancerous lesions and invasive cancers.
Biopsies for histologic diagnosis usually are directed by colposcopy or high-resolution
anoscopy.  No  screening  tests  are  available  for  vaginal  and  vulvar  disease;  however,
these  lesions  often  are  diagnosed  in  women  referred  to  colposcopy  for  abnormal
cytology or because of abnormalities noted on macroscopic examination. Histology also
should be confirmed for vulvar and vaginal squamous intraepithelial lesions and cancer.
HPV DNA can be detected using several platforms (903). The only FDA-approved test is
HybridCapture,  which  detects  any  of  13  high-risk  HPV  types  and  is  not  type  specific.
Detection  and  typing  of  HPV  is  not  recommended  for  diagnosing  or  managing
anogenital or cutaneous warts or papillomas (870). HPV testing is not recommended in
any  circumstance  for  adolescent  girls  (aged  ≤20  years)  (904),  regardless  of  whether
they  are  HIV-infected  or  HIV-uninfected,  because  of  the  high  rates  of  HPV  infection.
These  recommendations  may  change  once  specific  HPV  testing  has  been  studied  in
clinical  trials.  Preventing  Exposure  HIV-infected  persons  should  use  latex  condoms
during  every  act  of  sexual  intercourse  to  reduce  the  risk  for  exposure  to  sexually
transmitted  pathogens  (AII),  including  HPV  (887).  HPV  vaccine  In  June  2006,  FDA
approved the first preventive vaccine for HPV types 16, 18, 6, and 11. HPV 16 and 18
cause  almost  70%  of  invasive  cervical  cancers,  and  HPV  6  and  11  cause  90%  of
external  genital  warts.  HPV  exposure  is  extremely  common  after  sexual  contact,  not
just sexual intercourse, is initiated. Administration of the vaccine is critical before onset
of  sexual  activity  for  it  to  be  fully  effective.  Data  for  HIV-uninfected  women  showed
efficacy  rates  of  95%  for  preventing  HPV  infection  and  high-grade  CIN  related  to
vaccine-related HPV strains and 99% efficacy for genital warts (905,906). However, if
previous exposure to the vaccine HPV types was documented, no efficacy was noted for
that type, underscoring the fact that the vaccine is not therapeutic. A second vaccine
targeting HPV 16 and 18 has had similar efficacy (Cervarix, Glaxo Smith Kline, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina) (907) and is expected to receive FDA approval in 2009.
Although the vaccines are considered safe, studies in HIV-infected persons are not yet
available, so immunogenicity and efficacy in this population has not been established.
However, because quadrivalent HPV vaccine is noninfectious, it can be administered to
females  who  are  immunosuppressed  by  disease  (including  HIV)  or  medications  (AI);
immune  response  and  vaccine  efficacy  might  be  less  than  in  immunocompetent
persons  (Figure  2)  (30,908).  Studies  of  the  immunogenicity  and  safety  of  the  HPV
vaccine in HIV-infected children show that the vaccine is safe. Although seroconversion
occurred in 100% of those HIV-infected seronegative children, titers for HPV 6 and 18
were  lower  than  those  for  healthy  children  (909).  CDC  recommendations  for  HPV
vaccination of all children and adolescents should be followed for both HIV-infected and
HIV-uninfected  persons  (908).  The  first  dose  of  the  HPV  vaccine  series  should  be
administered to girls aged 11--12 years but can be administered as early as 9 years.
The second dose should be administered 2 months after the first dose, and the third
dose should be administered 6 months after the first dose. HIV-infected adolescent girls
and  young  women  aged  13--26  years  who  have  not  been  previously  vaccinated  also
should be vaccinated with the three-dose HPV vaccine series. The HPV vaccine does not
have any therapeutic benefit for existing HPV-related lesions in either HIV-infected or
HIV-uninfected women. No studies using the HPV vaccine to prevent HPV infection and
associated lesions of the anus, penis, or oral cavity in men have been published, and
the  vaccine  is  not  approved  for  use  in  men  in  the  United  States.  As  in  HIV-infected
women, no data exist on the safety or efficacy of the HPV vaccine in HIV-infected men.
Preventing  First  Episode  of  Disease  HPV-associated  genital  epithelial  cancers  among
HIV-infected  women  As  part  of  a  complete  history  and  physical  examination,
HIV-infected  sexually  active  women  should  have  a  pelvic  examination  and  a  cervical
cancer screening test (Pap test, either conventional or liquid-based). In accordance with
the recommendation of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, a Pap smear
should be obtained twice during the first year after diagnosis of HIV infection and, if the
results  are  normal,  annually  thereafter  (AII).  If  the  results  of  the  Pap  smear  are
abnormal, care should be provided according to treatment guidelines described below
for adolescents. Adult women (e.g., aged >20 years) should be managed according to
adult  guidelines.  No  data  are  available  that  demonstrate  these  guidelines  should  be
modified  to  prevent  cervical  disease  for  women  on  HAART.  HPV-associated  anal
intraepithelial neoplasia and anal cancer among HIV-infected women and HIV-infected
men  who  have  sex  with  men  Evidence  from  multiple  studies  demonstrates  that
HIV-infected men who have sex with men and HIV-infected women are at increased risk
for anal HSIL and might be at increased risk for anal cancer. In view of this evidence,
and given a cost-effectiveness analysis projecting that screening and treatment for anal
HSILs  provide  clinical  benefits  comparable  to  other  measures  to  prevent  OIs  among
HIV-infected persons (910), anal cytology screening of HIV-infected men who have sex
with men and of women might become a useful preventive measure (911). However,
studies  of  screening  and  treatment  programs  for  anal  HSIL  need  to  be  implemented
before  recommendations  for  anal  cytology  screening  can  be  made.  Treatment  of
Disease Genital warts Multiple treatments for HPV-associated skin and external genital
lesions  exist,  but  no  one  treatment  is  ideal  for  all  patients  or  all  lesions  (CIII)  (870).
Standard topical therapy for HPV-associated lesions among HIV-infected children often
is ineffective. Treatment can induce wart-free periods, but the underlying viral infection
can  persist  and  result  in  recurrence.  No  data  suggest  that  treatment  modalities  for
external genital warts should differ in HIV-infected persons. However, persons who are
immunosuppressed because of HIV might have larger or more numerous warts, might
not  respond  as  well  as  immunocompetent  persons  to  therapy  for  genital  warts,  and
might  have  more  frequent  recurrences  after  treatment  (154,912,913).  In  addition,
topical  treatments  are  seldom  effective  in  patients  with  large  or  extensive  lesions.
Topical  treatments  include  podofilox  (0.5%)  solution  or  gel  (antimitotic  agent),
imiquimod  (5%)  cream  (topical  immune  enhancer  that  stimulates  production  of
interferon  and  other  cytokines),  trichloroacetic  or  bichloroacetic  acid  (80%--90%
aqueous  solution)  (caustic  agents  that  destroy  warts  by  chemical  coagulation  of
proteins),  and  podophyllin  resin  (10%--25%)  in  a  compound  tincture  of  benzoin
(contains  antimitotic  compounds  and  mutagens).  Podofilox  and  imiquimod  are
patient-applied. Podofilox is applied to all lesions twice a day for 3 consecutive days,
followed  by  4  days  of  no  therapy.  This  cycle  can  be  repeated  weekly  up  to  4  weeks
(BIII). Imiquimod is applied once daily at bedtime for 3 nonconsecutive nights a week
for  up  to  16  weeks.  The  treatment  area  should  be  washed  with  soap  and  water  the
following  morning  (BII).  Acid  cauterization  (i.e.,  tricholoracetic  or  bichloroacetic  acid)
and podophyllin resin require application by a health-care provider. Acid cauterization
should  be  discontinued  if  substantial  improvement  is  not  observed  after  three
treatment  sessions  or  complete  clearance  has  not  occurred  after  six  consecutive
treatments  (BIII).  Podophyllin  resin  is  applied  and  removed  by  washing  a  few  hours
later; applications can be repeated weekly for up to 6 weeks (CIII). Podophyllin resin has
lost favor because the resin can vary in potency and is not reliable. Other treatments
include Veregen(r) (based on the antioxidative effect of green tea extract), intralesion
interferon  or  5-fluorouracil/epinephrinegel  implant,  and  cidofovir  topical  gel  (1%).
Veregen (sinecatechins) is a new FDA-approved topical product for external genital wart
treatment that can be used three times daily for up to 16 weeks. No data are available
on this treatment for HIV-infected persons (CIII). Cidofovir topical gel (1%) is a topical
preparation  that  has  been  evaluated  in  a  limited  number  of  adults  for  treatment  of
anogenital HPV infection (CIII). Topical cidofovir can be absorbed systemically and be
associated
 with
 renal
 toxicity
 (914).
 Injectable
 therapy
 (e.g.,
 interferon
 or
5-fluoracil/epinephringel  implant)  should  be  offered  in  only  severe  recalcitrant  cases
because  of  inconvenient  routes  of  administration,  frequent  office  visits,  and  a  high
frequency  of  systemic  adverse  effects.  Lesions  can  be  removed  by  cryotherapy  or
surgery  (BIII).  Cryotherapy  (application  of  liquid  nitrogen  or  dry  ice)  must  be  applied
until each lesion is thoroughly frozen. Treatment can be repeated every 1--2 weeks up
to  four  times.  The  major  toxicity  is  local  pain.  Adequate  local  pain  management  is
essential  for  all  caustic  treatments.  Topical  anesthetics  are  favored.  Lesions  can  be
removed  surgically  by  tangential  scissor,  tangential  shave  excision,  curettage,  or
electrosurgery. Oral warts Oral warts can be located on various surfaces in the mouth.
In contrast to other oral manifestations of HIV, an increased prevalence of oral warts in
patients on HAART has been reported from the United States and the United Kingdom
(915,916).  No  randomized  trials  have  been  conducted  on  treatment  of  oral  warts.
Treatments  include  surgical  excision  and  cryotherapy.  Some  topical  modalities  have
had  success  (917).   Respiratory  papillomatosis  Respiratory  papillomatosis  should  be
managed  by  a  specialist  (918).  Treatment  is  directed  toward  removing  lesions
obstructing the airway rather than at the elimination of disease. Lesions are removed
by debridement or laser. Systemic interferon-alfa therapy or intralesional cidofovir has
been  used  as  an  investigational  treatment  with  limited  success  in  children,  with
frequent recurrences or extension into the trachea, bronchi, or lung parenchyma (CIII).
Management  of  abnormal  cytology  Management  of  anogenital  HPV  infection
accompanied by cytologic changes indicating dysplasia/carcinoma among adolescents
differs slightly from that for adults. Adolescents aged 13 --20 years and young women
are considered a special population. The risk for invasive cervical cancer is low in this
group, but CIN lesions are common. As noted earlier, CIN in HIV-uninfected adolescents
also  has  a  high  rate  of  spontaneous  regression  of  CIN  lesions  (919).  HPV  testing  for
follow-up is not recommended for adolescents, regardless of HIV infection status (904).
Because of the high rate of progression to HSIL, all HIV-infected adolescents with any
SIL,  either  low-grade  (LSIL)  or  high-grade  (HSIL),  or  atypical  squamous  cells  of
undetermined  significance  (ASCUS)  suggestive  of  HSIL  should  be  referred  for
colposcopy (BIII). In patients with ASCUS alone, Pap smear for cytology can be repeated
in 6--12 months. If ASCUS or greater is found on repeat cytology, referral to colposcopy
is warranted. Treatment of histologic CIN Follow-up with annual cytologic assessment is
recommended for adolescents with CIN 1 (AII) (904). At the 12-month follow-up, only
adolescents  with  HSIL  or  greater  on  the  repeat  cytology  should  be  referred  back  to
colposcopy. At the 24-month follow-up, those with an ASCUS or greater result should be
referred  back  to  colposcopy  (AII).  For  adolescent  girls  and  young  women  with  a
histologic  diagnosis  of  CIN  2  or  3  not  otherwise  specified,  either  treatment  or
observation  for  up  to  24  months  using  both  colposcopy  and  cytology  at  6-month
intervals  is  acceptable,  provided  colposcopy  is  satisfactory  (BIII)  (904).  When  a
histologic  diagnosis  of  CIN  2  is  specified,  observation  is  preferred,  but  treatment  is
acceptable.  When  CIN  3  is  histologically  diagnosed  or  when  colposcopy  is
unsatisfactory, treatment is recommended (BIII). If the colposcopic appearance of the
lesion worsens or if HSIL cytology or a high-grade colposcopic lesion persists for 1 year,
repeat biopsy is recommended (BIII). After two consecutive "negative for intraepithelial
lesion or malignancy" results, adolescents and young women with normal colposcopy
can return to routine cytologic screening (BII). Treatment is recommended if CIN 3 is
subsequently identified or if CIN 2 or 3 persists for 24 months (BII). Persistent CIN 1, 2,
and  3  lesions  in  HIV-infected  women  should  be  treated  as  in  HIV-uninfected  women
(904).  Conventional  therapies  used  to  treat  CIN  2  or  3  include  cryotherapy,  laser
therapy,  cone  biopsy,  and  a  loop  electrosurgical  excision  procedure  (LEEP).  LEEP
usually is the preferred mode of treatment (BIII). Recurrence rates of 40%--60% after
treatment  have  been  reported  among  HIV-infected  women  undergoing  these
procedures. Pregnant HIV-infected adolescents should be treated similarly to pregnant
HIV-infected  women.  Role  of  antiretroviral  therapy  HAART  has  not  been  consistently
associated  with  reduced  risk  for  HPV-related  cervical  abnormalities  in  HIV-infected
women. However, severe immunosuppression is associated with higher morbidity and
mortality.  Monitoring  of  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS  Monitoring  is  required  during
and  after  treatment  of  genital  warts  because  each  treatment  has  associated  toxicity
and  recurrences  are  common  after  treatment.  Patients  can  be  monitored  by  physical
examination  for  evidence  of  recurrence.  The  major  toxicity  of  podophyllotoxin  and
topical podophyllin resin is local skin irritation. Also, if podophyllin is applied to a large
treatment area, systemic absorption can cause nausea, vomiting, and CNS effects. The
major toxicity of imiquimod is inflammation at the application site. The major toxicity of
cryotherapy is local pain. The major side effects of surgical treatment for genital warts
are local pain, bleeding, and secondary infection. The major adverse events associated
with acid cauterization are local pain and irritation or ulceration of adjacent normal skin.
Intralesional  interferon  can  be  associated  with  systemic  toxicities  of  interferon,
including  fever,  fatigue,  myalgia,  malaise,  depression,  and  other  influenza-like
symptoms. Infrared coagulation may lead to bleeding and abscess formation. Scarring
can occur with any of the above treatment modalities. Topical cidofovir may result in
systemic absorption and be associated with renal toxicity (914). Secondary infections
are  not  uncommon  if  ulcerations  occur.  Patients  should  be  monitored  regularly  after
each  treatment.  Because  risk  for  recurrence  of  CIN  and  cervical  cancer  after
conventional  therapy  increases  among  HIV-seropositive  persons,  patients  should  be
carefully  followed  after  treatment  with  frequent  cytologic  screening  and  colposcopic
examination  according  to  published  guidelines  (AII)  (920,921).  Treatment  of  CIN  with
ablative and excisional modalities can be associated with several adverse events such
as  pain  and  discomfort,  intraoperative  hemorrhage,  postoperative  hemorrhage,
infection  and  cervical  stenosis.  The  major  toxicity  of  topical  agents  for  treatment  of
external  genital  warts  is  local  pain  or  irritation  of  adjacent  normal  skin.  HIV-infected
patients  with  immunosuppression  might  have  a  lower  response  rate  to  all  of  these
modalities. Secondary infections are not uncommon if ulcerations occur. Patients should
be  monitored  regularly  after  each  treatment.  Because  of  the  frequent  recurrence  of
squamous intraepithelial lesions after treatment, close surveillance with colposcopy and
cytology  are  recommended.  An  "immune  reconstitution"-like  syndrome  related  to
HPV-associated oral warts among HIV-infected adults has been observed in which the
occurrence  of  oral  warts  was  associated  with  decreased  HIV  RNA  levels  with  HAART
(915). Immune reconstitution in response to viral load reduction might result in a return
of marked inflammatory responses against latent oral HPV infection.  Management of
Treatment  Failure  Treatment  failure  is  defined  as  the  persistence  or  recurrence  of
lesions after appropriate therapy. For persistent or recurrent genital warts, retreatment
with any of the modalities previously described should be considered, preferably with
an  alternative  modality  to  the  one  that  previously  failed  (AIII).  Genital  warts  often
require more than one course of treatment. Recalcitrant warts should be managed by
experienced  clinicians  and  referred  for  excisional  therapy.  Recurrence  of  CIN  may
require  additional  treatments  (i.e.,  LEEP  and  laser).  No  recommendations  exist  for
preventing  recurrence  of  external  genital  warts.  Patients  should  be  monitored  with
cytologic screening according to published guidelines and, when indicated, colposcopic
examination  for  recurrent  lesions  (AI)  (922,923).  In  one  study,  use  of  low-dose
intravaginal  flurouracil  reduced  recurrence  of  CIN  after  LEEP,  but  lack  of  additional
studies  do  not  warrant  routine  use  (924).  Efudex  should  not  be  used  in  pregnant
women.  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  Not  applicable.  First  described  in
association  with  chronic  lymphocytic  leukemia  and  Hodgkin  disease,  progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare demyelinating disease of the CNS that
occurs  in  immunocompromised  patients  (925).  It  is  caused  by  primary  infection  or
reactivation of Jamestown Canyon virus (JCV), a ubiquitous polyoma virus. Most humans
are infected with JCV early in life; 50% of children are seropositive by age 9--11 years,
and seropositivity among adult women aged >25 years is 72% (926). Infection results
in  chronic  asymptomatic  carriage  in  the  kidneys,  lymphoid  tissue,  bone  marrow,  and
lymphocytes (927,928); in a patient with a weakened immune system, the virus may
reactivate and spread to the brain by lymphocytes causing neurologic dysfunction and
serious  and  life-threatening  disease.  PML  is  an  AIDS-defining  illness  in  HIV-infected
persons.  PML  has  been  rare  in  reports  from  large  series  of  HIV-infected  children
(1,4,929),  but  cases  have  been  reported  in  children  (930--935).  No  symptoms  are
known to be associated with acute JCV infection. PML is the only disease caused by JCV.
Cases  in  children  are  similar  to  those  in  adults.  Demyelination  is  at  first  patchy,
involving  subcortical  regions,  and  then  spreads  to  deep  white  matter  in  confluent
pattern; thus, PML initially may present with focal neurologic deficits that can involve
different brain regions. The established criteria for clinical diagnosis are focal signs and
symptoms on neurologic examination, focal white matter lesions on MRI or CT without
mass effect, and exclusion of other causes of the clinical and neuroradiologic findings
(936).  The  disease  has  an  insidious  onset  and  produces  a  neurologic  syndrome  that
steadily progresses over weeks or months, characterized by confusion, disorientation,
lack  of  energy,  loss  of  balance,  cognitive  dysfunction,  dementia,  seizures,  ataxia,
aphasia,  cranial  nerve  deficits,  visual  abnormalities  (e.g.,  blurred  or  double  vision  or
loss  of  vision),  hemiparesis  or  quadraparesis,  and  eventually  coma.  During  the
pre-HAART  era,  adults  and  children  with  PML  had  extremely  poor  survival  (929).
Survival among adults has improved during the HAART era (937--939). No comparable
data  exist  for  children.  A  confirmed  diagnosis  of  PML  requires  a  compatible  clinical
syndrome  and  radiographic  findings  coupled  with  brain  biopsy  demonstrating  a
characteristic  triad  of  pathologic  foci  of  demyelination,  enlarged  hyperchromatic
oligodendrocytes  with  enlarged  nuclei  and  basophilic-staining  intranuclear  material,
and  enlarged  astrocytes  with  bizarre  hyperchromatic  nuclei.  When  only  two  of  these
features are present, JCV can be demonstrated by in situ hybridization or by electron
microscopy for definitive diagnosis. Although brain biopsy remains the confirmative test
for diagnosis of PML, brain scans such as MRI or CT can reveal lesions in the brain. The
radiologic  features  of  PML  are  typically  noninflammatory  (unless  associated  with
HAART-related  IRIS).  Typical  CT  abnormalities  include  single  or  multiple  hypodense,
nonenhancing  cerebral  white  matter  lesions;  cerebellum  and  brain  stem  occasionally
are involved. MRI depicts white matter lesions of low T1 signal intensity and high proton
density  on  T2  weighted  images  with  absence  of  edema  or  mass  effects,  as  might  be
seen with cerebral toxoplasmosis or lymphoma. Postcontrast enhancement is unusual
and, when present, usually is sparse, with a thin or reticulated appearance adjacent to
the edge of the lesions. PML diagnosis is now facilitated by use of PCR to detect JCV
DNA in CSF, which may obviate the need for brain biopsy in patients with a compatible
clinical syndrome and radiographic findings. Nested JCV PCR on CSF is highly sensitive
(90%--100%) and specific (92%--100%) for PML (940). Measurement of JCV DNA levels
in CSF samples can be a useful virologic marker for managing PML in patients receiving
HAART (941). Preventing Exposure There are no known means of preventing exposure
to JCV. Preventing First Episode of Disease There are no means of preventing PML in
severely  immune-suppressed  persons.  Use  of  HAART  can  prevent  or  reverse  severe
immunosuppression.
 Discontinuing
 Primary
 Prophylaxis
 No
 means
 of
 primary
prophylaxis  of  JCV  infection  or  development  of  PML  have  been  demonstrated.
Treatment  of  Disease  No  effective  therapy  has  been  established  for  JCV  infection  or
PML.  Survival  in  HIV-infected  adults  with  PML  has  substantially  improved  during  the
post-HAART  era,  with  a  median  survival  increase  from  14  to  64  weeks  (942).  A  CD4
count of >100 cells/mm3 at PML diagnosis was associated with improved survival, and
the  use  of  HAART  postdiagnosis  of  PML  also  was  strongly  associated  with  improved
survival  (942).  Thus,  the  main  approach  to  treatment  involves  maximally  optimizing
antiretroviral  therapy  to  reverse  the  immunosuppression  that  interferes  with  normal
host response to this virus (AII). A number of agents have been proposed or reported
anecdotally as more specific treatments for PML, but none have proven effective after
greater  scrutiny  or  more  extensive  study.  In  a  randomized  open-label  trial  of  IV  and
intrathecal  cytosine  arabinoside  (943)  and  a  nonrandomized,  open-label  trial  of
cidofovir (944), neither drug was effective in producing clinical improvement of PML and
neither  is  routinely  recommended  (DII).  Immunomodulatory  approaches,  such  as
interferon-alfa,  also  have  been  described  in  case  reports  in  HIV-infected  adults;
however, none have been studied in a prospective, controlled clinical trial and, in one
analysis, did not provide any benefit beyond that with HAART (945), and thus are also
not  routinely  recommended  (DIII).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS
Neurologic stability or improvement and prolonged survival are associated with reduced
JCV DNA and appearance of JCV-specific antibody in CSF of HAART-treated PML patients
(946). When antiretroviral therapy is initiated and CD4 counts rise, certain patients will
experience  neurologic  improvement  and  others  might  become  neurologically  stable;
however, reports have documented worsening neurologic manifestations after initiation
of HAART (939). In certain instances, this worsening is caused by IRIS (939,947--949),
examples  of  which  have  occurred  in  children  (21).  Other  cases  may  represent  the
natural history of PML. The underlying etiology and trigger of HAART-associated PML is
controversial.  One  hypothesis  postulates  a  reduction  in  inhibitory  cytokines  (e.g.,
interferon-alfa and interleukin-12) after HAART, thus promoting JCV reactivation within
the brain or, by increasing trafficking of JCV-infected peripheral lymphocytes, into the
brain  (950).  JCV  infection  occurring  coincidental  to  HAART  initiation  resulting  in  a
beneficial inflammatory response with lack of disease progression is another hypothesis
(950), particularly given that JCV infection in children with perinatal HIV infection most
often would be acquired during childhood. The overall prevalence of IRIS in children is
not  known.  Inflammatory  PML  should  be  suspected  in  HAART-treated  children  with
advanced HIV disease who show acute neurologic deterioration and contrast-enhancing
demyelinating  lesions  on  MRI.  Management  of  Treatment  Failure  PML  remission  with
HAART may take several weeks, and no criteria exist that define progression of disease.
A  working  definition  used  for  HIV-infected  adults  is  continued  clinical  worsening  and
continued  detection  of  CSF  JCV  at  3  months  (see  Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  and
Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-Infected Adults) (16). Some patients' PML
worsens  despite  HAART,  either  because  of  IRIS  or  the  natural  history  of  PML.  In  both
cases, HAART should be continued. If HAART fails to suppress HIV RNA or to boost the
CD4 count, then attention should focus on modifying and optimizing the antiretroviral
treatment  (AII).  However,  in  HIV-infected  children  responding  well  to  HAART  but  with
continued worsening PML, an expert in pediatric HIV infection should be consulted.  On
the  basis  of  its  role  in  reversing  the  disease,  the  main  preventive  measure  is  an
effective antiretroviral regimen that suppresses HIV viremia and maintains CD4 count
(AII).  Discontinuing  Secondary  Prophylaxis  No  means  of  secondary  prophylaxis  of  JCV
infection or PML have been demonstrated. Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infections occur
worldwide.  In  the  prevaccine  era,  approximately  4  million  cases  of  varicella  occurred
annually in the United States. Since the institution of universal varicella vaccination for
healthy children, the incidence of varicella and its associated morbidity and mortality
have  decreased  by  approximately  74%--90%  (951).  Varicella  can  cause  greater
morbidity  and  mortality  in  HIV-infected  persons  than  among  the  general  population
(952,953).  VZV  causes  both  varicella  (a  primary  infection)  and  zoster  (a  secondary
infection  caused  by  reactivation  of  latent  VZV  acquired  during  varicella)  (954).  The
incubation period for varicella ranges from 10 to 21 days (average: 14 days). Before the
widespread  use  of  varicella  vaccine  in  the  United  States,  the  annual  rate  of  varicella
infection  in  children  aged  <10  years  was  9%;  by  adulthood  >95%  of  persons  had
antibodies to VZV, indicating a history of primary infection (955). Once established, VZV
latency persists for life. Reactivation, causing clinical zoster, occurs in roughly 25% of
people.  A  decline  in  specific  cellular  immunity  to  VZV  contributes  significantly  to
development  of  zoster  (954).  HIV-infected  persons  are  at  higher  risk  for  zoster,  by  a
factor of 15--25 times, than the general population (956). The incidence of zoster also
increased with age, particularly in persons aged >50 years. VZV is transmitted mainly
from  skin  lesions  during  illness  but  also  can  be  transmitted  through  airborne  spread
(957).  Varicella  is  highly  contagious;  clinical  infection  develops  in  about  80%  of
susceptible  persons  exposed  in  a  household  (958).  Second  attacks  of  varicella  are
uncommon (954). Zoster is less contagious than varicella. Mother-to-child transmission
of  VZV  can  occur;  however,  because  most  adults  are  immune,  varicella  complicating
pregnancy  is  unusual.  In  one  study,  13%  of  HIV-infected  pregnant  women  lacked
immunity  to  VZV  (959).  Whether  mother-to-child  VZV  transmission  increases  among
HIV-infected  pregnant  women  who  have  varicella  is  unknown.  Congenital  varicella
syndrome  occurs  in  approximately  0.4%  (95%  CI:  0.05%--1.5%)  of  infants  born  to
women  who  have  varicella  during  pregnancy  before  13  weeks'  gestation  and  in
approximately  2%  (95%  CI:  0%--5%)  of  infants  born  to  women  who  have  varicella  at
13--20 weeks' gestation (960). This syndrome is not seen among women who develop
herpes  zoster  during  pregnancy.  Fewer  than  100  cases  of  congenital  VZV  have  been
reported, none so far in HIV-infected mothers. However, congenital varicella syndrome
may not be recognized. Before the availability of varicella vaccine in the United States,
approximately  44  cases  occurred  each  year.  Congenital  varicella  syndrome  is
characterized  by  cicatricial  skin  scarring,  limb  hypoplasia,  and  neurologic  (e.g.,
microcephaly,  cortical  atrophy,  seizures,  and  mental  retardation),  eye  (e.g.,
chorioretinitis,
 microphthalmia,
 and
 cataracts),
 renal
 (e.g.,
 hydroureter,
 and
hydronephrosis)  and  autonomic  nervous  system  abnormalities  (neurogenic  bladder,
swallowing dysfunction, and aspiration pneumonia) (961--963). VZV can be transmitted
to the fetus in later gestation, resulting in acute neonatal varicella. When the mother
develops varicella from 4 days before to 2 days after delivery without passive antibody
prophylaxis, the attack rate for infants is approximately 20% and mortality, before the
availability  of  antiviral  therapy,  was  approximately  30%  (961).  In  comparison,  if
maternal  varicella  precedes  delivery  long  enough  to  allow  transfer  of  VZV  IgG
antibodies across the placenta, infants can develop varicella in the first 5 days of life,
but it is rarely severe and usually requires no medical intervention. Zoster occurs only
among persons previously infected with VZV. Zoster used to be common in HIV-infected
children  who  had  primary  varicella  infections  when  their  CD4  counts  were  normal  or
mildly  suppressed.  Before  PIs  were  commonly  administered  to  children,  among
HIV-infected children with low CD4 percentage (i.e., CD4 <15%) at the time of primary
varicella,  the  rate  of  subsequent  zoster  was  approximately  70%  (952,953).  The
incidence of zoster among HIV-infected children who developed primary varicella when
they  were  immunocompromised  was  467  per  1000  child-years,  substantially  higher
than the rates for immunocompromised HIV-infected adults (98 per 1000 person-years)
and for children with leukemia (25 per 1000 child-years). As in adults, the CD4 count in
children  correlates  with  the  frequency  of  zoster  recurrences  (964).  The  incidence  of
zoster reportedly increases transiently after institution of PIs (22,965). The cause of this
phenomenon is not known; one hypothesis is that it results from return of regulatory
T-cell function with transient immune dysregulation. Overall, however, the incidence of
herpes zoster in HIV-infected children is lower during the HAART era than it was during
the pre-HAART era (3). One reason may be immunization of many HIV-infected children
with  the  Oka  vaccine  strain.  The  Oka  vaccine  strain  of  VZV  is  the  licensed  live
attenuated  varicella  vaccine  (marketed  by  Merck  in  the  United  States  and  by
GlaxoSmithKline  in  other  countries).  Varicella  in  HIV-infected  children  may  be
associated with a prodrome of malaise and fever, followed by pruritic vesiculopapular
lesions that are more numerous on the face and trunk than on the extremities. Lesions
evolve over 5 days through macular, papular, vesicular, pustular, and crust stages. In
profoundly immunocompromised hosts, vesicles can persist for weeks and coalesce to
form large lesions resembling a burn. Complications of varicella include superinfection
of  skin  with  bacterial  pathogens,  such  as  staphylococci  and  streptococci;  neurologic
manifestations, such as encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, and transverse myelitis; and on
occasion, vasculitic stroke, hepatitis, and pneumonia. Initial reports of varicella among
HIV-infected children suggested severe disease manifestations (966), but more recent
studies support less complicated courses, particularly in children receiving antiretroviral
therapy  or  having  higher  CD4  counts  at  the  time  of  infection  (952,953,967,968).
However,  the  disease  may  last  longer  than  normal,  and  the  rate  of  complications  is
higher  than  in  otherwise  healthy  children  with  varicella  (968).  Uncommonly,
HIV-infected children can have persistent chronic infection, with continued appearance
of new VZV lesions for >1 month after primary or recurrent infection (969). The lesions
are  characteristically  varicelliform  at  onset  but  evolve  into  nonhealing  ulcers  that
become  necrotic,  crusted,  and  hyperkeratotic.  Persistent  lesions  may  be  atypical  and
lack a vesicular component. Chronic VZV was reported in 14% of HIV-infected children
with  VZV,  usually  in  children  with  low  CD4  counts  (964).  The  virus  may  become
resistant  to  acyclovir  during  prolonged  therapy  (970).  The  classical  presentation  of
zoster  is  a  painful  or  pruritic  unilateral  vesicular  eruption  with  a  dermatomal
distribution.  Less  typical  rashes,  however,  including  those  that  extend  beyond
dermatomal boundaries or are bilaterally distributed or generalized, also can represent
zoster  in  HIV-infected  children.  HIV-infected  children  can  have  recurrent  episodes  of
reactivated  VZV  infection  that  present  with  a  disseminated  rash  more  similar  to
varicella  than  zoster  but  without  visceral  dissemination;  they  also  can  have  multiple
episodes  of  recurrent  dermatomal  disease  (964).  Encephalitis  without  rash  resulting
from  zoster  also  has  been  reported  (971).  Diagnostic  laboratory  studies  are  useful  if
children  or  adolescents  present  with  unusual  clinical  manifestations  suspected  to  be
caused  by  zoster.  Ruling  out  HSV  infection,  which  can  be  confused  with  VZV  skin
manifestations,  also  is  important  (972).  Retinitis  is  a  complication  of  VZV  infection
among  HIV-infected  patients  that  occurs  in  children  and  adolescents  (973).
VZV-associated  retinitis  may  be  confused  with  CMV  retinitis  (974).  Progressive  outer
retinal  necrosis  is  a  VZV-associated  entity  that  typically  occurs  among  HIV-infected
persons with CD4 counts <50 cells/mm3. This rapidly progressive necrotizing herpetic
retinopathy  often  is  associated  with  dermatomal  zoster  and  is  characterized  by
multifocal retinal opacification with little or no ocular inflammation (975,976) and rapid
visual  loss.  Acute  retinal  necrosis  occurs  as  a  peripheral  necrotizing  retinitis  with
yellowish thumbprint lesions, retinal vascular sheathing, and vitritis, with a high rate of
visual loss often caused by retinal detachment. This latter syndrome can occur in both
immunologically normal and deficient persons. Among patients with HIV infection, acute
retinal  necrosis  can  occur  at  any  CD4  count,  but  more  often  occurs  at  higher  CD4
counts, and progressive outer retinal necrosis more often occurs at lower CD4 counts.
VZV infection should be suspected in children with unilateral vesicular rashes. Retinitis
as a complication of VZV should be suspected when CMV cannot be implicated or with
progressive  and  otherwise  unexplained  encephalitis  and  a  history  of  varicella  or
varicella  vaccination.  Varicella  and  zoster  are  diagnosed  clinically  by  the  typical
appearance  of  generalized  pruritic  vesicular  rash  and  fever  in  the  former  and  a
frequently  painful  or  pruritic  unilateral  vesicular  rash  in  a  dermatomal  pattern  in  the
latter. Direct immunofluorescence for VZV antigen can be performed on cells collected
from  skin,  conjunctiva,  or  mucosal  lesion  scrapings  for  diagnosis  (972).  The  optimal
sensitivity  of  this  method  requires  obtaining  cells  from  the  base  of  a  lesion  after
unroofing
 a
 fresh
 vesicle.
 Direct
 and
 indirect
 immunofluorescence
 or
immunoperoxidase  methods  also  can  be  used  to  detect  VZV-infected  cells  in  tissue
sections of lung, liver, brain, or other organs. Giemsa-staining (Tzanck preparation) of
scrapings from lesions is nonspecific; detection of multinucleated giant cells does not
distinguish  between  VZV  and  HSV  infection.  VZV  can  be  isolated  in  cell  culture  from
vesicular fluid or ulcer swabs, but the virus is labile. The specimen must be processed
rapidly or kept on dry ice or frozen at -70°C (-94°F) if storage is required for more than
a  few  hours  (961).  Typical  cytopathic  effects  usually  can  be  detected  5--7  days  after
inoculation; confirmation by staining with virus-specific antiserum is then needed. Shell
vial
 cultures
 combine
 centrifugation
 and
 staining
 with
 fluorescein-conjugated
monoclonal antibodies to detect synthesis of VZV proteins in infected cells. This allows
results 1--3 days after inoculation, before cytopathic effect is visible. Standard culture
usually  is  necessary  when  testing  the  virus  for  antiviral  susceptibility  is  anticipated,
although PCR also can be used (972,977). PCR can be used to detect VZV in samples, is
extremely sensitive and specific, can differentiate between wild-type and vaccine VZV,
and  is  becoming  increasingly  available  and  used.  In  some  laboratories,  PCR  has
replaced culture as the "gold standard" (972). Serologic tests can be used to diagnose
VZV infection, noting a substantial increase in antibody titer during convalescence (e.g.,
2--3 weeks after illness onset) or VZV IgM antibody. VZV reactivation also can induce
VZV-IgM antibodies so their presence does not differentiate primary from recurrent VZV
infections (961,972). Preventing Exposure HIV-infected children and adults who have no
evidence  of  immunity  to  VZV  (with  no  history  of  varicella  or  zoster;  or  who  are
seronegative for VZV by a sensitive, specific antibody assay; or who lack evidence of
age appropriate vaccination) should avoid exposure to persons with varicella or zoster
(AII).  Household  contacts  of  HIV-infected  persons  should  receive  varicella  vaccine  if
they  lack  evidence  of  immunity  (i.e.,  have  no  history  of  varicella  or  zoster,  are
seronegative  for  HIV,  were  born  in  the  United  States  after  1980,  or  lack  evidence  of
age-appropriate vaccination) so they will be less likely to transmit wild-type VZV to their
HIV-infected  contacts  (AIII)  (32).  Preventing  Disease  HIV-infected  children  aged  1--8
years in CDC clinical categories N, A, and B (98) and whose CD4 levels are ≥15% should
be  considered  for  vaccination  (two  doses  of  monovalent  single-antigen  varicella
vaccine); first dose administered at age 12--15 months and second dose 3 months later
(BII)  (32).  Limited  data  from  a  clinical  trial  in  HIV-infected  children  with  these
characteristics indicate that the vaccine was well-tolerated and that >80% of subjects
had  detectable  VZV-specific  immune  response  (either  antibody  or  cell  immune
response  or  both)  at  1  year  after  vaccination  (978,979).  Data  are  not  available  on
safety,
 immunogenicity,
 or
 efficacy
 of
 the
 combination
measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine in HIV-infected children, and the combination
measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine should not be administered as a substitute for
the single-antigen varicella vaccine to HIV-infected children (EIII). Data are lacking on
use of varicella vaccine in older HIV-infected children and adolescents. However, on the
basis of expert opinion, the safety of varicella vaccine in HIV-infected persons aged >8
years who have similar levels of immune function (e.g., CD4 count ≥200 cells/mm3) is
likely to be similar to that in children aged <8 years. Immunogenicity might be lower in
older  HIV-infected  children,  adolescents,  and  adults.  However,  weighing  the  risk  for
severe  disease  from  wild  VZV  and  potential  benefit  of  vaccination,  vaccination  (two
doses  of  single-antigen  vaccine,  administered  3  months  apart)  for  persons  with  CD4
count ≥200 cells/mm3 in these age groups can be considered (BIII) (32). HIV-infected
children  tolerate  the  vaccine  well;  as  in  healthy  children,  serious  vaccine-related
adverse events are rare. As with healthy children, vaccinated HIV-infected children who
develop mild rashes >2 weeks after vaccination rarely require antiviral therapy for Oka
VZV;  these  rashes  usually  clear  in  3--5  days  without  treatment.  If  vaccination  of
HIV-infected  children  results  in  more  severe  clinical  disease,  the  use  of  acyclovir  to
treat the Oka vaccine strain of VZV (which is sensitive to acyclovir) might modify the
severity  of  disease.  VZV  rashes  developing  <2  weeks  after  vaccination,  however,
usually  result  from  wild-type  VZV  (32).  HIV-infected  children  with  low  CD4  levels
(<15%) may develop pneumonia and neurologic manifestations from VZV and should
not  be  vaccinated  against  varicella  (EIII).  Vaccination  of  such  children  after
reconstitution  of  their  immune  system  (CD4  percentage  ≥15%)  with  antiretroviral
therapy, however, can be considered (980). Zoster from the vaccine (Oka strain) has
been reported in healthy children and in children with acute lymphocytic leukemia, but
it  has  not  been  described  in  HIV-infected  children  (981,982).  Efficacy  studies  on
preventing  varicella  in  HIV-infected  children  are  not  available.  In  vaccinated  healthy
children (after one dose) and in children with underlying leukemia (after two doses), the
effectiveness of varicella vaccine is about 80%--85% for prevention of clinical infection.
The majority of varicella cases in vaccinated children are modified, with fewer lesions
(commonly <50), fever, and a shorter duration of illness (32,951). Because Zostavax is
licensed only for use in healthy people aged >60 years to prevent zoster, it should not
be given to HIV-infected children. Being immunocompromised is a contraindication for
its  use.  There  are  no  data  on  safety  or  efficacy  for  HIV-infected  children  (EIII).  For
postexposure prophylaxis against varicella, HIV-infected children and adolescents who
lack  evidence  of  immunity  to  VZV  (i.e.,  have  no  history  of  varicella  or  zoster;  are
seronegative  for  VZV  by  a  sensitive,  specific  antibody  assay;  or  lack  evidence  of
age-appropriate  vaccination)  should  be  passively  immunized  as  soon  as  possible  and
within  <96  hours  after  close  contact  with  a  person  with  varicella  or  zoster  (AIII).
Previously  this  was  performed  by  administering  varicella-zoster  immune  globulin
(VZIG),  but  because  licensure  of  varicella  vaccine  in  the  United  States  resulted  in
dramatically  fewer  requests  for  VZIG,  VZIG  is  no  longer  produced.  A  new  product,
human  varicella  immune  globulin  (VariZIG),  manufactured  in  Canada,  is  the
replacement. VariZIG is a lyophilized preparation which, when properly reconstituted, is
approximately a 5% solution of IgG that can be administered intramuscularly. VariZIG is
available  under  an  investigational  new  drug  application  expanded  access  protocol
(available  at  http://www.fda.gov/cber/infosheets/mphvzig020806.htm)  (983).  VariZIG
can  be  obtained  in  the  United  States,  and  it  has  received  central  institutional  review
board  approval  but  local  institutional  review  board  approval  also  may  be  necessary.
VariZIG can be obtained 24 hours a day from the sole authorized U.S. distributor (FFF
Enterprises,
 Temecula,
 California)
 at
 1-800-843-7477
 or
 online
 at
http://www.fffenterprises.com.  An  alternative  to  VariZIG  for  passive  immunization  is
IVIG, 400 mg/kg, administered once. IVIG should be administered within 96 hours after
exposure. Data are lacking about the effectiveness of acyclovir for preventing varicella
among  susceptible  HIV-infected  children.  Published  information  about  this  form  of
prophylaxis for healthy children is minimal (984--986). If VariZIG is not available or >96
hours  have  passed  since  exposure,  some  experts  recommend  prophylaxis  with
acyclovir (80 mg/kg/day, administered four times per day for 5--7 days; beginning day
7--10 after exposure, maximum dose of 80 mg, four times per day) (90). However, the
use  of  acyclovir  for  prophylaxis  in  HIV-infected  VZV-exposed  children  has  not  been
studied. For that reason, some experts would consider it prudent to wait until the first
appearance of rash to start acyclovir therapy for the VZV-susceptible and VZV-exposed
HIV-infected  child  for  whom  passive  immunization  was  not  administered  (CIII).
Treatment  of  Disease  On  the  basis  of  controlled  trials  among  children  with
malignancies, acyclovir is the drug of choice for treating VZV infection in HIV-infected
children (AI). For varicella, acyclovir should be initiated as soon as possible after initial
lesions  appear.  New  lesions  can  continue  to  appear  for  72  hours  after  initiation  of
acyclovir and crusting of all lesions might take 5--7 days. IV acyclovir is recommended
for
 treating
 primary
 varicella
 among
 HIV-infected
 children
 with
 severe
immunosuppression (i.e., CD4 < 15%, CDC Immunologic Category 3) (98) or who have
high fever or numerous or deep, necrotic, or hemorrhagic skin lesions (AIII). For children
aged <1 year, the dose of acyclovir is 10 mg/kg/dose administered intravenously every
8 hours as a 1-hour infusion. Some health-care providers administer the same dose for
children  aged  ≥1  year,  and  others  base  dosage  of  acyclovir  on  body  surface  area
among  children  aged  ≥1  year  old  (500  mg/m2  body  surface  area/dose  intravenously
every 8 hours as a 1-hour infusion) (90). Administration is for 7--10 days or until no new
lesions appear for 48 hours. Oral administration should be used only to treat primary
varicella  among  HIV-infected  children  with  normal  or  only  slightly  decreased  CD4
counts (CDC Immunologic Category 1 or 2) (98) and have mild varicella disease (BIII).
Acyclovir  is  the  treatment  of  choice  for  zoster  among  HIV-infected  children,
administered for 7--10 days, although longer durations of therapy should be considered
if  lesions  are  slow  to  resolve  (AII).  With  zoster,  oral  acyclovir  can  be  administered
because the chance for disseminated, life-threatening disease is less with zoster than
with  varicella.  Initial  IV  administration  should  be  considered  for  HIV-infected  children
with severe immunosuppression (i.e., CD4 <15%, CDC Immunologic Category 3) (98),
trigeminal nerve involvement, or extensive multidermatomal zoster (AII). If cutaneous
lesions  are  extensive  or  if  clinical  evidence  of  visceral  involvement  is  observed,  IV
acyclovir should be initiated and continued until cutaneous lesions and visceral disease
are  clearly  resolving  (AII),  then  change  to  oral  administration  can  be  considered  to
complete  the  course  of  therapy  (10--14  days  in  this  situation)  (AIII)  (987).  Doses  of
acyclovir  for  treating  zoster  are  the  same  as  those  for  treating  varicella.  Progressive
outer  retinal  necrosis  is  rapidly  progressive  and  leads  to  profound  loss  of  vision;
prognosis  for  visual  preservation  is  poor  despite  aggressive  therapy,  and  optimal
therapy  is  yet  to  be  defined  (988,989).  Regardless  of  specific  VZV  antiviral  therapy,
optimization of antiretroviral therapy also is recommended. Some experts recommend
anti-VZV  therapy  that  includes  a  combination  of  IV  ganciclovir  (5  mg/kg/dose
administered intravenously every 12 hours) and foscarnet (90 mg/kg/dose administered
intravenously every 12 hours) plus twice weekly intravitreal injections of ganciclovir (2
mg/0.05  mL  and/or  foscarnet  1.2  mg/0.05  mL)  (BIII)  (990).  In  contrast,  acute  retinal
necrosis  appears  more  responsive  to  antiviral  therapy,  and  one  recommended
treatment  is  high-dose  IV  acyclovir  (10--15  mg/kg  intravenously  every  8  hours  for
10--14  days),  followed  by  prolonged  (i.e.,  4--6  weeks)  oral  valacyclovir  (AIII)  (990).
Involvement of an ophthalmologist experienced in managing patients with VZV retinitis
is strongly recommended (AIII). Alternatives to acyclovir in older adolescents and adults
include  valacyclovir  and  famciclovir.  Valacyclovir  is  a  prodrug  of  acyclovir  with
improved  bioavailability  that  is  rapidly  converted  to  acyclovir  after  absorption  and  is
approved  for  treating  zoster  in  adults.  It  is  not  active  against  acyclovir-resistant  VZV
strains. Data are limited for its use in children (863,991); bioavailability is about 45%
and independent of age in children. Limited data indicate that pediatric blood levels of
acyclovir (from the prodrug valacyclovir) similar to that of valacyclovir tablets in adults
can  be  achieved  by  administering  an  oral  dose  of  valacyclovir  of  20--25  mg/kg/dose
administered  two  or  three  times  a  day  (CIII)  (864).  However,  valacyclovir  is  available
only  in  a  caplet  formulation;  hence  this  drug  is  an  alternative  only  for  children  old
enough to swallow the valacyclovir caplets. Although tablets can be crushed, they have
a unpleasant taste. A liquid formulation that is stable for 21 days can be prepared in
Ora-Sweet(r)  and  Syrpalta(r)  syrups  and  stored  in  amber  glass  bottles  (991).
Famciclovir is the oral prodrug of penciclovir. It is not active against acyclovir-resistant
VZV  strains.  It  is  comparable  in  efficacy  to  oral  acyclovir  in  treatment  of
immunocompromised  adults  with  localized  zoster  but  has  not  been  approved  for  this
indication.  It  is  available  only  in  tablet  form.  No  specific  data  exist  on  the
pharmacokinetics and dosing of famciclovir in children, and no pediatric preparation is
available  (EIII)  (864).  Monitoring  and  Adverse  Events,  Including  IRIS  Acyclovir  is
excreted primarily by the kidney, and dose adjustment (based on creatinine clearance)
is  needed  for  patients  with  renal  insufficiency  or  renal  failure.  Primary  toxicities  of
acyclovir are phlebitis, renal toxicity, nausea, vomiting, and rash. Toxicities are similar
for valacyclovir. Among infants receiving high-dose acyclovir for neonatal HSV disease,
the major toxicity was neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count <1000/mm3), which was
observed in 21% of children (857). Grade 3 or higher nephrotoxicity was observed in
6%  of  children.  For  children  receiving  high-dose  IV  acyclovir,  monitoring  of  renal
function is recommended at initiation of treatment, and once or twice weekly for the
duration of treatment, particularly for those with underlying renal dysfunction or those
receiving  prolonged  therapy.  In  HIV-infected  adults,  immune  reconstitution  after
initiation  of  HAART  may  be  associated  with  increased  VZV  reactivation  (965,992).
VZV-associated  IRIS  after  HAART  also  has  been  described  in  HIV-infected  children
(20,24). In a study of 153 HAART-treated children in Thailand, 19% of children starting
HAART  experienced  IRIS;  22%  of  IRIS  cases  were  secondary  to  VZV.  In  the  reported
cases,  manifestations  were  typically  mild  and  cutaneous,  had  a  typical  dermatomal
distribution  of  vesicular  lesions  as  seen  in  VZV  reactivation,  and  responded  well  to
treatment with oral acyclovir. Most cases presented in the first 4 months of HAART; the
median time from initiation of HAART to onset of clinical symptoms was 6 weeks (range:
2--21 weeks) (24). Management of Treatment Failure Children who continue to develop
lesions or whose lesions fail to heal after 10 days of treatment may be infected with
acyclovir-resistant VZV. If possible, a culture should be obtained to analyze the virus for
drug resistance. HIV-infected children with acyclovir-resistant VZV can be treated with
IV  foscarnet  for  7  days  or  until  no  new  lesions  have  appeared  for  48  hours  (AII)
(990,993,994). The dose of foscarnet should be administered slowly over the course of
2 hours (i.e., no faster than 1 mg/kg/minute). Infusing foscarnet with saline fluid loading
can  minimize  renal  toxicity.  Doses  should  be  modified  among  patients  with  renal
insufficiency.  The  main  toxicity  of  foscarnet  is  decreased  renal  function;  in  ≤30%  of
patients,  serum  creatinine  levels  increase.  Renal  toxicity  and  foscarnet  binding  to
divalent  metal  ions  (e.g.,  calcium)  leads  to  metabolic  abnormalities  in  approximately
one  third  of  patients.  In  addition,  serious  electrolyte  imbalances  (including
abnormalities  in  calcium,  phosphorus,  magnesium,  and  potassium  levels),  secondary
seizures, cardiac dysrhythmias, abnormal liver transaminases, and CNS symptoms can
occur.  Preventing  Recurrence  No  preventive  measures  are  available  for  zoster  in
HIV-infected  children  and  adolescents.  A  vaccine  to  prevent  herpes  zoster  has  been
approved for use in immunocompetent adults aged >60 years. Data regarding safety
and efficacy of this vaccine in HIV-infected persons of any age are lacking, and use of
the  vaccine  in  HIV-infected  persons  is  not  recommended  (DIII).  However,  prospective
clinical trials are planned to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of herpes zoster
vaccine in HIV-infected adults. Discontinuing Secondary Prophylaxis Not applicable. 
BOX 1. Rating scheme for prevention and treatment recommendations for HIV-exposed
and HIV-infected infants and children --- United States Category Definition Strength of
the recommendation A Strong evidence for efficacy and substantial clinical benefit both
support recommendations for use. Always should be offered. B Moderate evidence for
efficacy---or  strong  evidence  for  efficacy  but  only  limited  clinical  benefit---support
recommendations  for  use.  Generally  should  be  offered.  C  Evidence  for  efficacy  is
insufficient  to  support  a  recommendation  for  or  against  use,  or  evidence  for  efficacy
might  not  outweigh  adverse  consequences  (e.g.,  drug  toxicity,  drug  interactions)  or
cost  of  the  treatment  under  consideration.  Optional.  D  Moderate  evidence  for  lack  of
efficacy  or  for  adverse  outcomes  supports  a  recommendation  against  use.  Generally
should  not  be  offered.  E  Good  evidence  for  lack  of  efficacy  or  for  adverse  outcomes
supports a recommendation against use. Never should be offered. Quality of evidence
supporting  the  recommendation  I  Evidence  from  at  least  one  properly  designed
randomized,  controlled  trial.  II  Evidence  from  at  least  one  well-designed  clinical  trial
without  randomization,  from  cohort  or  case-controlled  studies  (preferably  from  more
than  one  center),  or  from  multiple  time-series  studies;  or  dramatic  results  from
uncontrolled experiments. III Evidence from opinions of respected authorities based on
clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees. 
BOX 2. Diagnosis of HIV infection and presumptive lack of HIV infection in children with
known  exposure  to  perinatal  HIV  Definitive  infection:  OR  Presumptive  exclusion  of
infection  in  nonbreastfed  infant:  AND  OR  OR  Definitive  exclusion  of  infection  in
nonbreastfed infant: AND OR 
TABLE  1.  Prophylaxis  to  prevent  first  episode  of  opportunistic  infections  among
HIV-exposed and HIV-infected infants and children, United States*† Preventive regimen
Pathogen Indication First choice Alternative Strongly recommended as standard of care
Pneumocystis pneumonia§ HIV-infected or HIV- indeterminate infants aged 1--12 mos;
HIV-infected  children  aged  1--5  yrs  with  CD4  count  of  <500  cells/mm3  or  CD4
percentage  of  <15%;  HIV-infected  children  aged  6--12  yrs  with  CD4  count  of  <200
cells/mm3  or  CD4  percentage  of  <15%  Malaria   Travel  to  area  in  which  malaria  is
endemic Mycobacterium tuberculosis  Isoniazid-sensitive TST reaction ≥5 mm or prior
positive TST result without treatment; or regardless of current TST result and previous
treatment, close contact with any person who has contagious TB. TB disease must be
excluded  before  start  of  treatment.   Isoniazid-resistant  Same  as  previous  pathogen;
increased probability of exposure to isoniazid-resistant TB Multidrug-resistant (isoniazid
and  rifampin)  Same  as  previous  pathogen;  increased  probability  of  exposure  to
multidrug-resistant TB Mycobacterium avium complex¶ For children aged ≥6 yrs with
CD4 count of <50 cells/mm3; aged 2--5 yrs with CD4 count of <75 cells/mm3; aged 1--2
yrs with CD4 count of <500 cells/mm3; aged <1 yr with CD4 count of <750 cells/mm3
Varicella-zoster virus** Substantial exposure to varicella or shingles with no history of
varicella or zoster or seronegative status for VZV by a sensitive, specific antibody assay
or  lack  of  evidence  for  age-appropriate  vaccination  Vaccine-preventable  pathogens
Standard  recommendations  for  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  children  Routine
vaccinations (see 
Figures 1 and 
2) TABLE 1. (Continued) Prophylaxis to prevent first episode of opportunistic
infections  among  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*†
Preventive regimen Pathogen Indication First choice Alternative Usually recommended
Toxoplasma  gondii§§  Immunoglobulin  G  (IgG)  antibody  to  Toxoplasma  and  severe
immunosuppression:  HIV-infected  children  aged  <6  yrs  with  CD4  <15%;  HIV-infected
children  aged  ≥6  yrs  with  CD4  <100  cells/mm3  (BIII)  Not  recommended  for  most
children; indicated for use only in unusual circumstances Invasive bacterial infections
Hypogammaglobulinemia  (i.e.,  IgG  <400  mg/dL)   Cytomegalovirus  CMV  antibody
positivity and severe immunosuppression (CD4 <50 cells/mm3)  * Abbreviations: HIV =
human  immunodeficiency  virus;  PCP  =  Pneumocystis  pneumonia;  TMP-SMX  =
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole;  TST  =  tuberculin  skin  test;  TB  =  tuberculosis;  IM  =
intramuscularly; IVIG = intravenous immune globulin; IgG = immunoglobulin G; CMV =
cytomegalovirus; VZV = varicella-zoster virus; FDA = Food and Drug Administration. †
Information  in  these  guidelines  might  not  represent  FDA  approval  or  FDA-approved
labeling for products or indications. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" might
not be synonymous with the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval. Letters
and  roman  numerals  in  parentheses  after  regimens  indicate  the  strength  of  the
recommendation  and  the  quality  of  the  evidence  supporting  it  (see  Box).   §  Daily
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  (TMP-SMX)  reduces  the  frequency  of  certain  bacterial
infections.  TMP-SMX,  dapsone-pyrimethamine,  and  possibly  atovaquone  (with  or
without  pyrimethamine)  protect  against  toxoplasmosis;  however,  data  have  not  been
prospectively  collected.  Compared  with  weekly  dapsone,  daily  dapsone  is  associated
with  lower  incidence  of  PCP  but  higher  hematologic  toxicity  and  mortality.  Patients
receiving  therapy  for  toxoplasmosis  with  sulfadiazine-pyrimethamine  are  protected
against  PCP  and  do  not  need  TMP-SMX.  ¶  Substantial  drug  interactions  can  occur
between  rifamycins  (i.e.,  rifampin  and  rifabutin)  and  protease  inhibitors  and
non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors.  A  specialist  should  be  consulted.   **
Children  routinely  being  administered  intravenous  immune  globulin  (IVIG)  should
receive VariZIG if the last dose of IVIG was administered >21 days before exposure. ††
As of 2007, VariZIG can be obtained only under a treatment Investigational New Drug
protocol (1-800-843-7477, FFF Enterprises, Temecula, California.)  §§ Protection against
toxoplasmosis is provided by the preferred anti-Pneumocystis regimens and possibly by
atovaquone. 
TABLE  2.  Prophylaxis  to  prevent  recurrence  of  opportunistic  infections,  after
chemotherapy  for  acute  disease,  among  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and
children,  United  States*†  Preventive  regimen  Pathogen  Indication  First  choice
Alternative  Recommended  as  standard  of  care  after  completion  of  initial  therapy
Pneumocystis pneumonia§ Prior PCP TMP-SMX, 150/750 mg/m2 body surface area daily
(max:  320/1600  mg)  orally  divided  into  2  doses  and  administered  3  times  weekly  on
consecutive days (AI) Acceptable alternative dosage schedules for same dosage: single
dose  orally  3  times  weekly  on  consecutive  days;  2  divided  doses  orally  daily;  or  2
divided doses orally 3 times weekly on alternate days (Al) Dapsone: children aged ≥1
mos, 2 mg/kg body weight (max 100 mg) orally daily or 4 mg/kg body weight (max 200
mg)  orally  weekly  (BI)  Atovaquone:  children  aged  1--3  mos  and  >24  mos,  30  mg/kg
body weight orally daily; children aged 4--24 mos, 45 mg/kg body weight orally daily
(BI)  Aerosolized  pentamidine:  children  aged  ≥5  yrs,  300  mg  every  mo  by  Respirgard
II(tm) (Marquest, Englewood, CO) nebulizer (BI) Toxoplasma gondii§ Before Toxoplasma
encephalitis Sulfadiazine, 85--120 mg/kg body weight (max 2--4 g) daily orally divided
into  in  2--4  doses;  PLUS  pyrimethamine,  1  mg/kg  body  weight  or  15  mg/m2  body
surface area (max 25 mg) orally daily; PLUS leucovorin, 5 mg orally every 3 days (AI)
Clindamycin,  20--30  mg/kg  body  weight  daily  orally  divided  into  3--4  doses;  PLUS
pyrimethamine,  1  mg/kg  body  weight  or  15  mg/m2  body  surface  area  (max  25  mg)
orally daily; PLUS leucovorin, 5 mg orally every 3 days (BI) Atovaquone (children aged
1--3 mos and >24 mos, 30 mg/kg body weight orally daily; children aged 4--24 mos, 45
mg/kg body weight orally daily) with or without pyrimethamine, 1 mg/kg body weight or
15  mg/m2  body  surface  area  (max  25  mg)  orally  daily;  PLUS  leucovorin,  5  mg  orally
every  3  days  (CIII)  Mycobacterium  avium  complex¶  Prior  disease  Clarithromycin,  7.5
mg/kg body weight (max 500 mg) orally 2 times daily (AII); PLUS ethambutol, 15--25
mg/kg body weight (max 2.5 g) orally daily (AII); with or without rifabutin, 5 mg/kg body
weight  (max  300  mg)  orally  daily  (CII)  Azithromycin,  5  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  250
mg) orally daily (AII); PLUS ethambutol, 15--25 mg/kg body weight (max 2.5 g) orally
daily (AII); with or without rifabutin, 5 mg/kg body weight (max 300 mg) orally daily (CII)
Coccidioides  spp.  Documented  disease  Fluconazole,  6  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  400
mg)  orally  daily  (AII)  Itraconazole,  2--5  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  200  mg)  orally  per
dose 2 times daily (AII) Cryptococcus neoformans Documented disease Fluconazole, 6
mg/kg body weight (max 200 mg) orally daily (AI) Itraconazole oral solution, 5 mg/kg
body  weight  (max  200  mg)  orally  daily  (BI)  Histoplasma  capsulatum  Documented
disease Itraconazole oral solution, 5 mg/kg body weight (max 200 mg) orally per dose 2
times  daily  (AII)  Fluconazole,  3--6  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  200  mg)  orally  daily  (CII)
Microsporidiosis Disseminated, nonocular infection caused by microsporidia other than
Enterocytozoon bieneusi Albendzaole, 7.5 mg/kg body weight (max 400 mg/dose) per
dose  orally  2  times  daily  (AII)  until  immune  reconstitution  after  initiation  of  HAART
Ocular infection Topical fumagillin bicylohexylammonium (Fumidil B), 3 mg/mL in saline
(fumagillin 70 μg/mL) eye drops---2 drops every 2 hrs for 4 days, then 2 drops 4 times
daily (investigational use only in United States) (BII); PLUS albendazole, 7.5 mg/kg body
weight  (max  400  mg/dose)  orally  2  times  daily  to  manage  systemic  infection  (BIII)
Cytomegalovirus  Prior  retinitis,  neurologic  disease,  or  gastrointestinal  disease  with
relapse  Ganciclovir,  5  mg/kg  body  weight  IV  daily  (AI);  or  Foscarnet,  90--120  mg/kg
body  weight  IV  daily  (AI);  or  Valganciclovir,  900  mg  orally  1  time  daily  with  food  for
older  children  who  can  receive  adult  dosing  (AI)  (For  retinitis)  Ganciclovir
sustained-release  implant,  every  6--9  mos;  PLUS  ganciclovir,  30  mg/kg  body  weight
orally  3  times  daily  (BIII)  TABLE  2.  (Continued)  Prophylaxis  to  prevent  recurrence  of
opportunistic infections, after chemotherapy for acute disease, among HIV-exposed and
HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*†  Preventive  regimen  Pathogen
Indication  First  choice  Alternative  Recommended  only  if  subsequent  episodes  are
frequent  or  severe  Invasive  bacterial  infections**  >2  infections  in  a  1-yr  period
TMP-SMX,  150/750  mg/m2  body  surface  area  daily  orally  divided  into  in  2  doses  (BI)
IVIG,  400  mg/kg  body  weight  every  2--4  wks  (BI)  Antibiotic  chemoprophylaxis  with
another  active  agent  (BIII)  Bartonellosis  Frequent  or  severe  recurrences  Doxycycline,
2--4 mg/kg body weight (max 100--200 mg/day) per day orally 1 time daily or divided
into  2  doses  (AIII)  One  of  the  macrolide  antibiotics  (AIII)---  e.g.,  azithromycin,  5--12
mg/kg body weight (max 600 mg/day) orally 1 time daily; OR clarithromycin, 15 mg/kg
body weight (max 1 g/day) per day orally divided into 2 doses; OR erythromycin, 30--50
mg/kg  body  weight  (max  2  g/day)  per  day  orally  divided  into  2  doses  (AIII)  Candida
(esophageal)  Frequent  or  severe  recurrences  Fluconazole,  3--6  mg/kg  body  weight
(max 200 mg) orally daily (BI) --- Herpes simplex virus Frequent or severe recurrences
Acyclovir, 20 mg/kg body weight (max 400 mg/dose) per dose orally 2 times daily (AI)
Valacyclovir, 500 mg orally 2 times daily, OR famicilovir, 500 mg orally 2 times daily for
children old enough to receive adult dosing (AI)  * Information in these guidelines might
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  FDA-approved  labeling  for  products  or  indications.
Specifically,  the  terms  "safe"  and  "effective"  might  not  be  synonymous  with  the
FDA-defined  legal  standards  for  product  approval.  Letters  and  roman  numerals  in
parentheses  after  regimens  indicate  the  strength  of  the  recommendations  and  the
quality  of  evidence  supporting  it  (see  Box).   †  Abbreviations:  HIV---human
immunodeficiency  virus;  FDA---Food  and  Drug  Administration;  PCP---Pneumocystis
pneumonia;
 TMP-SMX---trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole;
 HAART---highly
 active
antiretroviral  treatment;  IV---intravenous;  IVIG---intravenous  immune  globulin.   §
Pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine, and possibly atovaquone, confers protection against
PCP as well as against toxoplasmosis. Although the clindamycin-plus-pyrimethamine or
atovaquone-with/without-pyrimethamine  regimens  are  recommended  for  adults,  they
have not been tested in children. However, these drugs are safe and are used for other
infections  in  children.   ¶  Substantial  drug  interactions  might  occur  between  rifabutin
and protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. A specialist
should  be  consulted.   **  Antimicrobial  prophylaxis  should  be  chosen  on  the  basis  of
microorganism  identification  and  antibiotic  susceptibility  testing.  TMP-SMX,  if  used,
should  be  administered  daily.  Health-care  providers  should  be  cautious  about  using
antibiotics  solely  for  this  purpose  because  of  the  potential  for  development  of
drug-resistant  microorganisms.  IVIG  might  not  provide  additional  benefit  to  children
receiving  daily  TMP/SMX  but  might  be  considered  for  children  who  have  recurrent
bacterial  infections  despite  TMP-SMX  prophylaxis.  Choice  of  antibiotic  prophylaxis
versus IVIG also should involve consideration of adherence, ease of IV access, and cost.
If  IVIG  is  used,  respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)  IVIG  (750  mg/kg  body  weight),  not
monoclonal RSV antibody, can be substituted for IVIG during the RSV season to provide
broad anti-infective protection, if this product is available. 
TABLE  3.  Criteria  for  discontinuing  and  restarting  prophylaxis  for  opportunistic
infections  among  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*
Opportunistic illness Criteria for discontinuing primary prophylaxis Criteria for restarting
primary  prophylaxis  Criteria  for  discontinuing  secondary  prophylaxis  Criteria  for
restarting  secondary  prophylaxis  Pneumocystis  pneumonia  Do  not  discontinue  in
children aged <1 yr After ≥6 mos of HAART and Age 1--5 yrs: CD4 percentage <15% or
count  <500  cells/mm3  (BIII)  Age  ≥6  yrs:  CD4  percentage  <15%  or  count  <200
cells/mm3  (BIII)  If  all  of  the  following  criteria  fulfilled  (CIII):  Age  1--5  yrs:  CD4
percentage <15% or count <500 cells/mm3 or PCP recurrence (BIII) Age ≥6 yrs: CD4
percentage <15% or count <200 cells/mm3 or PCP recurrence (BIII) Toxoplasma gondii
encephalitis Do not discontinue in children aged <1 yr After ≥6 mos of HAART and Age
1--5  yrs:  CD4  percentage  <15%  (CIII)  Age  ≥6  yrs:  CD4  percentage  <15%  or  count
<100--200 cells/mm3 (CIII) If all of the following criteria fulfilled (CIII): Age 1--5 yrs: CD4
percentage <15% or count <500 cells/mm3 (CIII) Age ≥6 yrs: CD4 percentage <15% or
count <200 cells/mm3 (CIII) Mycobacterium avium complex disease Do not discontinue
in children aged <2 yrs If age ≥2 yrs, after ≥6 mos of HAART and Age 2--5 yrs: CD4
count <200 cells/mm3 (BIII) Age ≥6 yrs: CD4 count <100 cells/mm3 (BIII) If all of the
following criteria fulfilled (CIII): Age 2--5 yrs: CD4 count <200 cells/mm3 (BII) Age ≥6
yrs:  CD4  count  <100  cells/mm3  (BII)  Cytomegalovirus  retinitis  Not  applicable  Not
applicable  If  all  of  the  following  criteria  fulfilled  (CIII):  Age  1--5  yrs:  CD4  percentage
<15% or count <500 cells/mm3 (BIII) Age ≥6 yrs: CD4 percentage <15% or CD4 count
<100 cells/mm3 (BIII)  Cryptococcal meningitis Not applicable Not applicable If all of the
following  criteria  (BII)  fulfilled:  Age  ≥6  yrs:  CD4  count  <200  cells/mm3  (AIII)
Histoplasma  capsulatum  infection  Not  applicable  Not  applicable  If  all  of  the  following
criteria  fulfilled  (CIII):  Age  ≥6  yrs:  CD4  count  <150  cells/mm3  (CIII)  *  Abbreviations:
HIV=human  immunodeficiency  virus;  PCP=Pneumocystis  pneumonia;  HAART:  highly
active  antiretroviral  treatment;  TE=Toxoplasma  encephalitis;  MAC=Mycobacterium
avium complex. 
TABLE  4.  Recommendations  for  treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed
and HIV-infected infants and children, United States*† Infection Preferred therapies and
duration  Alternative  therapies  Other  options  or  issues  Bacterial  infections  Bacterial
pneumonia
 (Streptococcus
 pneumoniae;
 occasionally
 Staphylococcus
 aureus,
Haemophilus  influenzae,  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa)  Ceftriaxone,  80--100  mg/kg  body
weight per day (max 4 g/day) in 1 or 2 divided doses (AIII) OR Cefotaxime, 150--200
mg/kg  body  weight  (max  8--10  g/day)  per  day  divided  into  3  or  4  doses  (AIII)
Cefuroxime, 100--150 mg/kg body weight (max 4--6 g/day) divided into 3 doses (AIII)
Add azithromycin for hospitalized patients to treat other common community-acquired
pneumonia  pathogens  (e.g.,  Mycoplasma  pneumoniae,  Chlamydia  pneumoniae).  Add
clindamycin or vancomycin if methicillin-resistant S. aureus is suspected (choice based
on  local  susceptibility  patterns).  For  patients  with  neutropenia,  chronic  lung  disease
other than asthma (e.g., lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, bronchiectasis) or indwelling
venous  catheter,  consider  regimen  that  includes  activity  against  P.  aeruginosa  (e.g.,
cefepime  instead  of  ceftriaxone).  Consider  PCP  in  patients  with  severe  pneumonia  or
more  advanced  HIV  disease.  Consider  evaluation  for  TB  and  cryptococcosis.
Bartonellosis  Cutaneous  bacillary  angiomatosis  infections:  Treatment  duration:  3  mos
Azithromycin,  5--12  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  600  mg/day)  orally  once  daily  (BIII)
Clarithromycin, 15 mg/kg body weight (max 1 g/day) per day orally divided into 2 doses
(BIII)  Severe  Jarisch-Herxheimer--like  reaction  can  occur  in  the  first  48  hrs  after
treatment. Long-term suppression with erythromycin or doxycycline may be considered
in  patients  with  relapse  or  reinfection  (CIII).  CNS  infections,  bacillary  peliosis,
osteomyelitis, severe infections: Treatment duration: 4 mos Rifampin, 20 mg/kg body
weight (max 600 mg/day) per day orally or IV once daily or divided into 2 doses can be
used  in  combination  with  erythromycin  or  doxycycline  in  patients  with  more  severe
infections (BIII) Syphilis Congenital: proven or highly probable disease: Acquired: Early
stage  (primary,  secondary,  early  latent):  Late  latent  stage:  Neurosyphilis  (including
ocular):  Congenital:  For  treatment  of  congenital  syphilis,  repeat  entire  course  of
treatment if even 1 day of treatment is missed. Children with congenital syphilis should
be evaluated at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 mos of age and have nontreponemal testing at 3, 6,
and 12 mos after conclusion of therapy or until test becomes negative (AIII). Children
with increasing titers or persistently positive titers (even if low levels) at age 6--12 mos
should  be  evaluated  and  considered  for  retreatment  (AIII).  Children  and  adolescents
with acquired syphilis should have clinical and serologic response monitored at 3, 6, 9,
12,  and  24  mos  after  therapy  (AIII).  TABLE  4.  (Continued)  Recommendations  for
treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and
children,  United  States*†  Infection  Preferred  therapies  and  duration  Alternative
therapies Other options or issues Mycobacterial infections Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
Intensive  phase  (8  wks)  (AI):  Isoniazid,  10--15  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  300  mg/day)
orally  once  daily;  PLUS  rifampin,  10--20  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  600  mg/day)  orally
once  daily;  PLUS  pyrazinamide,  20--40  mg/kg  (max  2  g/day)  body  weight  orally  once
daily;  PLUS  ethambutol,  15--25  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  2.5  g/day)  orally  once  daily
(AI)  Continuation  phase  (for  drug-  susceptible  TB)  (AI):  Treatment  duration
(drug-sensitive TB) (AIII): Alternative drug for rifampin is rifabutin, 10--20 mg/kg body
weight (max 300 mg/day) orally once daily (same dose is for intermittent 2 or 3 times
weekly  regimen)  (BIII)  Alternative  drug  for  ethambutol  is  streptomycin,  20--40  mg/kg
body  weight  (max  1  g/day)  IM  once  daily  (or  20  mg/kg  as  intermittent  2  or  3  times
weekly  regimen)  (BIII)  Ethionamide,  15--20  mg/kg  body  weight  orally  (max  1  g/day)
divided into 2 or 3 doses per day should be used for TB meningitis (AIII) Drug-resistant
TB: Treatment duration (drug-resistant TB) (AIII): Directly observed therapy should be
standard of care for children with TB (AII) Potential drug interactions should be carefully
reviewed  In  antiretroviral-naïve  child,  initiate  therapy  for  TB  2--8  wks  before  starting
antiretroviral drugs (BII); for children already receiving antiretroviral therapy in whom
TB  is  diagnosed,  the  child's  antiretroviral  regimen  should  be  reviewed  and  altered,  if
needed,  to  ensure  optimal  treatment  for  both  TB  and  HIV  and  to  minimize  potential
toxicities and drug-drug interactions (AIII). For children with severe immunosuppression
(CD4  <15%  or  children  ≥6  yrs  old,  <100  cell/μL),  continuation  phase  for
drug-susceptible
 TB
 should
 include
 either
 daily
 or
 thrice-weekly
 treatment;
twice-weekly  regimens  should  not  be  used  because  they  may  lead  to  rifamycin
resistance  in  immunosuppressed  patients  (AII).  Pyridoxine  should  be  administered  if
isoniazid or cycloserine is administered (AII). Adjunctive treatment with corticosteroids
is indicated for children with CNS disease (AII) and can be considered for children with
pleural  or  pericardial  effusions,  severe  miliary  disease,  and  significant  endobronchial
disease  (BIII).  Children  receiving  ethambutol  who  are  old  enough  to  undergo  routine
eye  testing  should  have  monthly  monitoring  of  visual  acuity  and  color  discrimination
(AIII).  Thiacetazone  can  cause  severe  or  fatal  reactions  in  HIV-infected  children,
including  rash  and  aplastic  anemia,  and  should  not  be  used  (EIII).  For  drug-resistant
strains, ≥2 drugs to which the isolate is susceptible should be administered (minimum
of  3  drugs  should  be  administered  through  the  continuation  phase  of  therapy).
Second-line drugs for multidrug-resistant TB: Amikacin, 15--30 mg/kg body weight (max
1 g/day) IM once daily. Capreomycin, 15--30 mg/kg body weight (max 1 g/day) IM once
daily.  Ciprofloxacin,  10--15  mg/kg  body  weight  orally  twice  daily  (max  1.5  g/day);
levofloxicin, 500--1000 mg orally once daily; OR moxifloxacin, 400 mg orally once daily
(fluoroquinolones are not labeled for use in children <18 yrs old because of concerns
about  potential  effects  on  cartilage;  use  in  younger  persons  requires  assessment  of
potential risks and benefits) (CIII). Cycloserine, 10--20 mg/kg body weight (max 1 g/day)
orally once daily. Ethionamide/prothionamide, 15--20 mg/kg body weight (max 1 g/day)
orally  in  2--3  divided  doses.  Kanamycin,  15--30  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  1  g/day)  IM
once  daily.  Para-aminosalicylic  acid,  200--300  mg/kg  body  weight  orally  divided  into
3--4  doses  per  day  (max  10  g/day).  Streptomycin,  20--40  mg/kg  body  weight  (max
1  g/day)  IM  once  daily.  TABLE  4.  (Continued)  Recommendations  for  treatment  of
opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United
States*† Infection Preferred therapies and duration Alternative therapies Other options
or  issues  Mycobacterium  avium  complex   Initial  treatment  (≥2  drugs)  (AI):
Azithromycin,  10--12  mg/kg  body  weight  (max  500  mg/day)  orally  once  daily  if
intolerant to clarithromycin (AII) If rifabutin cannot be administered (or if a fourth drug
is  needed  for  patients  with  more  severe  symptoms  or  disseminated  disease):
ciprofloxacin,  10--15  mg/kg  body  weight  orally  twice  daily  (max  1.5  g/day);  OR
levofloxicin, 500 mg orally once daily; OR amikacin, 15--30 mg/kg body weight IV in 1 or
2 divided doses (max 1.5 g/day) (CIII)  Combination therapy with a minimum of 2 drugs
is recommended (AI). Clofazamine is associated with increased mortality in HIV-infected
adults and should not be used (EII). Children receiving ethambutol who are old enough
to  undergo  routine  eye  testing  should  have  monthly  monitoring  of  visual  acuity  and
color  discrimination  (AIII).  Fluoroquinolones  (e.g.,  ciprofloxacin,  levofloxacin)  are  not
labeled  for  use  in  children  <18  yrs  because  of  concerns  about  potential  effects  on
cartilage; use in younger persons requires an assessment of potential risks and benefits
(CIII). Chronic suppressive therapy (secondary prophylaxis) is recommended in children
and  adults  after  initial  therapy  (Table  2).  Fungal  infections  Aspergillosis  Voriconazole,
6--8 mg/kg body weight per dose IV or 8 mg/kg body weight (max 400 mg) per dose
orally twice daily on day 1, followed by 7 mg/kg body weight (max 200 mg) per dose IV
or orally twice daily (AI) Treatment duration: ≥12 wks, but treatment duration should be
individualized  for  each  patient  according  to  clinical  response  Amphotericin  B
deoxycholate,  1.0--1.5  mg/kg  body  weight  IV  once  daily  (AIII)  Lipid  formulations  of
amphotericin B, 5 mg/kg body weight IV once daily (AIII) Caspofungin, 70 mg/m2 body
surface area (max 70 mg) IV as loading dose, then 50 mg/m2 body surface area (max
50  mg)  IV  once  daily  (CIII)  Potential  for  significant  pharmacokinetic  interactions
between  protease  inhibitors  or  non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors  with
voriconazole  and  should  be  used  cautiously  in  these  situations.  Consider  therapeutic
drug  monitoring  and  dosage  adjustment  if  necessary.  Candidiasis  Oropharyngeal
disease:  Treatment  duration:  7--14  days  Esophageal  disease:  Treatment  duration:
minimum  of  4--21  days  Invasive  disease:  Treatment  duration:  based  on  presence  of
deep tissue foci and clinical response; in patients with candidemia, treat until 2--3 wks
after last by positive blood culture (AIII) Oropharyngeal disease (fluconazole-refractory):
Esophageal disease: Invasive disease: Itraconazole cyclodextrin oral solution should not
be  used  interchangeably  with  itraconazole  capsules.  Itraconazole  capsules  are
generally  ineffective  for  treating  esophageal  disease  (DII).  Central  venous  catheters
should  be  removed  when  feasible  in  HIV-infected  children  with  fungemia  (AII).
Fluconazole should not be used for empiric treatment of fungemia because resistance
of  non-albicans  Candida  species  to  fluconazole  has  been  reported  (EIII).  In
uncomplicated  catheter-associated  C.  albicans  candidemia,  an  initial  course  of
amphotericin  B  followed  by  fluconazole  to  complete  treatment  can  be  used  (BIII).
Amphotericin  B  initiation  doses  After  stabilization  and  resolution  of  fever  on  daily
therapy for children with invasive disease, amphotericin B can be administered as 1.5
mg/kg body weight IV once every other day (BIII). Lipid formulation of amphotericin B
may  be  used  in  patients  with  renal  insufficiency  or  infusion-related  toxicity  to
amphotericin B (BII). Voriconazole has been used to treat esophageal candidiasis in a
small  number  of  immunocompromised  children  without  HIV  infection;  because  of
limited experience in children, data are insufficient to recommend use of this drug for
esophageal  or  disseminated  candidiasis  (CIII).  Caspofungin  has  been  used  to  treat
esophageal  and  invasive  candidiasis  in  adults;  however,  data  in  children  are  limited,
and  definitive  pediatric  dose  has  not  been  defined  (CIII).  Flucytosine  dose  should  be
adjusted to keep drug levels 40--60 μg/mL. TABLE 4. (Continued) Recommendations for
treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and
children,  United  States*†  Infection  Preferred  therapies  and  duration  Alternative
therapies Other options or issues Coccidioides spp. Diffuse pulmonary or disseminated
non-meningitic  disease:  Meningeal  infection:  Diffuse  pulmonary  or  disseminated
non-meningitic  disease  (in  stable  patient):  Meningeal  infection  (unresponsive  to
fluconazole):  Surgical  debridement  of  bone  and  lung  lesions  may  be  helpful  Some
experts add triazole to amphotericin B therapy and continue triazole once amphotericin
B  is  stopped  (BIII)  May  consider  voriconazole,  capsofungin,  or  posaconazole;  or
combinations, although experience in children is limited, and definitive pediatric dose
has  not  been  defined  (CIII)  Options  should  be  discussed  with  an  expert  in  treating
coccidioidomycosis
 Chronic
 suppressive
 therapy
 (secondary
 prophylaxis)
 with
fluconazole  or  itraconazole  is  recommended  for  adults  and  children  after  initial
induction therapy (Table 2) Cryptococcus neoformans  CNS disease: Localized disease
including isolated pulmonary disease (CNS not involved) Treatment duration: length of
initial therapy for non-CNS disease depends on site and severity of infection and clinical
response.  Disseminated  disease  (CNS  not  involved)  or  severe,  pulmonary  disease
Treatment duration: length of initial therapy for non-CNS disease depends on site and
severity of infection and clinical response. CNS disease: Consolidation therapy (followed
by  chronic  suppressive  therapy):  Localized  disease  including  isolated  pulmonary
disease  (CNS  not  involved)  Disseminated  disease  (CNS  not  involved)  or  severe
pulmonary disease: In patients with meningitis, CSF culture should be negative before
initiation of consolidation therapy. Overall in vitro resistance to antifungal agents used
to treat cryptococcosis remains uncommon. Newer azoles (voriconazole, posaconazole,
ravuconazole) are all very active in vitro against C. neoformans, but published clinical
experience  is  limited  about  their  use  for  cryptococcosis.  Liquid  preparation  of
itraconazole  (if  tolerated)  preferable  (but  more  expensive)  over  tablet  formulation
because of better bioavailability (BIII). Serum concentrations of itraconazole should be
monitored to optimize drug dosing. Amphotericin B may increase toxicity of flucytosine
by increasing cellular uptake or impairing its renal excretion or both. Flucytosine dose
should be adjusted to keep drug levels at 40--60 μg/mL. Oral acetazolamide should not
be  used  to  reduce  intracranial  pressure  in  cryptococcal  meningitis  (DIII).  Chronic
suppressive  therapy  (secondary  prophylaxis)  with  fluconazole  is  recommended  for
adults
 and
 childrens
 after
 initial
 therapy
 (Table
 2).
 TABLE
 4.
 (Continued)
Recommendations  for  treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and
HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*†  Infection  Preferred  therapies  and
duration  Alternative  therapies  Other  options  or  issues  Histoplasma  capsulatum   Mild
disseminated disease: Moderately severe to severe disseminated disease: CNS infection
Moderately  severe  to  severe  disseminated  disease  or  CNS  Infection:  Urine  antigen
should be monitored to identify relapse. Serum concentrations of itraconazole should be
monitored  and  reach  1  μg/mL  at  steady-state.  Levels  exceeding  10  μg/mL  should  be
followed by dose reduction. Urine antigen should be monitored to identify relapse. High
relapse rate with CNS infection occurs in adults, and longer therapy may be required;
treatment  in  children  is  anecdotal,  and  expert  consultation  should  be  considered
Chronic suppressive therapy (secondary prophylaxis) with itraconazole is recommended
for  adults  and  children  after  initial  therapy  (Table  2).  Pneumocystis  pneumonia
TMP-SMX, 15--20 mg/kg body weight TMP; PLUS 75--100 mg/kg body weight SMX daily
IV  or  orally  in  3--4  divided  doses  (AI)  (after  acute  pneumonitis  resolved  in  mild  to
moderate disease, IV TMP-SMX may be changed to oral) Treatment duration (followed
by  chronic  suppressive  therapy):  21  days  (AII)  Alternative  therapeutic  regimens  (if
patient  is  TMP-SMX  intolerant  or  clinical  treatment  fails  after  5--7  days  of  TMP-SMX
therapy): Dapsone, 2 mg/kg body weight orally once daily (max 100 mg/day) PLUS TMP,
15 mg/kg body weight orally per day divided into 3 doses has been used in adults (BI),
but data in children are limited (CIII). Primaquine base, 0.3 mg/kg body weight orally
once daily (max 30 mg/day), PLUS clindamycin, 10 mg/kg body weight IV or orally (max
600 mg IV and 300--450 mg orally) every 6 hrs has been used in adults (BI), but data in
children are not available (CIII). Indications for corticosteroids (AI): Chronic suppressive
therapy (secondary prophylaxis) with TMP/SMX is recommended for children and adults
after  initial  therapy  (Table  2)  (AI).  TABLE  4.  (Continued)  Recommendations  for
treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and
children,  United  States*†  Infection  Preferred  therapies  and  duration  Alternative
therapies Other options or issues Parasitic infections Cryptosporidiosis Effective HAART;
immune  reconstitution  may  lead  to  microbiologic  and  clinical  response  (AII)  No
consistently  effective  therapy  exists  for  cryptosporidiosis  in  HIV-infected  persons;
optimized  HAART  and  a  trial  of  nitazoxanide  can  be  considered:  Treatment  duration:
trial  of  ≤14  days  Supportive  care:  hydration,  correct  electrolyte  abnormalities,
nutritional  support  (AIII).  Antimotility  agents  (e.g.,  loperamide)  should  be  used  with
caution among young children (CIII). Malaria Uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum OR
unknown  malarial  species  from  ---  Atovaquone-proguanil  (Malarone(tm))  (pediatric
tablets  62.5  mg/25  mg;  adult  tablets  250  mg/100  mg  adult  tabs)  (AI)  ---  Chloroquine
phosphate, 16.6 mg/kg (10 mg/kg body weight base) (max 1000 mg) orally once, then
8.3 mg/kg body weight (max 500 mg) orally at 6, 24, 48 hrs (total dose = 41.6 mg/kg
(AI) chloroquine phosphate [max 2500 mg] = 25 mg/kg chloroquine base) (AI) P. vivax,
P. ovale, P. malariae (all areas except Papua New Guinea, Indonesia) Uncomplicated P.
falciparum OR unknown malaria species, chloroquine-resistant (all other malarial areas
or  unknown  region):  Chloroquine  phosphate  is  the  only  formulation  of  chloroquine
available in the United States. 10 mg of chloroquine phosphate = 6 mg of chloroquine
base.  In  combination  with  quinine,  an  alternative  to  clindamycin  is  doxycycline  in
persons >8 yrs of age. Doxycycline 2.2 mg/kg (max: 100 mg) orally twice daily for 7
days. Papua New Guinea has widespread chloroquine-resistant P. vivax; thus, patients
with malaria who have traveled there should be treated as having chloroquine-resistant
malaria Before primaquine is administered,glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase status
must  be  verified.  Primaquine  typically  is  administered  after  the  initial  chloroquine
blood-phase therapy, not in combination. The most updated prevention and treatment
recommendations
 for
 specific
 malarial
 regions
 are
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/pdf/treatmenttable.pdf.  Severe  malaria  Severe  malaria:
Quinidine  gluconate  is  a  class  1a  anti-arrhythmic  agent  not  typically  stocked  in
pediatric hospitals. When regional supplies are not available, it can be obtained from Eli
Lilly Company, telephone: 800-821-0538; the CDC Malaria hotline may be of assistance
(see below). Do not give quinidine gluconate as an IV bolus. Administration of quinidine
gluconate IV should be monitored. Cardiac monitoring is required. Adverse events that
can  result  from  use  of  this  drug  at  treatment  doses  include  severe  hypoglycemia,
prolongation of the QT interval, ventricular arrhythmia, and hypotension. Artesunate is
available only from CDC quarantine stations as of July 2007. Contact the CDC Malaria
Hotline, 770-488-7788, from 8 a.m. to 4:30 pm EST, or 770-488-7100 after hours and
on  weekends  and  holidays.  TABLE  4.  (Continued)  Recommendations  for  treatment  of
opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United
States*† Infection Preferred therapies and duration Alternative therapies Other options
or  issues  Microsporidiosis  Effective  HAART:  immune  reconstitution  may  lead  to
microbiologic  and  clinical  response  (AII)  For  disseminated  (not  ocular)  and  intestinal
infection  attributed  to  microsporidia  other  than  Enterocytozoon  bienuesi:  Treatment
duration: continue until immune reconstitution after initiation of HAART (AIII) For ocular
infection:  Treatment  duration:  continue  indefinitely  to  prevent  recurrence  or  relapse
(BIII)  Supportive  care:  hydration,  correct  electrolyte  abnormalities,  nutritional  support
(AIII).  Antimotility  agents  (e.g.,  loperamide)  should  be  used  with  caution  in  young
children (CIII). Fumagillin (adult dose, 20 mg/dose orally 3 times daily for 2 weeks), or
TNP-470 (a synthetic analogue of fumagillin) recommended for treatment of infections
because of Enterocytozoon bienuesi in HIV-infected adults, is unavailable in the United
States,  and  data  are  unavailable  on  dosing  in  children  (CIII).  Toxoplasma  gondii  
Congenital
 toxoplasmosis
 (AII):
 Treatment
 duration:
 12
 mos
 (AII)
 Acquired
toxoplasmosis, acute induction therapy (followed by chronic suppressive therapy) (AI):
Treatment duration (followed by chronic suppressive therapy): ≥6 wks (longer if clinical
or  radiologic  disease  is  extensive  or  response  in  incomplete  at  6  wks)  (BII)  For
sulfonamide-intolerant  patients:  Congenital  toxoplasmosis:  Acquired  toxoplasmosis:
TABLE  4.  (Continued)  Recommendations  for  treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in
HIV-exposed and HIV-infected infants and children, United States*† Infection Preferred
therapies  and  duration  Alternative  therapies  Other  options  or  issues  Viral  infections
Cytomegalovirus  Symptomatic  congenital  infection  with  neurologic  involvement:
Disseminated  disease  and  retinitis:  CNS  disease  (followed  by  chronic  suppressive
therapy):  Disseminated  disease  and  retinitis:  Valganciclovir  is  used  in  adults  to  treat
CMV  retinitis:  induction  dosing  in  adults  is  900  mg  orally  twice  daily  for  14--21  days,
followed  by  once  daily  dosing  as  chronic  suppressive  therapy  (AI);  however,  data  on
valganciclovir dosing in children are unavailable (CIII). Valganciclovir liquid formulation
is  not  commercially  available,  and  because  pharmacokinetics,  bioavailability,  safety,
and  shelf-life  of  extemporaneously  compounded  valganciclovir  are  not  known,  such
"homebrew" formulations should not be used (EIII). Cidofovir also is used to treat CMV
retinitis in adults: induction dosing in adults is 5 mg/kg body weight IV once weekly for
2  wks,  followed  by  chronic  suppressive  therapy  (AI);  however,  data  on  dosing  in
children are unavailable (CIII). Must be administered with probenecid and IV hydration.
Intravitreal  injections  not  practical  for  most  children  (DIII).  Intraocular  implant  should
not be used in children <3 yrs of age because of small size of eyes (EIII). Combination
ganciclovir  and  foscarnet  is  associated  with  substantial  rates  of  adverse  effects,  and
optimal  treatment  for  neurologic  disease  in  children  is  unknown,  particularly  those
receiving  optimized  antiretroviral  therapy.  Chronic  suppressive  therapy  (secondary
prophylaxis)  is  recommended  for  adults  and  children  after  initial  therapy  of
disseminated disease or retinitis (Table 2) (AI). TABLE 4. (Continued) Recommendations
for  treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and
children,  United  States*†  Infection  Preferred  therapies  and  duration  Alternative
therapies Other options or issues Hepatitis B virus Treatment required only for HBV (HIV
treatment not required; avoid TDF, 3TC, and FTC): Treatment required for both HIV and
HBV:  Treatment  for  HIV  alone:  Interferon-alfa,  10  million  units/m2  body  surface  area
subcutaneously  3  times  weekly  for  6  mos  (sometime  used  for  retreatment  of  failed
lower-dose interferon therapy) (CII) Alternative for 3TC: FTC 6 mg/kg body weight (max
200  mg)  once  daily  (BIII)  Indications  for  treatment  include  (BII):  Interferon-alfa  is
contraindicated  in  children  with  decompensated  liver  disease,  significant  cytopenias,
severe  renal,  neuropsychiatric,  or  cardiac  disorders,  and  autoimmune  disease  (EII).
Choice of HBV treatment options for HBV/HCV coinfected children depends on whether
concurrent  HIV  treatment  is  warranted.  3TC  and  FTC  have  similar  activity  (and  have
cross-resistance)  and  should  not  be  administered  together.  Tenofovir  is  not  approved
for use in HIV-infected children aged <18 yrs, and no pediatric formulation exists; it can
be used for older HIV-infected children who can receive adult dosage. Adefovir is not
approved for use in children but is under study in HIV-uninfected children for treatment
of chronic hepatitis B; can be considered for older HIV-infected children who can receive
adult dosage. IRIS may be manifested by dramatic increase in transaminases as CD4
counts  rise  within  the  first  6--12  wks  of  HAART.  Distinguishing  between  drug-induced
hepatotoxicity  or  other  causes  of  hepatitis  and  IRIS  may  be  difficult.  In  children
receiving 3TC, FTC, and/or tenofovir, clinical and laboratory exacerbations of hepatitis
(flare)  may  occur  if  the  drug  is  discontinued;  thus,  once  anti-HBV/HIV  therapy  has
begun, it should be continued unless contraindicated or until the child has been treated
for  >6  mos  after  HBeAg  seroconversion  and  can  be  closely  monitored  on
discontinuation  (BIII).  If  anti-HBV  therapy  is  discontinued  and  a  flare  occurs,
reinstitution of therapy is recommended because a flare can be life threatening (BIII).
Entecavir and telbivudine have been approved for use in adults with HBV; no data exist
on  safety  or  efficacy  of  these  medications  in  children.  TABLE  4.  (Continued)
Recommendations  for  treatment  of  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and
HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*†  Infection  Preferred  therapies  and
duration Alternative therapies Other options or issues Hepatitis C virus Interferon-alfa
PLUS  ribavirin  combination  therapy  (BIII):  Treatment  duration:  48  wks,  regardless  of
HCV  genotype  (BIII)  For  children  in  whom  ribavirin  is  contraindicated  (e.g.,  who  have
unstable cardiopulmonary disease, preexisting anemia or hemoglobinopathy): Length of
treatment for HIV/HCV-coinfected children is unknown and based on recommendations
for  HIV/HCV-coinfected  adults  (BIII).  Treatment  of  HCV  in  children  <3  yrs  generally  is
not  recommended  (DIII).  Indications  for  treatment  are  based  on  recommendations  in
HIV/  HCV-coinfected  adults;  because  HCV  therapy  is  more  likely  to  be  effective  in
younger  patients  and  in  patients  without  advanced  disease  or  immunodeficiency,
treatment should be considered for all HIV/HCV-infected children >3 yrs who have no
contraindications for treatment (BIII). IRIS may be manifested by dramatic increase in
transaminases  as  CD4  counts  rise  within  the  first  6--12  wks  of  HAART.  Distinguishing
between  drug-induced  hepatotoxicity  or  other  causes  of  hepatitis  and  IRIS  may  be
difficult. Interferon-alfa is contraindicated in children with decompensated liver disease,
significant cytopenias, severe renal or cardiac disorders, and autoimmune disease (EII).
Ribavirin is contraindicated in children with unstable cardiopulmonary disease, severe
preexisting anemia or hemoglobinopathy (EII). Didanosine combined with ribavirin may
lead  to  increased  mitochondrial  toxicities;  concomitant  use  is  contraindicated  (EIII).
Ribavirin and zidovudine both are associated with anemia and when possible should not
be  administered  together  (DII).  Pegylated  interferon-alfa  is  not  approved  for  use  in
children, although it is under study; in adults, pegylated interferon-alfa--2a (180 μg) or
--2b (1.5 μg/kg) subcutaneously once weekly PLUS ribavirin is the treatment of choice in
adults  with  chronic  HCV  hepatitis  warranting  treatment  (AI).  Herpes  Simplex  virus
Neonatal CNS or disseminated disease: Neonatal skin, eye, or mouth disease: CNS or
disseminated  disease  in  children  outside  the  neonatal  period:  Moderate  to  severe
symptomatic  gingivostomatitis:  For  genital  herpes:  Acyclovir-resistant  HSV  infection:
Mild  symptomatic  gingivostomatitis:  For  neonatal  CNS  disease:  repeat  CSF  HSV  DNA
PCR should be performed at days 19--21 of therapy; do not stop acyclovir until repeat
CSF  HSV  DNA  PCR  is  negative  (BIII).  Valacyclovir  is  approved  for  use  in  adults  and
adolescents  with  mucocutaneous  HSV  at  a  dosage  of  1  g  orally  twice  daily  (AI);  no
pediatric preparation exists, and data on dosing in children are limited; could be used
by older children able to receive adult dosing. Famciclovir is approved for use in adults
and adolescents with mucocutaneous HSV infection at a dosage of 500 mg orally twice
daily  (AI);  no  pediatric  preparation  exists,  and  data  on  dosing  in  children  are
unavailable; could be used by older children able to receive adult dosing. Suppressive
secondary  prophylaxis  can  be  considered  for  children  with  severe  and  recurrent
gingivostomatitis  (AI).  TABLE  4.  (Continued)  Recommendations  for  treatment  of
opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United
States*† Infection Preferred therapies and duration Alternative therapies Other options
or  issues  Human  papillomavirus  Podofilox  solution/gel  (0.5%)  applied  topically  twice
daily for 3 consecutive days weekly for ≤4 wks (patient applied) (BIII) Imiquimod cream
(5%) applied topically at night for 3 nonconsecutive nights per week for up to 16 weeks
and washed off 6--10 hours after each application (patient applied) (BII) Trichloroacetic
acid  applied  topically  weekly  for  up  to  3--6  wks  (health-care  provider  applied)  (BIII)
Podophyllin  resin,  10%--25%  suspension  in  tincture  of  benzoin,  applied  topically  and
washed  off  several  hrs;  later  repeated  weekly  for  3--6  wks  (CIII)  Individual  external
genital  wart  lesions  can  be  removed  by  cryotherapy  or  electrodessication;  may  be
repeated  every  1--2  wks  (BIII)  Veragen  self-applied  3  times  daily  for  up  to  16  wks
(patient  applied)  (CIII)  Laser  ablation  or  surgical  excision  for  recalcitrant  cases
Adequate  topical  anesthetics  to  the  genital  area  should  be  administered  before
application  of  caustic  modalities.  Intralesional  interferon-alfa  generally  is  not
recommended because of high cost, difficult administration, and potential for systemic
side  effects  (DIII).  Cidofovir  topical  gel  (1%)  is  an  experimental  therapy  studied  in
HIV-infected  adults  but  is  not  commercially  available  and  has  limited  use  in  children;
systemic absorption can occur (CIII). HAART has not been consistently associated with
reduced  risk  for  HPV-related  cervical  abnormalities  in  HIV-infected  women.  Laryngeal
papillomatosis generally requires referral to a pediatric otolaryngologist. Treatment is
directed at maintaining the airway, rather than removal of all disease. Adjuvant therapy
with interferon-alfa or intralesional cidofovir is being used investigationally for invasive
disease  (CIII).  Abnormal  Pap  smear  cytology  should  be  referred  to  colposcopy  for
diagnosis and management. Varicella zoster virus Chickenpox: Zoster: For patients not
responding to acyclovir: Some experts base IV acyclovir dosing in children aged ≥1 yr
on  body  surface  area  (500  mg/m2/dose  IV  every  8  hrs)  instead  of  on  body  weight.
Valacyclovir is approved for use in adults and adolescents who have zoster at a dosage
of 1 g orally twice daily for 7--10 days (AII); no pediatric preparation is available, and
data on dosing in children are limited; could be used by older children able to receive
adult dosing. Famciclovir is approved for use in adults and adolescents who have zoster
at a dosage of 500 mg orally 3 times daily for 7--10 days (AII); no pediatric preparation
is available, and data on dosing in children are limited; could be used by older children
able  to  receive  adult  dosing  Involvement  of  an  experienced  ophthalmologist  with
management  of  children  with  varicella  zoster  virus  retinitis  is  strongly  recommended
(AIII)
 *
 HIV=human
 immunodeficiency
 virus;
 PCP=Pneumocystis
 pneumonia;
TB=tuberculosis;
 IV=intravenous;
 IV=intravenous;
 IM=intramuscularly;
CSF=cerebrospinal
 fluid;
 CNS=central
 nervous
 system;
TMP/SMX=trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; HAART=highly active antiretroviral therapy;
CMV=cytomegalovirus.
 HBV=hepatitis
 B
 virus;
 HBeAg=hepatitis
 B
 e
 antigen;
HCV=hepatitis
 C
 virus;
 IRIS=immune
 reconstitution
 inflammatory
 syndrome;
PCR=polymerase
 chain
 reaction;
 HSV=herpes
 simplex
 virus;
 HPV=human
papillomavirus  †  Information  in  these  guidelines  might  not  represent  Food  and  Drug
Administration  (FDA)  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  products  or  indications.
Specifically,  the  terms  safe  and  effective  might  not  be  synonymous  with  the
FDA-defined  legal  standards  for  product  approval.  Letters  and  roman  numerals  in
parentheses  after  regimens  indicate  the  strength  of  the  recommendations  and  the
quality of evidence supporting it (see Box). 
TABLE  5.  Preparations  and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating
opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United
States*  Major  toxicities†  Drug  Preparations  Indicating  need  for  medical  attention
Indicating  need  for  medical  attention  if  persistent  or  bothersome  Special  instructions
Antifungal  drugs  Amphotericin  B  Deoxycholate  (Fungizone)  IV  Frequent  Less
frequent/Rare  GI  disturbance  (nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhea,  abdominal  pain)  Headache
Infuse  over  1--2  hrs;  in  patients  with  azotemia,  hyperkalemia,  or  getting  doses
>1 mg/kg, infuse over 3--6 hrs. Requires dose reduction in patients with impaired renal
function. Nephrotoxicity exacerbated with concomitant use of other nephrotoxic drugs;
avoid
 when
 possible.
 Permanent
 nephrotoxicity
 related
 to
 cumulative
 dose.
Nephrotoxicity may be ameliorated by hydration with 0.9% saline IV over 30 min before
the  amphotericin  B  infusion.  Infusion-related  reactions  Less  frequent  in  children  than
adults; onset usually 1--3 hrs after infusion; duration <1 hr; frequency decreases over
time. Pretreatment with acetaminophen and/or diphenhydramine may alleviate febrile
reactions. Amphotericin B lipid complex (Abelcet(r)) IV More frequent Less frequent GI
disturbance (loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain) Infuse diluted
solution at rate of 2.5 mg/kg/hr. In-line filters should not be used. Use with caution with
other
 bone-marrow--suppressing
 drugs
 or
 nephrotoxic
 drugs;
 renal
 toxicity
dose-dependent,  but  renal  toxicity  is  less  than  with  conventional  amphotericin  B.
Consider  dose  reduction  in  patients  with  impaired  renal  function.  Amphotericin  B
liposome (AmBisome(r)) IV More frequent Less frequent Rare GI disturbance (nausea,
vomiting,  diarrhea,  abdominal  pain)  Headache  Skin  rash  Infuse  over  2  hrs.  Consider
dose  reduction  in  patients  with  impaired  renal  function.  TABLE  5.  (Continued)
Preparations  and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic
infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*  Major
toxicities† Drug Preparations Indicating need for medical attention Indicating need for
medical  attention  if  persistent  or  bothersome  Special  instructions  Caspofungin
(Cancidas)  IV  More  frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhea)
Headache  Skin  rash,  facial  flushing  Elevated  liver  transaminases  Thrombophelbitis
Requires dose adjustment in moderate to severe hepatic insufficiency. IV infusion over
1 hr in normal saline (do not use diluents containing dextrose). Flucytosine (Ancobon)
Capsules:   250  mg,  500  mg  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances
(abdominal  pain,  constipation,  diarrhea,  anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting)  Elevated  liver
transaminases Skin rash Rare Drug levels should be monitored and doses adjusted to
maintain  at  40--60  μg/mL.  Requires  dose  adjustment  in  patients  with  impaired  renal
function;  use  with  extreme  caution.  Fatal  aplastic  anemia  and  agranulocytosis  have
been  Rarely  reported.  Fluconazole  (Diflucan)  Oral  suspension:   10  mg/mL,  40  mg/mL
Tablets:  50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg IV Infrequent Rare Frequent Infrequent May
be administered orally without regard to meals. Requires dose adjustment in patients
with impaired renal function. IV administration should be administered 1 time daily at
rate ≤200 mg/hr. Oral and IV doses are the same. Multiple potential drug interactions.
Itraconazole (Sporanox) Oral solution:  10 mg/mL Capsules:  100 mg IV Infrequent Rare
Frequent Infrequent Oral solution: give on an empty stomach as gastric acid increases
absorption. Capsules: administer after a full meal to increase absorption. Itraconazole
oral  solution  has  60%  greater  bioavailability  than  capsules,  and  the  oral  solution  and
capsules should not be used interchangeably. IV infusion over 60 min. Multiple potential
drug interactions. Posaconazole (Noxafil) Oral solution:  40 mg/mL Infrequent Rare Bone
marrow  suppression  Muscular  pain  Must  be  administered  with  meals.  Adequate
absorption depends on food for efficacy. Liver function tests, renal function tests and
electrolytes should be monitored while on therapy. TABLE 5. (Continued) Preparations
and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic  infections  in
HIV-exposed and HIV-infected infants and children, United States* Major toxicities† Drug
Preparations Indicating need for medical attention Indicating need for medical attention
if persistent or bothersome Special instructions Ketoconazole (Nizoral) Tablets:  200 mg
Infrequent  Rare  Frequent  Infrequent  Rare  Adverse  GI  effects  occur  less  often  when
administered  with  food.  Drugs  that  decrease  gastric  acidity  or  sucralfate  should  be
administered ≥2 hrs after ketoconazole. Disulfiram reactions have occurred in patients
ingesting  alcohol.  Hepatotoxicity  is  an  idiosyncratic  reaction,  usually  reversible  when
stopping the drug, but Rare fatalities can occur any time during therapy; more common
in females and adults >40 yrs, but cases reported in children. High-dose ketoconazole
suppresses
 corticosteroid
 secretion,
 lowers
 serum
 testosterone
 concentration
(reversible). Multiple potential drug interactions. Voriconazole (VFEND) Tablets:  50 mg,
200 mg IV Infrequent Rare More frequent Rare Approved for use in treating aspergillosis
and  serious  fungal  infections  caused  by  Fusarium  species  and  Scedosporium
apiospermum in adults intolerant of or refractory to other therapy. Oral tablets should
be taken 1 hr before or after a meal. Maximum infusion rate 3 mg/kg/hr over 1--2 hrs.
Oral administration to patients with impaired renal function if possible (accumulation of
IV  vehicle  occurs  in  patients  with  renal  insufficiency).  Dose  adjustment  needed  if
hepatic  insufficiency.  Data  in  children  not  yet  available.  Visual  disturbances  common
(>30%) but transient and reversible when drug is discontinued. Multiple potential drug
interactions.  Anti-Pneumocystis  drugs  Atovaquone  (Mepron)  Oral  suspension:  
150  mg/mL  Frequent  Frequent  Should  be  administered  with  a  meal  to  enhance
absorption  (bioavailability  increases  3-fold  when  administered  with  high-fat  meal).
Clindamycin (Cleocin) Oral solution:  15 mg/mL Capsules:  75 mg, 150 mg, 300 mg IV
More  frequent  Less  frequent  GI  disturbances  (abdominal  pain,  nausea,  vomiting,
diarrhea)  Fungal  overgrowth,  rectal  and  genital  areas  IV  preparation  contains  benzyl
alcohol, not recommended for use in neonates. IV preparation must be diluted before
administration. Capsule formulation should be taken with food or a full glass of water to
avoid esophageal irritation. TABLE 5. (Continued) Preparations and major toxicities of
drugs  commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and
HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*  Major  toxicities†  Drug  Preparations
Indicating need for medical attention Indicating need for medical attention if persistent
or bothersome Special instructions Dapsone Syrup (compassionate-use investigational
new  drug):   2  mg/mL  Tablets:   25  mg,  100  mg  More  frequent  Rare  CNS  toxicity
(headache,  insomnia,  nervousness)  GI  disturbances  (anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting)
Protect  from  light;  dispense  syrup  in  amber  glass  bottles.  Pentamidine  (Pentam)  IV
Aerosol More frequent Less frequent More frequent More frequent Less frequent More
frequent  Rapid  infusion  can  results  in  precipitous  hypotension;  IV  infusion  should  be
administered over ≥60 min (preferably 2 hrs). Cytolytic effect on pancreatic beta islet
cells, leading to insulin release, can result in prolonged severe hypoglycemia (usually
occurs after 5--7 days' therapy, but also can occur after discontinuation of drug); risk
increases  with  higher  dose,  longer  duration  of  therapy,  and  retreatment  ≤3  mos.
Hyperglycemia  and  diabetes  mellitus  may  occur  up  to  several  mos  after  drug
discontinued.  Primaquine  Tablets:  15  mg  (base)  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  GI
disturbances  (nausea,  vomiting)  Take  with  meals  or  antacids  to  minimize  gastric
irritation. Store in light-resistant container. Trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX)
(Bactrim,  Septra)  Oral  suspension:   TMP  8  mg/mL  and  SMX  40  mg/mL  Tablets,  single
strength: TMP 80 mg and SMX 400 mg Double strength: TMP 160 mg and SMX 800 mg
IV  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting,
diarrhea) Requires dose adjustment in patients with impaired renal function. Maintain
adequate fluid intake to prevent crystalluria and stone formation (take with full glass of
water). Potential for photosensitivity skin reaction with sun exposure. IV infusion over
60--90 min. TABLE 5. (Continued) Preparations and major toxicities of drugs commonly
used for treating opportunistic infections in HIV-exposed and HIV-infected infants and
children, United States* Major toxicities† Drug Preparations Indicating need for medical
attention  Indicating  need  for  medical  attention  if  persistent  or  bothersome  Special
instructions  Antimycobacterial  drugs  Amikacin  IV  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare
Must  be  infused  over  30--60  min  to  avoid  neuromuscular  blockade.  Requires  dose
adjustment in patients with impaired renal function. Should monitor renal function and
hearing  periodically  (e.g.,  monthly)  in  children  on  prolonged  therapy.  Azithromycin
(Zithromax) Oral suspension:  20 mg/mL, 40 mg/mL Capsules:  250 mg, 600 mg IV More
frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (abdominal  discomfort  or  pain,  diarrhea,  nausea,
vomiting)  Dizziness,  headache  Administer  1  hr  before  or  2  hrs  after  a  meal;  do  not
administer with aluminum- and magnesium-containing antacids. IV: should be infused
at concentration of 1 mg/mL over a 3-hr period or 2 mg/mL over a 1-hr period; should
not be administered as a bolus. Use with caution in patients who have hepatic function
impairment  (biliary  excretion  main  route  of  elimination).  Potential  drug  interactions.
Capreomycin  (Capastat)  IM  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Requires  dose  adjustment  in
patients  with  impaired  renal  function.  Administer  only  by  deep  IM  injection  into  large
muscle mass (superficial injections may result in sterile abscess). Should monitor renal
function  and  hearing  periodically  (e.g.,  monthly)  in  children  on  prolonged  therapy.
Ciprofloxacin  (Cipro)  Oral  suspension:   50  mg/mL,  100  mg/mL  Tablets:   100  mg,
250  mg,  500  mg,  750  mg  IV  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  More  frequent  Less
frequent Can be taken without regard to meals. Avoid concurrent antacids or sucralfate
(take ≥6 hrs before or 2 hrs after ciprofloxacin). Take with full glass of water to avoid
crystalluria. Possible phototoxicity reactions with sun exposure. IV infusions should be
over  1  hr.  Clarithromycin  (Biaxin)  Oral  suspension:   25  mg/mL,  50  mg/mL  Tablets:  
250 mg, 500 mg Rare Frequent Infrequent Requires dose adjustment in patients with
impaired  renal  function.  Can  be  administered  without  regard  to  meals.  Reconstituted
suspension should not be refrigerated. Potential drug interactions. TABLE 5. (Continued)
Preparations  and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic
infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*  Major
toxicities† Drug Preparations Indicating need for medical attention Indicating need for
medical  attention  if  persistent  or  bothersome  Special  instructions  Cycloserine
(Seromycin) Capsules:  250 mg More frequent Less frequent Rare More frequent Rare
Take with food to minimize gastric irritation. Neurotoxicity is related to excessive serum
concentrations;  serum  concentrations  should  be  maintained  at  25--30  μg/mL.  Do  not
administer  to  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  (because  of  increased  risk  for
neurotoxicity). Should monitor serum levels, if possible. Should administer pyridoxine at
the same time. Ethambutol (Myambutol) Tablets:  100 mg, 400 mg Infrequent Rare GI
disturbances  (abdominal  pain,  anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting)  Confusion  Disorientation
Headache Requires dose adjustment in patients with impaired renal function. Take with
food  to  minimize  gastric  irritation.  Monitor  visual  acuity  and  red-green  color
discrimination.  Avoid  concomitant  use  of  drugs  with  neurotoxicity.  Ethionamide
(Trecator-SC) Tablets:  250 mg Infrequent Rare More frequent Rare Avoid use of other
neurotoxic  drugs  that  could  increase  potential  for  peripheral  neuropathy  and  optic
neuritis. Administration of pyridoxine may alleviate peripheral neuritis. Take with food
to minimize gastric irritation. Isoniazid Oral syrup:  10 mg/mL Tablets: 50 mg, 100 mg,
300  mg  IM  More  frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (abdominal  pain,  nausea,  vomiting,
diarrhea)  Take  with  food  to  minimize  gastric  irritation.  Take  ≥1  hr  before
aluminum-containing antacids. Hepatitis less common in children. Use with caution in
patients  who  have  hepatic  function  impairment,  severe  renal  failure,  or  history  of
seizures.  Pyridoxine  supplementation  should  be  provided  for  all  HIV-infected  children.
Kanamycin Vials: 75 mg/2 mL 500 mg/2 mL 1 g/3 mL IM More frequent Less frequent
Rare Must be infused over 30--60 min to avoid neuromuscular blockade. Requires dose
adjustment in patients with impaired renal function. Should monitor renal function and
hearing  periodically  (e.g.,  monthly)  in  children  on  prolonged  therapy.  TABLE  5.
(Continued)  Preparations  and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating
opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United
States*  Major  toxicities†  Drug  Preparations  Indicating  need  for  medical  attention
Indicating  need  for  medical  attention  if  persistent  or  bothersome  Special  instructions
P-aminosalicyclic  acid  Delayed-release  granules:  4  g  per  packet  Rare  GI  disturbances
(abdominal  pain,  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhea)  Should  not  be  administered  to  patients
with  severe  renal  disease.  Drug  should  be  discontinued  at  first  sign  suggesting
hypersensitivity  reaction  (usually  rash,  fever,  GI  symptoms  followed  by  jaundice).
Vitamin B12 therapy should be considered in patients receiving for >1 mo. Administer
granules by sprinkling on acidic foods (e.g., applesauce or yogurt) or a fruit drink (e.g.,
tomato  juice  or  orange  juice).  Maintain  urine  at  neutral  or  alkaline  pH  to  avoid
crystalluria. The granule soft "skeleton" may be seen in the stool. Pyrazinamide Tablets:
 500 mg More frequent Less frequent Rare Skin rash, pruritis Photosensitivity Avoid in
patients with severe hepatic impairment. Rifabutin (Mycobutin) Capsules:  150 mg More
frequent Less frequent Rare Headache Insomnia Preferably take on empty stomach, but
may administer with food in patients with GI intolerance. Contents of capsules may be
mixed  with  applesauce  if  unable  to  swallow  capsule.  May  cause  reddish  to
brown-orange color urine, feces, saliva, sweat, skin, or tears (can discolor soft contact
lenses).  Uveitis  seen  with  high-dose  rifabutin  (adults  >300  mg/day)  especially  when
combined  with  clarithromycin.  Multiple  potential  drug  interactions.  Rifampin  (Fifadin)
Oral suspension:  (not commercially available but can be prepared from capsules of 1.2
g  rifampin  in  120  mL  syrup)  Capsules:   150  mg,  300  mg  IV  Infrequent  Rare  GI
disturbances  (abdominal  pain,  diarrhea)  Preferably  take  on  empty  stomach,  but  may
administer  with  food  in  patients  with  GI  intolerance;  take  with  full  glass  of  water.
Suspension  formulation  stable  for  30  days.  May  cause  reddish  to  brown-orange  color
urine,  feces,  saliva,  sweat,  skin,  or  tears  (can  discolor  soft  contact  lenses).  Multiple
potential  drug  interactions.  Streptomycin  IM  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  Usual
route of administration is deep IM injection into large muscle mass. For patients who
cannot tolerate IM injections, dilute to 12--15 mg in 100 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride;
must  be  infused  over  30--60  min  to  avoid  neuromuscular  blockade.  Requires  dose
adjustment in patients with impaired renal function. Should monitor renal function and
hearing  periodically  (e.g.,  monthly)  in  children  on  prolonged  therapy.  TABLE  5.
(Continued)  Preparations  and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating
opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United
States*  Major  toxicities†  Drug  Preparations  Indicating  need  for  medical  attention
Indicating  need  for  medical  attention  if  persistent  or  bothersome  Special  instructions
Antiviral  drugs  Acyclovir  (Zovirax)  Oral  suspension:   40  mg/mL  Capsules:   200  mg
Tablets:  400 mg, 800 mg IV More frequent Less frequent Rare (parenteral form only)
Rare (parenteral and oral forms): More frequent Less frequent (more marked in older
adults)  [irrelevant  to  this  document]  Requires  dose  adjustment  in  patients  with  renal
impairment.  Avoid  other  nephrotoxic  drugs.  Infusion  concentrations  of  <7  mg/mL  are
recommended. Should be infused slowly over 1 hr to avoid renal tubular damage; must
be  accompanied  by  adequate  hydration.  Cidofovir  (Vistide)  IV  More  frequent  Less
frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (anorexia,  diarrhea,  nausea,  vomiting)  Headache
Asthenia Infuse over 1 hr. Should not be used in patients with severe renal impairment.
Probenecid must be administered before each dose of cidofovir and 2 and 8 hrs after
infusion. Each dose must be administered with 1 liter of 0.9% sodium injection, infused
over 1--2 hrs immediately before cidofovir infusion; if the patient can tolerate the fluid
load, a second liter should be started either at the beginning of the cidofovir infusion or
immediately afterward. Concurrent use of other nephrotoxic drugs should be avoided.
Foscarnet  (Foscarvir)  IV  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  Frequent  Requires  dose
adjustment  in  patients  with  impaired  renal  function.  Use  adequate  hydration  to
decrease  nephrotoxicity.  Avoid  concomitant  use  of  other  nephrotoxic  drugs.  Monitor
serum electrolytes. IV solution of 24 mg/mL can be administered through central line
but  must  dilute  to  12  mg/mL  if  administered  through  peripheral  line.  Must  be
administered  at  a  constant  rate  by  infusion  pump  over  ≥2  hrs  (or  no  faster  than
1  mg/kg/min).  TABLE  5.  (Continued)  Preparations  and  major  toxicities  of  drugs
commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected
infants and children, United States* Major toxicities† Drug Preparations Indicating need
for medical attention Indicating need for medical attention if persistent or bothersome
Special instructions Ganciclovir (Cytovene) Capsules:  250 mg, 500 mg IV More frequent
Less  frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (abdominal  pain,  anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting)
Requires  dose  adjustment  in  patients  with  renal  impairment.  Avoid  other  nephrotoxic
drugs. IV infusion over 1 hr. In-line filter required. Maintain good hydration. Undiluted IV
solution is alkaline (pH 11); use caution in handling and preparing solutions, and avoid
contact with skin and mucus membranes. Administer oral doses with food to increase
absorption.  Interferon-alfa  Parenteral  (subcutaneous  or  IM  use)  More  frequent  Less
frequent Rare More frequent Infrequent Severe adverse effects less common in children
than  adults.  Toxicity  dose-related,  with  significant  reduction  over  the  first  4  mos  of
therapy.  For  non-life--threatening  reactions,  reduce  dose  or  temporarily  discontinue
drug  and  restart  at  low  doses  with  stepwise  increases.  If  patients  have  visual
complaints,  ophthalmologic  exam  should  be  performed  to  detect  possible  retinal
hemorrhage or retinal artery or vein obstruction. Should not be used in children with
decompenstated  hepatic  disease,  significant  cytopenia,  autoimmune  disease,  or
significant preexisting renal or cardiac disease. If symptoms of hepatic decompensation
occur  (ascites,  coagulopathy,  jaundice),  interferon-alfa  should  be  discontinued.
Lamivudine (Epivir) Oral solution:  10 mg/mL Tablets: 100 mg, 150 mg, 300 mg More
frequent Less frequent Infrequent Rare Avoid use in patients with history of pancreatitis
or peripheral neuropathy. Requires dose adjustment in patients with renal impairment.
HIV/HBV  coinfected  children  should  not  be  treated  with  lamivudine  monotherapy;
lamivudine should be administered as part of potent combination regimen and the dose
used for HIV treatment. TABLE 5. (Continued) Preparations and major toxicities of drugs
commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic  infections  in  HIV-exposed  and  HIV-infected
infants and children, United States* Major toxicities† Drug Preparations Indicating need
for medical attention Indicating need for medical attention if persistent or bothersome
Special  instructions  Ribavirin  Inhalation  solution:  6-g  vial  (oral  solution  and  IV
preparation  not  available  commercially  but  can  be  prepared  by  diluting  ribavirin
inhalation  product  vial)  Capsules:   200  mg  (in  kit  with  interferon-alfa)  More  frequent
Infrequent  CNS  effects  (fatigue,  headache,  insomnia,  depression)  GI  disturbances
(abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting) Skin rash After reconstitution, ribavirin oral solution
stable for 24 hrs. IV infusion should be over 15--20 min. Should not be used in patients
with  severe  renal  impairment.  Should  not  be  used  as  monotherapy  for  treatment  of
hepatitis C, but used in combination with interferon-alfa. Intracellular phosphorylation
of  pyrimidine  nucleoside  analogues  (zidovudine,  stavudine,  zalcitabine)  decreased  by
ribavirin,  may  have  antagonism,  use  with  caution.  Enhances  phosphorylation  of
didanosine,  use  with  caution  because  of  increased  risk  for  pancreatitis/mitochondrial
toxicity.  Valacyclovir (Valtrex) Tablets:  500 mg, 1 g (an oral suspension formulation
50  mg/mL  can  be  prepared  in  Ora-Sweet  or  Syrpalta  syrups)  Less  frequent  More
frequent Less frequent An oral suspension formulation can be prepared in Ora-Sweet or
Syrpalta syrups (to yield a final concentration of 50 mg/mL of the hydrochloride salt);
stable
 for
 21
 days
 in
 amber
 glass
 bottles.
 Thrombotic
 thrombocytopenia
purpura/hemolytic  uremic  syndrome  has  been  reported  in  HIV-infected  adults  with
advanced disease receiving high (8 g/day) but not lower doses. Valganciclovir (Valcyte)
Tablets:   450  mg  More  frequent  Less  frequent  GI  disturbances  (abdominal  pain,
anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting)  Requires  dose  adjustment  in  patients  with  renal
impairment. Avoid other nephrotoxic drugs. Tablets should not be broken or crushed.
Antiparasitic drugs Albendazole (Albenza) Tablets:  200 mg More frequent Less frequent
Rare Infrequent Rare Take with meals to increase absorption. Nitazoxanide (Alinia) Oral
suspension:  20 mg/mL Tablets (not yet commercially available): 500 mg More frequent
Rare Should be administered with food. Pyrimethamine (Daraprim) Tablet: 25 mg Less
frequent  Rare  Skin  rash  To  prevent  hematologic  toxicity,  administer  with  leucovorin.
Sulfadiazine  Tablet:  500  mg  Rare  GI  disturbances  (abdominal  pain,  diarrhea,  nausea)
Ensure  adequate  fluid  intake  to  avoid  crystalluria.  TABLE  5.  (Continued)  Preparations
and  major  toxicities  of  drugs  commonly  used  for  treating  opportunistic  infections  in
HIV-exposed and HIV-infected infants and children, United States* Major toxicities† Drug
Preparations Indicating need for medical attention Indicating need for medical attention
if persistent or bothersome Special instructions Antimalarial drugs Primaquine  Tablets: 
15  mg  (base)  More  frequent  Less  frequent  Rare  GI  disturbances  (nausea,  vomiting)
Take  with  meals  or  antacids  to  minimize  gastric  irritation.  Store  in  light-resistant
container.  Mefloquine  Tablets:   250  mg  More  frequent  Side  effects  less  prominent  in
children No pediatric tablets. Bitter taste; use with marshmellows can mask taste. Side
effects  requiring  discontinuation  ~4%.  Atovaquone/Proguanil  Tablets:   Pediatric
tabs---62.5 mg/25 mg Adult tabs---250 mg/100 mg Less frequent Not for severe renal
impairment  (GFR  <30  mL/min)  Pediatric  tablets  available  making  dosing  easier.  In
adults, side effects similar to placebo. Side effects requiring discontinuation ~1%--2%.
Doxycycline  Tablets  and  Capsules:   50,  75,  100  mg  Suspension:  25  mg/5  mL  oral
suspension, 50 mg/5 mL syrup More frequent Staining of teeth, use in persons >8 yrs
Photoonycholysis  Swallow  with  adequate  amounts  of  fluids.  Milk  decreases  mean
absorption  by  30%.  Provides  rickettsial  and  leptospirosis  prophylaxis.  Chloroquine
Phosphate  Tablets:   500  mg  250  mg  More  frequent  Psoriasis  exacerbations  Well
tolerated  at  prophylaxis  dosing.  Store  in  child-proof  containers.  Can  be  toxic  in
overdose.  Bitter  tasting.  Solution  available  worldwide,  but  not  in  United  States.
Quinidine IV Serious Very frequent Cinchonism = dose-dependent effect with tinnitus,
reversible  high-frequency  hearing  loss,  deafness,  vertigo,  blurred  vision,  diplopia,
photophobia,  headache,  confusion,  delirium.  Nausea,  diarrhea  Electrocardiogram
monitoring  is  standard  of  care.  Do  not  give  by  bolus  infusion.  If  electrocardiogram
changes observed, slow infusion rate. Artesunate IV (available from CDC Malaria Hotline
only: telephone: 770-488-7788) Approximately 40% less mortality than with quinidine
use in severe malaria. 50% less hypoglycemia than with quinidine. Antibacterial drugs
(note:  clarithromycin  and  azithromycin  are  listed  under  "Antimycobacterial  drugs")
Doxycycline Capsules:  20, 50, 75, 100 mg Tablets:  20, 50, 100 mg Syrup: 50 mg/5 mL
(60  mL)  Suspension:  25  mg/5  mL  (60  mL)  Injection:  100,  200  mg  Uncommon  GI
disturbances  (nausea,  vomiting,  abdominal  cramps)  Use  with  caution  in  hepatic  and
renal disease. IV doses should be infused over 1--4 hrs. Patient should avoid prolonged
exposure  to  direct  sunlight  (skin  sensitivity).  Generally  not  recommended  for  use  in
children <8 yrs of age because of risk for tooth enamel hypoplasia and discoloration,
unless  benefit  outweighs  the  risk.  TABLE  5.  (Continued)  Preparations  and  major
toxicities of drugs commonly used for treating opportunistic infections in HIV-exposed
and  HIV-infected  infants  and  children,  United  States*  Major  toxicities†  Drug
Preparations Indicating need for medical attention Indicating need for medical attention
if persistent or bothersome Special instructions Erythromycin Erythromycin base Tablet:
250, 333, 500 mg Delayed-release tablet: 250, 333, 500 mg Delayed-release capsule:
250  mg  Erythromycin  ethyl  succinate  Suspension:  200,  400  mg/5  mL  (100,  480  mL)
Oral  drops:  100  mg/2.5  mL  Chewable  tablet:  200  mg  Tablet:  400  mg  Erythromycin
estolate  Suspension:  125,  250  mg/5  mL  Erythromycin  stearate  Tablet:  250,  500  mg
Erythromycin gluceptate Injection: 1,000 mg Erythromycin lactobionate Injection: 500,
1000 mg Uncommon GI disturbances (nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps) Use with
caution  in  liver  disease.  Oral  therapy  should  replace  IV  therapy  as  soon  as  possible.
Give  oral  doses  after  meals.  Parenteral  administration  should  consist  of  a  continuous
drip or slow infusion over ≥60 min. Adjust dose in renal failure. Erythromycin should be
used  with  caution  in  neonates;  hypertrophic  pyloric  stenosis  and  life-threatening
episodes of ventricular tachycardia associated with prolonged QTc interval have been
reported.  High  potential  for  interaction  with  many  antiretrovirals  and  other  drugs.  *
Abbreviations:
 CNS---central
 nervous
 system;
 GI---gastrointestinal;
G6-PD---glucose-6-phosphate
 dehydrogenase
 deficiency;
 IM---intramuscular;
IV---intravenous.  †  The  toxicities  given  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  potential
clinical significance and do not include all side effects reported for a particular drug. 
TABLE
 6.
 Drug
 interactions
 of
 clinical
 significance*
 Drug
 class
 and
 name
Contraindicated  drugs  Drugs  that  should  be  used  with  caution  Drugs  that  require
plasma-level  monitoring  and/or  dose  adjustment  Antifungal  drugs  Amphotericin  B
Amphotericin B lipid complex (Abelcet) Amphotericin B liposome (AmBisome) Potential
for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity  or  side  effect  of  amphotericin
(e.g.,  hypokalemia):  Bone  marrow  suppressant  drugs:  corticosteroids,  corticotropin
Cardiovascular  drugs:  digitalis  glycosides  Diuretics:  potassium  depleting  Nephrotoxic
drugs  Neuromuscular  blocking  drugs  Caspofungin  Decreases  caspofungin  levels:
Anticonvulsant drugs: phenytoin Antimycobacterial drugs: rifampin Antiretroviral drugs:
efavirenz,  nevirapine,  nelfinavir  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Anticancer:
tacrolimus Flucytosine Increases flucytosine levels: Nephrotoxic drugs: medications that
impair glomerular filtration Ketoconazole Decreases ketoconazole levels: Antiretroviral
drugs:  nevirapine  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antihistamines:  astemizole,
terfenadine
 Gastrointestinal
 drugs:
 cisapride
 Sedatives/Hypnotics:
 midazolam,
triazolam
 Decreases
 ketoconazole
 levels:
 Anticonvulsant
 drugs:
 phenytoin
Antimycobacterial  drugs:  isoniazid,  rifampin  Decreases  ketoconazole  absorption:
Antiretroviral
 drugs:
 didanosine
 Gastrointestinal
 drugs:
 antacids,
anticholinergics/antispasmodics,
 histamine
 H2-receptor
 antagonists,
 omeprazole,
sucralfate  Minerals:  ferrous  sulfate,  zinc  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because
of  overlapping  toxicity:  Hepatotoxic  drugs  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Anticoagulant  drugs:  warfarin  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Antiretroviral  drugs:
indinavir  Cardiovascular  drugs:  digoxin  Immunosuppressant  drugs:  cyclosporine
Fluconazole  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antihistamines:  terfenadine  (with
high-dose  fluconazole)  Gastrointestinal  drugs:  cisapride  Decreases  fluconazole  levels:
Anticonvulsant
 drugs:
 phenytoin
 Antimycobacterial
 drugs:
 rifampin
 Increases
concomitant  drug  levels:  Antidiabetes  drugs:  oral  agents  Antimycobacterial  drugs:
rifabutin  Antidepressant  drugs:  amitriptyline  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Anticoagulant  drugs:  warfarin  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Asthma  drugs:
theophylline  Immunosuppressant  drugs:  cyclosporin  (with  high  dose  fluconazole)
Sedatives/Hypnotics:  midazolam  Itraconazole  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Antihistamines:
 astemizole,
 terfenadine
 Gastrointestinal
 drugs:
 cisapride
Sedatives/Hypnotics:  midazolam,  triazolam  Statins:  lovastatin,  simvastatin  Decreases
itraconazole levels: Anticonvulsant drugs: carbamazepine, phenytoin Antimycobacterial
drugs:  rifampin  Decreases  itraconazole  absorption:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  didanosine
Gastrointestinal
 drugs:
 antacids,
 anticholinergics/
 antispasmodics,
 histamine
H2-receptor  antagonists,  omeprazole,  sucralfate  Minerals:  ferrous  sulfate,  zinc
Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antidiabetes  drugs:  oral  agents  Increases
concomitant  drug  levels:  Anticoagulant  drugs:  warfarin  Anticonvulsant  drugs:
carbamazepine,  phenytoin  Cardiovascular  drugs:  digoxin  Immunosuppressant  drugs:
cyclosporin TABLE 6. (Continued) Drug interactions of clinical significance* Drug class
and  name  Contraindicated  drugs  Drugs  that  should  be  used  with  caution  Drugs  that
require  plasma-level  monitoring  and/or  dose  adjustment  Posaconazole  Increases
posaconzaole levels: Antihistamines: astemizole, terfenadine Antimalarial: Halofantrine
Cardiovascular  drugs:  quinidine  Ergot  alkaloids:  ergotamine,  dihydroergotamine
Gastrointestinal  drugs:  cisapride  Psychiatric  drugs:  pimozide  Increases  posaconzaole
levels:  Antihistamin  astemizole,  terfenadine  Antimalarial:  Halofantrine  Cardiovascular
drugs: quinidine Ergot alkaloids: ergotamine, dihydroergotamine Gastrointestinal drugs:
cisapride  Psychiatric  drugs:  pimozide  May  decrease  posaconazole  drug  levels  (avoid
concomitant  use  unless  benefits  outweigh  risks):  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin
Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifabutin  Gastrointestinal  drugs:  cimetidine  May  increase
concomitant  drug  levels:  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Antihypertensives:  (calcium
channel blockers metabolized through CYP3A4):verapamil, diltiazem Antimycobacterial
drugs: rifabutin Chemotherapeutic drugs (i.e. vinca alkaloids): vincristine and vinblastin
Immunosuppressant  drugs:  cyclosporin,  sirolimus,tacrolimus,  Sedatives/Hypnotics:
midazolam Statins: (those metabolized by CYP34A) Increased blood glucose levels with
concomitant  drug  use;  requires  glucose  monitoring:  Antidiabetic  drugs:  glipizide  May
increase  concomitant  drug  levels:  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Amtihypertensives
(calcium  channel  blockers  metabolized  through  CYP3A4):  verapamil,  diltiazem
Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifabutin  Chemotherapeutic  drugs  (i.e.  vinca  alkaloids):
vincristine and vinblastin Immunosuppressant drugs: cyclosporin, sirolimus,tacrolimus,
Sedatives/Hypnotics:  midazolam  Statins:  (those  metabolized  by  CYP34A)  Voriconazole
Decreases  voriconazole  levels:  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  carbamazepine,  long-acting
barbiturates  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifabutin,  rifampin  Increases  concomitant  drug
levels:  Antihistamines:  astemizole,  terfenadine  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifabutin
Cardiovascular  drugs:  quinidine  Ergot  alkaloids  Gastrointestinal  drugs:  cisapride
Immunosuppressant
 drugs:
 sirolimus
 Psychiatric
 drugs:
 pimozide
 Increases
voriconazole levels: Antiretroviral drugs: amprenavir, ritonavir, saquinavir May increase
or  decrease  voriconazole  levels:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  delavirdine,  efavirenz  Increases
concomitant  drug  levels:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  amprenavir,  nelfinavir,  saquinavir,
delavirdine  Antidiabetes  drugs:  oral  Statins  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Anticancer  drugs:  vinca  alkaloids  Anticoagulant  drugs:  warfarin,  coumarin  derivatives
Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Cardiovascular  drugs:  felodipine  (calcium  channel
blockers)  Gastrointestinal  drugs:  omeprazole  Immunosuppressant  drugs:  cyclosporin,
tacrolimus  Sedatives/Hypnotics:  midazolam,  triazolam,  alprazolam  Statins:  lovastatin,
simvastatin
 Decreases
 voriconazole
 levels:
 Anticonvulsant
 drugs:
 phenytoin
Anti-Pneumocystis drugs Atovaquone Decreases atovoquone levels: Antimycobacterial
drugs:  rifampin  Decreases  atovaquone  levels:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifabutin  
Clindamycin
 Decreases
 clindamycin
 antibacterial
 efficacy:
 Antibacterial
 drugs:
chloramphenicol,  erythromycins  Increases  concomitant  drug  toxicity:  Anesthetics:
hydrocarbon  inhalation  Neuromuscular  blocking  drugs  Dapsone  Increases  dapsone
levels:  Probenecid  Decreases  dapsone  levels:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifampin
Decreases  dapsone  absorption:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  didanosine  Increases  levels  both
drugs:  Antibacterial  drugs:  trimethoprim  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because
of  overlapping  toxicity:  Bone  marrow  suppressant  drugs  or  drugs  associated  with
hemolysis  Pentamidine Potential for increased toxicity because of overlapping toxicity
Anti-emetic  drugs:  droperidol  Antiretroviral  drugs:  zalcitibine  Potential  for  increased
toxicity because of overlapping toxicity: Antiviral drugs: foscarnet Antiretroviral drugs:
didanosine  Bone  marrow  suppressant  drugs  Nephrotoxic  drugs  TABLE  6.  (Continued)
Drug  interactions  of  clinical  significance*  Drug  class  and  name  Contraindicated  drugs
Drugs  that  should  be  used  with  caution  Drugs  that  require  plasma-level  monitoring
and/or  dose  adjustment  Primaquine  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because
of overlapping toxicity: Antiprotozoal drugs: quinacrine Potential for increased toxicity
because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Bone  marrow  suppressant  drugs  or  drugs  associated
with  hemolysis  Nephrotoxic  drugs  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  Potential  for
increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Folate  antagonists  Decreases
trimethoprim  levels:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifampin  Increases  levels  both  drugs:
Antibacteria  drugsl:  dapsone  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping
toxicity:  Bone  marrow  suppressant  drugs   Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Anticoagulant  drugs:  warfarin  Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Cardiovascular  drugs:
procainamide  Antimycobacterial  drugs  Amikacin  Potential  for  increased  toxicity
because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  capreomycin  Potential  for
increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Anti-TB  drugs  (injectable):
streptomycin,  kanamycin  Nephrotoxic  drugs  Neuromuscular  blocking  drugs  Ototoxic
drug:  loop  diuretics  Azithromycin  Decreases  azithromycin  absorption:  Gastrointestinal
drugs:  antacids  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antihistamines:  terfenadine  Ergot
derivatives
 Sedatives/Hypnotics:
 triazolam
 Increases
 concomitant
 drug
 levels:
Anticoagulant drugs: warfarin Anticonvulsant drugs: carbamazepine, phenytoin Asthma
drugs:
 theophylline
 Cardiovascular
 drugs:
 digoxin
 Immunosuppressant
 drugs:
cyclosporin  Capreomycin  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping
toxicity:  Antibacterial  drugs:  aminoglycosides  (parenteral)  Potential  for  increased
toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Nephrotoxic  drugs  Neuromuscular  blocking
drugs  Ototoxic  drugs:  loop  diuretics  Ciprofloxacin  Increases  ciprofloxacin  levels:
Probenecid  Decreases  ciprofloxacin  absorption:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  didanosine
Minerals:
 ferrous
 sulfate,
 zinc
 Gastrointestinal
 drugs:
 antacids,
 sucralfate,
magnesium-containing  laxatives  Potential  increased  toxicity  concomitant  drug:
Antidiabetes  drugs:  sulfonylurea  (glucose  abnormalities,  both  hypoglycemia  and
hyperglycemia, mechanism unclear) Increases concomitant drug levels: Anticoagulant
drugs:
 warfarin
 Asthma
 drugs:
 aminophylline,
 oxtriphylline,
 theophylline
Immunosuppressant
 drugs:
 cyclosporin
 Decreases
 concomitant
 drug
 levels:
Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin  Clarithromycin  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Antihistamines:  astemizole,  terfenadine  Gastrointestinal  drugs:  cisapride  Psychiatric
drugs:  pimozide  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:
Anti-emetic drugs: droperidol Decreases clarithromycin levels: Antimycobacterial drugs:
rifabutin,  rifampin  Antiretroviral  drugs:  zidovudine  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Anticoagulant
 drugs:
 warfarin,
 coumadin
 derivatives
 Anticonvulsant
 drugs:
carbamazapine Cardiovascular drugs: digoxin Asthma drugs: theophylline  Cycloserine
Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Antimycobacterial
drugs: ethionamide, isoniazid Increases concomitant drug levels: Anticonvulsant drugs:
phenytoin Ethambutol Potential for increased toxicity because of overlapping toxicity:
Neurotoxic drugs TABLE 6. (Continued) Drug interactions of clinical significance* Drug
class and name Contraindicated drugs Drugs that should be used with caution Drugs
that require plasma-level monitoring and/or dose adjustment Ethionamide Potential for
increased toxicity because of overlapping toxicity: Neurotoxic drugs Antimycobacterial
drugs:  cycloserine,  isoniazid  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Immunosuppressant
drugs: cyclosporin Isoniazid Decreases isoniazid levels: Corticosteriods: glucocorticoids
(e.g.,  prednisolone)  Decreases  isoniazid  absorption:  Gastrointestinal  drugs:  antacids
Increases concomitant drug levels: Anesthetics: alfentanil Decreases concomitant drug
levels:  Antifungal  drugs:  ketoconazole  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because
of  overlapping  toxicity:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifampin,  cycloserine,  ethionamide
Hepatotoxic drugs Neurotoxic drugs Increases concomitant drug levels: Anticoagulant
drugs: coumadin derivatives Anticonvulsant drugs: carbamazepine, phenytoin Asthma
drugs:  theophylline  Sedatives/Hypnotics:  benzodiazepines  Kanamycin   Potential  for
increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity  Aminoglycosides:  history  of
hypersensitivity or toxic reaction to any aminoglycoside Diuretics (potent): ethacrynic
acid, furosemide, meralluride sodium, sodium mercaptomerin, or mannitol (note: should
not
 be
 administered
 concurrently)
 Potential
 for
 increased
 toxicity
 because
of
 overlapping
 toxicity
 (should
 be
 avoided)
 Aminoglycosides:
 all,
 including
paromomycin  Nephrotoxic  and/or  neurotoxic  drugs:  polymyxin  B,  bacitracin,  colistin,
amphotercin  B,  cisplatin,  vancomycin  Decreases  kanamycin  levels:  Beta-lactam--type
antibiotics:  penicillins  or  cephalosporins  Pyrazinamide  Potential  for  increased  toxicity
because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifampin  Hepatotoxic  drugs
Decreases concomitant drug levels: Immunosuppressant drugs: cyclosporine Rifabutin
Decreases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  delavirdine;  saquinavir  (hard
gel capsule without higher-dose ritonavir boosting) Decreases concomitant drug levels:
Antibacterial  drugs:  dapsone  Antifungal  drugs:  azoles  (except  for  fluconazole)
Cardiovascular  drugs:  quinidine,  verapamil  (oral)  Contraceptives:  oral  Corticosteriods  
Increases  rifabutin  levels:  Antiretroviral  drugs:  nevirapine;  amprenavir,  indinavir,
nelfinavir,  ritonavir,  saquinavir  in  combination  with  higher  dose  ritonavir  boost
Decreases rifabutin levels: Antiretroviral drugs: efavirenz Decreases concomitant drug
levels:
 Antibacterial
 drugs:
 chloramphenicol,
 dapsone
 Anticonvulsant
 drugs:
barbiturates, diazepam Antidiabetes drugs: oral Antilipid drugs: clofibrate Antiretroviral
drugs: nevirapine, efavirenz, amprenavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, saquinavir (soft gel cap)
Asthma  drugs:  aminophylline,  oxtriphylline,  theophylline  Cardiovascular  drugs:
beta-adrenergic
 blockers,
 digitalis
 glycosides,
 quinidine,
 verapamil
 (oral)
Immunosuppressant  drugs:  cyclosporine  TABLE  6.  (Continued)  Drug  interactions  of
clinical significance* Drug class and name Contraindicated drugs Drugs that should be
used with caution Drugs that require plasma-level monitoring and/or dose adjustment
Rifampin Decreases concomitant drug levels: Contraceptives: oral Antiretroviral drugs:
delavirdine, amprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, nelfinavir, saquinavir (hard or soft
gel without higher-dose ritonavir boosting), or dual protease low-dose ritonavir-boosted
regimens  Decreases  rifampin  absorption:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  clofazamine
Decreases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antibacterial  drugs:  dapsone,  trimethoprim
Antiretroviral  drugs:  nevirapine  (use  only  if  other  options  not  available  and  close
virologic  and  immunologic  monitoring  can  be  done)  Antifungal  drugs:  azoles
Corticosteriods  Methadone  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping
toxicity:
 Bone
 marrow
 suppressant
 drugs
 Antimycobacterial
 drugs:
 isoniazid,
pyrazinamide  Hepatotoxic  drugs  Decreases  concomitant  drug  levels:  Antibacterial
drugs:
 chloramphenicol
 Anticoagulant
 drugs:
 warfarin,
 coumadin
 derivatives
Anticonvulsant  drugs:  barbiturates,  diazepam,  phenytoin  Antidiabetes  drugs:  oral
Antilipid  drugs:  clofibrate  Asthma  drugs:  aminophylline,  oxtriphylline,  theophylline
Cardiovascular  drugs:  beta-adrenergic  blockers,  digitalis  glycosides,  disopyramide,
mexiletine,  propafenone,  quinidine,  tocainide,  verapamil  (oral)  Immuosuppressant
drugs:  cyclosporine  Methadone  Streptomycin  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because
of  overlapping  toxicity:  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  capreomycin  Potential  for  increased
toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Nephrotoxic  drugs  Neuromuscular  blocking
drugs Ototoxic drugs Antiviral drugs Acyclovir (Valacyclovir) Increases acyclovir levels:
Probenecid Potential for increased toxicity because of overlapping toxicity: Nephrotoxic
drugs  Cidofovir  Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:
Antibacterial  drugs:  aminoglycosides  Nephrotoxic  drugs  Foscarnet  Potential  for
increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Anesthetic  adjuncts:  droperidol
Antiviral drugs: cidofovir Anti-Pneumocystis drugs: pentamidine Potential for increased
toxicity because of overlapping toxicity: Nephrotoxic drugs Ganciclovir (Valganciclovir)
Increases
 ganciclovir
 levels:
 Probenecid
 Increases
 concomitant
 drug
 levels:
Antiretroviral drugs: didanosine Potential for increased toxicity because of overlapping
toxicity  or  other  mechanisms:  Antibacterial  drugs:  impenem-cilastatin  Antiretroviral
drugs:  zidovudine  Bone  marrow  suppressant  drugs  Nephrotoxic  drugs  Interferon-alfa
Potential  for  increased  toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Antiretroviral  drugs:
zidovudine Bone marrow suppressant drugs Increases concomitant drug levels: Asthma
drugs: theophylline Sedative drugs: barbiturates Ribavirin Increases concomitant level
of active drug (potential for increased risk of pancreatitis and mitochondrial toxicity):
Antiretroviral  drugs:  didanosine  Decreases  concomitant  level  of  active  drug:
Antiretroviral  drugs:  zidovudine,  stavudine,  zalcitabine  TABLE  6.  (Continued)  Drug
interactions of clinical significance* Drug class and name Contraindicated drugs Drugs
that  should  be  used  with  caution  Drugs  that  require  plasma-level  monitoring  and/or
dose  adjustment  Antiparasitic  drugs  Albendazole  Increases  albendazole  levels:
Gastrointestinal  drugs:  Cimetidine  Corticosteroids  Anithelminhic  drugs:  praziquantel
Decreases concomitant drug levels: Asthma drugs: theophylline Nitazoxanide Potential
for  toxicity  if  concomitant  use  of  highly  protein-bound  drugs  with  narrow  therapeutic
index, because of high (>99.9%) protein binding  Paromomycin Potential for increased
toxicity  because  of  overlapping  toxicity:  Neuromuscular  blocking  drugs  Decreases
concomitant
 drug
 levels:
 Cardiovascular
 drugs:
 digoxin
 Antimalarial
 drugs
Atovaquone/Proguanil  Decreases  atovaquone  levels  Antibacterial  drugs:  tetracycline
Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifampin,  rifabutin  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Antiretroviral  drugs:  Zidovudine  Mefloquine  None  Decreases  concomitant  drug  levels
Antiretroviral  drugs:  Ritonavir  (decreased  ritonavir  trough  and  area  under  curve)  
Artesunate  None  None  Quinidine  Ritonavir  Other  protease  inhibitors  (generally
contraindicated, but in presence of life-threatening, severe malaria and in the absence
of other therapy, quinidine should be administered initially while artesunate is obtained
from  CDC)  Increases  quinidine  levels  (may  increase  probability  of  arrthymia)
Antiretroviral drugs: Ritonavir  Chloroquine None None Primaquine None  Potential for
increased  toxicity  Glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  deficiency  oxidative  drug  use
Antibacterial
 drugs
 (Note:
 clarithromycin
 and
 azithromycin
 are
 listed
 under
"antimycobacterial
 drugs")
 Doxycycline
 Increases
 doxycycline
 clearance:
Anticonvulsant  drugs:  phenytoin,  carbamazepine  Antimycobacterial  drugs:  rifampin
Potential  for  increased  toxicity  of  concomitant  drug:  Antithrombotic  drugs:  warfarin
Erythromycin  Gastroinetestinal  drugs:  cisapride  Increases  concomitant  drug  levels:
Anticonvulsants:  carbamazepine,  clozapine  Antiinflammtory  drugs:  cyclosporine,
methylprednisolone  Asthma  drugs:  theophylline  Cardiac  drugs:  digoxin  *  The  drug
interactions  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  potential  clinical  significance  and  are
not inclusive of all potential drug interactions (see drug label for complete information
about  drug  interactions).  FIGURE  1.  Recommended  immunization  schedule  for
HIV-infected* children aged 0--6 years --- United States, 2009 For those who fall behind
or start late, see the catch-up schedule This schedule summarizes recommendations for
routine administration of vaccines for HIV-infected children 0--6 years and indicates the
recommended ages for vaccine administration in this population for childhood vaccines
licensed in the United States as of December 1, 2008. Any dose not administered at the
recommended age should be administered at a subsequent visit, when indicated and
feasible. Licensed combination vaccines may be used whenever any component of the
combination is indicated and other components of the vaccine are not contraindicated
and  if  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  for  that  dose  of  the  series.
Providers  should  consult  the  relevant  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
statement  for  detailed  recommendations.  Clinically  significant  adverse  events  that
follow immunization should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
(VAERS).  Guidance  about  how  to  obtain  and  complete  a  VAERS  form  is  available  at
http://www.vaers.hhs.gov  or  telephone  800-822-7967.   1.  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  (HepB).
(Minimum  age:  birth)  At  birth:  After  the  birth  dose:  4-month  dose:  Post-vaccination:
Booster dose:  2. Rotavirus vaccine (RV). (Minimum age: 6 weeks)  3. Diphtheria and
tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  (DTaP).  (Minimum  age:  6  weeks)   4.
Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  conjugate  vaccine  (Hib).  (Minimum  age:  6  weeks)   5.
Pneumococcal  vaccine.  (Minimum  age:  6  weeks  for  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine
[PCV]; 2 years for pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine [PPSV])  6. Influenza vaccine.
(Minimum age: 6 months for trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine [TIV])  7. Measles,
mumps, and rubella vaccine (MMR). (Minimum age: 12 months)  8. Varicella vaccine.
(Minimum age: 12 months)  9. Hepatitis A vaccine (HepA). (Minimum age: 12 months) 
10.  Meningococcal  vaccine.  (Minimum  age:  2  years  for  meningococcal  conjugate
vaccine  [MCV]  and  for  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  [MPSV])  For  more
information,
 see
 the
 catch-up
 schedule
(http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules/child-schedule.htm#catchup)
 *
 These
guidelines  also  correspond  to  perinatally  HIV-exposed  children  who  are  awaiting
laboratory  confirmation  that  they  are  HIV-uninfected.  FIGURE  2.  Recommended
immunization  schedule  for  HIV-infected  children  aged  7--18  years  ---  United  States,
2009  This  schedule  summarizes  recommendations  for  routine  administration  of
vaccines  for  HIV-infected  children  and  adolescents  aged  7  through  18  years  and
indicates the recommended ages for vaccine administration for vaccines licensed in the
United  States  as  of  December  1,  2008.  Additional  vaccines  may  be  licensed  and
recommended  after  this  immunization  schedule  is  published.  Licensed  combination
vaccines may be used whenever a component of the combination is indicated and other
components  of  the  vaccine  are  not  contraindicated  and  if  approved  by  the  Food  and
Drug Administration for that dose of the series. Providers should consult the relevant
Advisory
 Committee
 on
 Immunization
 Practices
 statement
 for
 detailed
recommendations. Clinically significant adverse events that follow immunization should
be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Guidance about
how to obtain and complete a VAERS form is available at http://www.vaers.hhs.gov or
telephone  800-822-7967.   1.  Tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis
vaccine (Tdap) (Minimum age: 10 years for BOOSTRIX(r) and 11 years for ADACEL(tm)) 
2.  Human  papillomavirus  vaccine  (HPV)  (Minimum  age:  9  years,  females  only)   3.
Meningococcal vaccine (meningococcal conjugate vaccine [MCV])  4. Influenza vaccine
(trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine [TIV])  5. Pneumococcal vaccine (pneumococcal
conjugate vaccine [PCV]; pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine [PPSV])  6. Hepatitis A
vaccine (HepA)  7. Hepatitis B vaccine (HepB)  8. Inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV)  9.
Measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine (MMR)  10. Varicella vaccine Note: Haemophilus
influenzae  type  b  conjugate  vaccine  (Hib)  Hib  conjugate  vaccines  are  available  in
single- or combined-antigen preparations. Hib is recommended routinely for all children
through age 59 months. Clinicians and other health-care providers might consider use
of  Hib  among  HIV-infected  children  60  months  and  older  who  did  not  receive  an
age-appropriate vaccine series before age 59 months. See
 MMWR 2006:55(No. RR-15). ACIP Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
AIDS  acquired  immunodeficiency  syndrome  anti-HCV  antibody  to  hepatitis  C  virus
anti-HBc antibody to hepatitis B core antigen anti-HBs hepatitis B surface antibody ART
antiretroviral therapy ASCUS squamous cells of undetermined significance BCG bacille
Calmette-Guérin  CF  complement  fixation  CI  confidence  interval  CIN  cervical
intraepithelial  neoplasia  CMV  cytomegalovirus  CNS  central  nervous  system  CT
computed  tomography  CSF  cerebrospinal  fluid  DOT  directly  observed  therapy  EIA
enzyme  immunoassay  FDA  Food  and  Drug  Administration  FTA-ABS  fluorescent
treponemal  antibody  absorption  GI  gastrointestinal  HAART  highly  active  antiretroviral
treatment  HBeAg  hepatitis  B  virus  early  antigen-positive  HBIG  hepatitis  B  immune
globulin  HBsAg  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  HBV  hepatitis  B  virus  HCC  hepatocellular
carcinoma  HCV  hepatitis  C  virus  HIV  human  immunodeficiency  virus  HHV  human
herpesvirus  HPV  human  papillomavirus  HSIL  high-grade  squamous  intraepithelial
lesions  HSV  herpes  simplex  virus  IFA  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  IM  intramuscularly
IRIS  immune  reconstitution  inflammatory  syndrome  IV  intravenous  IVIG  intravenous
immune  globulin  JCV  Jamestown  Canyon  virus  KS  Kaposi  sarcoma  LEEP  loop
electrosurgical excision procedure LSIS low-grade SIL LTBI latent tuberculosis infection
MAC Mycobacterium avium complex MCV4 conjugated meningococcal vaccine MDR TB
multidrug-resistant  tuberculosis  MPSV4  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  MRI
magnetic  resonance  imaging  MRSA  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  NNRTI
non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitor  OAR  AIDS  Research  (OAR)  of  NIH  OI
opportunistic  infection  OPC  oropharyngeal  candidiasis  PACTG  Pediatric  AIDS  Clinical
Trials  Group  PBMC  peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cell  PCP  Pneumocystis  jirovecii
pneumonia PCR polymerase chain reaction PCV pneumococcal conjugate vaccine PDH
progressive  disseminated  histoplasmosis  PI  protease  inhibitor  PML  progressive
multifocal  leukoencephalopathy  PPD  purified  protein  derivative  PPSV  pneumococcal
polysaccharide  vaccine  following  licensure  of  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (PCV)
PPV  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  SIL  squamous  intra-epithelial  lesions  TB
tuberculosis
 TE
 Toxoplasma
 encephalitis
 TP-PA
 Treponema
 pallidum
 particle
agglutination  test  TST  tuberculin  skin  test  TMP-SMX  trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
VariZIG varicella zoster immune globulin currently in production VDRL Venereal Disease
Research  Laboratory  VZIG  varicella-zoster  immune  globulin,  which  is  no  longer
produced VZV varicella-zoster virus XDR TB extensively drug-resistant TB Core Working
Group  Members:  Michael  Brady,  MD,  Nationwide  Children's  Hospital,  Columbus  Ohio;
Kenneth L. Dominguez, MD, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia;  Peter  Havens,  MD,  Children's  Hospital  of  Wisconsin,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin;
Edward  Handelsman,  MD,  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases,
Bethesda,  Maryland;  Lynne  M.  Mofenson,  MD  (Executive  Secretary),  Eunice  Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland;
Steven  Nesheim,  MD,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
Jennifer  S.  Read,  MD,  MS,  MPH,  DTM&H,  Eunice  Kennedy  Shriver  National  Institute  of
Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland (HIVMA/IDSA liaison); Leslie
Serchuck,  MD,  Eunice  Kennedy  Shriver  National  Institute  of  Child  Health  and  Human
Development, Bethesda, Maryland; and Russell van Dyke, MD (Chair), Tulane University
School  of  Medicine,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.  Working  Group  Members:  Daniel  K
Benjamin, Jr., MD, PhD MPH, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina;
Stephanie  R.  Bialek,  MD,  MPH,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,
Georgia;  David  Boulware,  MD,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota;  John
Christenson,  MD,  Indiana  University  School  of  Medicine,  Indianapolis,  Indiana;  Aditya
Gaur, MD, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee; Anne Gershon,
MD,  Columbia  University  College  Physicians,  New  York  City,  New  York;  Rohan  Hazra,
MD, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
Bethesda,  Maryland;  Walter  Hughes,  MD,  St.  Jude  Children's  Research  Hospital,
Memphis,  Tennessee;  David  Kimberlin,  MD,  University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama; Takehisa Ikeda, MD, UMDNJ New Jersey Medical School, Newark,
New Jersey; Martin Kleiman, MD, Indiana University/Riley Hospital, Indianapolis, Indiana;
James  McAuley,  MD,  Rush  University  Medical  Center,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Anna-Barbara
Moscicki,  MD,  University  of  California  San  Francisco,  San  Francisco,  California;  Lisa
Nelson,  MD,  MPH  MSc,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
James  Oleske,  MD,  MPH,  UMDNJ  New  Jersey  Medical  School,  Newark,  New  Jersey;
Richard  Rutstein,  MD,  Children's  Hospital  of  Philadelphia,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;
Pablo J. Sanchez, MD, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas;
Susan  Schuval,  MD,  Schneider  Children's  Hospital,  New  Hyde  Park,  New  York;  Jane  F.
Seward,  MBBS,  MPH,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
George  K  Siberry,  MD,  MPH,  Johns  Hopkins  Medical  Institutions,  Baltimore,  Maryland;
Jeffrey  Starke,  MD,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  William  Stauffer,  MD,
MSPH & DTMH, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Tong Wei Ch'ng, MD,
UMDNJ New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey; and Ram Yogev, MD, Children's
Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois. Use of trade names and commercial sources is for
identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from typeset documents.
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. 
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
      Date last reviewed: 8/25/2009
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Date  last  reviewed:
8/25/2009
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5811a1.htm
