 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
      Naomi P. O'Grady, M.D.1
Mary Alexander2
E. Patchen Dellinger, M.D.3
Julie L. Gerberding, M.D., M.P.H.4
Stephen O. Heard, M.D.5
Dennis G. Maki, M.D.6
Henry Masur, M.D.1
Rita D. McCormick, M.D.7
Leonard A. Mermel, D.O.8
Michele L. Pearson, M.D.9
Issam I. Raad, M.D.10
Adrienne Randolph, M.D., M.Sc.11
Robert  A. Weinstein, M.D.12
1National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
2Infusion Nurses Society, Cambridge, Massachusetts
3University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
4Office of the Director, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia
5University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts
6University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin
7University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics, Madison, Wisconsin
8Rhode  Island  Hospital  and  Brown  University  School  of  Medicine,  Providence,  Rhode
Island
9Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases, CDC,
Atlanta, Georgia
10MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
11The Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
12Cook County Hospital and Rush Medical College, Chicago, Illinois
 The  material  in  this  report  was  prepared  for  publication  by  the  National  Center  for
Infectious Diseases, James M. Hughes, M.D., Director; Division of Healthcare 
Quality Promotion, Steven L. Solomon, M.D., Acting Director.
Summary
These  guidelines  have  been  developed  for  practitioners  who  insert  catheters  and  for
persons responsible for surveillance 
and  control  of  infections  in  hospital,  outpatient,  and  home  health-care  settings.  This
report was prepared by a working 
group comprising members from professional organizations representing the disciplines
of critical care medicine, infectious 
diseases,
 health-care
 infection
 control,
 surgery,
 anesthesiology,
 interventional
radiology, pulmonary medicine, pediatric medicine, 
and  nursing.  The  working  group  was  led  by  the  Society  of  Critical  Care  Medicine
(SCCM), in collaboration with the 
Infectious  Disease  Society  of  America  (IDSA),  Society  for  Healthcare  Epidemiology  of
America (SHEA), Surgical Infection Society 
(SIS),  American  College  of  Chest  Physicians  (ACCP),  American  Thoracic  Society  (ATS),
American Society of Critical 
Care  Anesthesiologists  (ASCCA),  Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control  and
Epidemiology (APIC), Infusion 
Nurses  Society  (INS),  Oncology  Nursing  Society  (ONS),  Society  of  Cardiovascular  and
Interventional Radiology (SCVIR), 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) of the 
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  and  is  intended  to  replace  the
Guideline for Prevention of Intravascular 
Device-Related Infections published in 1996. These guidelines are intended to provide
evidence-based recommendations for 
preventing  catheter-related  infections.  Major  areas  of  emphasis  include  1)  educating
and training health-care providers who insert 
and  maintain  catheters;  2)  using  maximal  sterile  barrier  precautions  during  central
venous catheter insertion; 3) using a 
2%  chlorhexidine  preparation  for  skin  antisepsis;  4)  avoiding  routine  replacement  of
central venous catheters as a strategy 
to prevent infection; and 5) using antiseptic/antibiotic impregnated short-term central
venous catheters if the rate of infection 
is  high  despite  adherence  to  other  strategies  (i.e.,  education  and  training,  maximal
sterile barrier precautions, and 
2%  chlorhexidine  for  skin  antisepsis).  These  guidelines  also  identify  performance
indicators that can be used locally by 
health-care institutions or organizations to monitor their success in implementing these
evidence-based recommendations.
Introduction
This report provides health-care practitioners with background information and specific
recommendations  to reduce 
the incidence of intravascular catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSI).  These
guidelines replace the 
Guideline for Prevention of Intravascular Device-Related 
Infections, which was published in 1996 
(1). 
The Guidelines for the Prevention of Intravascular 
Catheter-Related Infections have been developed for 
practitioners who insert catheters and for persons who are responsible for surveillance
and control of infections in hospital, outpatient, and 
home health-care settings. This report was prepared by a working group composed of
professionals representing the disciplines 
of  critical  care  medicine,  infectious  diseases,  health-care  infection  control,  surgery,
anesthesiology, interventional 
radiology, pulmonary medicine, pediatrics, and nursing. The working group was led by
the Society of Critical Care Medicine 
(SCCM), in collaboration with Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA), Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America 
(SHEA), Surgical Infection Society (SIS), American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP),
American Thoracic Society (ATS), 
American  Society  of  Critical  Care  Anesthesiologists  (ASCCA),  Association  for
Professionals in Infection Control and 
Epidemiology  (APIC),  Infusion  Nurses  Society  (INS),  Oncology  Nursing  Society  (ONS),
Society of Cardiovascular and 
Interventional  Radiology  (SCVIR),  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP),  and  the
Healthcare Infection Control Practices 
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The recommendations presented in 
this report reflect consensus of HICPAC and other professional organizations.
Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections in Adult and Pediatric Patients: 
An Overview
Background
Intravascular catheters are indispensable in modern-day medical practice, particularly
in intensive care units 
(ICUs).  Although  such  catheters  provide  necessary  vascular  access,  their  use  puts
patients at risk for local and systemic 
infectious  complications,  including  local  site  infection,  CRBSI,  septic  thrombophlebitis,
endocarditis, and other metastatic 
infections (e.g., lung abscess, brain abscess, osteomyelitis, and endophthalmitis). 
Health-care  institutions  purchase  millions  of  intravascular  catheters  each  year.  The
incidence of CRBSI varies 
considerably
 by
 type
 of
 catheter,
 frequency
 of
 catheter
 manipulation,
 and
patient-related factors (e.g., underlying disease and acuity 
of  illness).  Peripheral  venous  catheters  are  the  devices  most  frequently  used  for
vascular access. Although the incidence of local 
or bloodstream infections (BSIs) associated with peripheral venous catheters is usually
low, serious infectious 
complications  produce  considerable  annual  morbidity  because  of  the  frequency  with
which such catheters are used. However, the majority 
of  serious  catheter-related  infections  are  associated  with  central  venous  catheters
(CVCs), especially those that are placed 
in patients in ICUs. In the ICU setting, the incidence of infection is often higher than in
the less acute in-patient or 
ambulatory  setting.  In  the  ICU,  central  venous  access  might  be  needed  for  extended
periods of time; patients can be colonized 
with hospital-acquired organisms; and the catheter can be manipulated multiple times
per day for the administration of 
fluids, drugs, and blood products. Moreover, some catheters can be inserted in urgent
situations, during which optimal attention 
to  aseptic  technique  might  not  be  feasible.  Certain  catheters  (e.g.,  pulmonary  artery
catheters and peripheral arterial 
catheters) can be accessed multiple times per day for hemodynamic measurements or
to obtain samples for laboratory 
analysis, augmenting the potential for contamination and subsequent clinical infection.
The magnitude of the potential for CVCs to cause morbidity and mortality resulting from
infectious complications has 
been estimated in several studies (2). In the United States, 15 million CVC days (i.e.,
the total number of days of exposure to 
CVCs by all patients in the selected population during the selected time period) occur in
ICUs each year 
(2). If the average rate of CVC-associated BSIs is 5.3 per 1,000 catheter days in the ICU 
(3), approximately 80,000 CVC-associated BSIs occur in 
ICUs  each  year  in  the  United  States.  The  attributable  mortality  for  these  BSIs  has
ranged from no increase in mortality in 
studies that controlled for severity of illness 
(4--6), to 35% increase in mortality in prospective studies that did not use this 
control (7,8). Thus, the attributable mortality remains unclear. The attributable cost per
infection is an estimated 
$34,508--$56,000 (5,9), and the annual cost of caring for patients with CVC-associated
BSIs ranges from $296 million to $2.3 billion 
(10). 
A total of 250,000 cases of CVC-associated BSIs have been estimated to occur annually
if entire hospitals are assessed 
rather than ICUs exclusively (11). In this case, attributable mortality 
is an estimated 12%--25% for each infection, and the 
marginal cost to the health-care system is $25,000 per episode 
(11). 
 Therefore, by several analyses, the cost of CVC-associated BSI is substantial, both in
terms of morbidity and in terms 
of  financial  resources  expended.  To  improve  patient  outcome  and  reduce  health-care
costs, strategies should be implemented 
to  reduce  the  incidence  of  these  infections.  This  effort  should  be  multidisciplinary,
involving health-care professionals who 
insert  and  maintain  intravascular  catheters,  health-care  managers  who  allocate
resources, and patients who are capable of assisting 
in the care of their catheters. Although several individual strategies have been studied
and shown to be effective in 
reducing CRBSI, studies using multiple strategies have not 
been conducted. Thus, it is not known whether implementing 
multiple strategies will have an additive effect in reducing CRBSI, but it is logical to use
multiple strategies concomitantly.
Terminology and Estimates of Risk
The  terminology  used  to  identify  different  types  of  catheters  is  confusing,  because
many clinicians and researchers 
use  different  aspects  of  the  catheter  for  informal  reference.  A  catheter  can  be
designated by the type of vessel it occupies 
(e.g.,  peripheral  venous,  central  venous,  or  arterial);  its  intended  life  span  (e.g.,
temporary or short-term versus permanent or 
long-term);  its  site  of  insertion  (e.g.,  subclavian,  femoral,  internal  jugular,  peripheral,
and peripherally inserted central 
catheter [PICC]); its pathway from skin to vessel (e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled); its
physical length (e.g., long versus short); 
or  some  special  characteristic  of  the  catheter  (e.g.,  presence  or  absence  of  a  cuff,
impregnation with heparin, antibiotics 
or  antiseptics,  and  the  number  of  lumens).  To  accurately  define  a  specific  type  of
catheter, all of these aspects should be 
described (Table 1). 
The  rate  of  all  catheter-related  infections  (including  local  infections  and  systemic
infections) is difficult to 
determine.  Although  CRBSI  is  an  ideal  parameter  because  it  represents  the  most
serious form of catheter-related infection, the rate of 
such infection depends on how CRBSI is defined. 
Health-care  professionals  should  recognize  the  difference  between  surveillance
definitions and clinical definitions. 
The  surveillance  definitions  for  catheter-associated  BSI  includes  all  BSIs  that  occur  in
patients with CVCs, when other sites 
of  infection  have  been  excluded  (Appendix  A).  That  is,  the  surveillance  definition
overestimates the true incidence of 
CRBSI because not all BSIs originate from a catheter. Some bacteremias are secondary
BSIs from undocumented sources 
(e.g., postoperative surgical sites, intra-abdominal infections, and 
hospital-associated pneumonia or urinary tract infections). 
Thus, surveillance definitions are really definitions for catheter-associated BSIs. A more
rigorous definition might include only 
those BSIs for which other sources were excluded by careful examination of the patient
record, and where a culture of the 
catheter tip demonstrated substantial colonies of an organism identical to those found
in the bloodstream. Such a clinical 
definition  would  focus  on  catheter-related  BSIs.  Therefore,  to  accurately  compare  a
health-care facility's infection rate to published 
data, comparable definitions also should be used.
CDC  and  the  Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO)
recommend that the rate 
of catheter-associated BSIs be expressed as the number of catheter associated BSIs per
1,000 CVC days 
(12,13).  This  parameter  is  more  useful  than  the  rate  expressed  as  the  number  of
catheter-associated infections per 100 catheters (or percentage of 
catheters studied), because it accounts for BSIs over time and therefore adjusts risk for
the number of days the catheter is in use.
Epidemiology and Microbiology 
Since 1970, CDC's National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance System (NNIS) has been
collecting data on the 
incidence and etiologies of hospital-acquired infections, including CVC-associated BSIs
in a group of nearly 300 U.S. hospitals. 
The majority of hospital-acquired BSIs are associated with the use of a CVC, with BSI
rates being substantially higher 
among  patients  with  CVCs  than  among  those  without  CVCs.  Rates  of  CVC-associated
BSI vary considerably by hospital 
size, hospital service/unit, and type of CVC. During 1992--2001, NNIS hospitals reported
ICU rates of CVC-associated 
BSI ranging from 2.9 (in a cardiothoracic ICU) to 11.3 (in a neonatal nursery for infants
weighing <1,000 g) BSIs per 1,000 
CVC days (Table 2) (14). 
The relative risk of catheter-associated BSI also has been assessed in a meta-analysis
of 223 prospective studies of 
adult patients (11). Relative risk of infection was best determined by analyzing rates of
infection both by BSIs per 100 catheters 
and 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter days. These rates, and the NNIS-derived data, can be used as
benchmarks by individual hospitals 
to  estimate  how  their  rates  compare  with  other  institutions.  Rates  are  influenced  by
patient-related parameters, such as severity 
of illness and type of illness (e.g., third-degree burns versus postcardiac surgery), and
by 
catheter-related  parameters,  such  as  the  condition  under  which  the  catheter  was
placed (e.g., elective versus urgent) and catheter type 
(e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled or subclavian versus jugular).
Types of organisms that most commonly cause 
hospital-acquired BSIs change over time. During 1986--1989, 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus, were the most frequently reported causes of BSIs, accounting 
for 27% and 16% of BSIs, respectively (Table 3) 
(15). Pooled data from 1992 through 1999 indicate that 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by enterococci, are now the most frequently
isolated causes of hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 37% 
(12) and S. aureus account for 12.6% of reported hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Also notable was the susceptibility pattern of 
S. aureus isolates. In 1999, for the first time since NNIS has been 
reporting susceptibilities, >50% of all S. 
aureus isolates from ICUs were resistant to oxacillin 
(12). 
In  1999,  enterococci  accounted  for  13.5%  of  BSIs,  an  increase  from  8%  reported  to
NNIS during 1986--1989. 
The percentage of enterococcal ICU isolates resistant to vancomycin also is increasing,
escalating from 0.5% in 1989 to 25.9% 
in 1999 (12). 
Candida spp. caused 8% of hospital-acquired BSIs reported to NNIS during 1986--1989 
(15,16), and during 1992--1999 
(12,17,18).  Resistance  of  Candida  spp.  to  commonly  used  antifungal  agents  is
increasing. Although NNIS has not 
reported  the  percentage  of  BSIs  caused  by  nonalbicans  species  or  fluconazole
susceptibility data, other epidemiologic and clinical 
data  document  that  fluconazole  resistance  is  an  increasingly  relevant  consideration
when designing empiric therapeutic regimens 
for  CRBSIs  caused  by  yeast.  Data  from  the  Surveillance  and  Control  of  Pathogens  of
Epidemiologic Importance 
(SCOPE) Program documented that 10% of C. 
albicans bloodstream isolates from hospitalized patients were resistant to 
fluconazole (17). Additionally, 48% of 
Candida BSIs were caused by nonalbicans species, including 
C. glabrata and C. krusei, which are more likely than 
C. albicans to demonstrate resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole 
(18,19). 
Gram-negative bacilli accounted for 19% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1986--1989
(15) compared with 14% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1992--1999 
(12). An increasing percentage of ICU-related isolates are caused 
by  Enterobacteriaceae  that  produce  extended-spectrum  ß-lactamases  (ESBLs),
particularly 
Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 (20).
 Such
 organisms
 not
 only
 are
 resistant
 to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins, but also to frequently used, broad 
spectrum antimicrobial agents.
Pathogenesis 
Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 These guidelines have been developed for practitioners who insert catheters and for
persons responsible for surveillance 
and  control  of  infections  in  hospital,  outpatient,  and  home  health-care  settings.  This
report was prepared by a working 
group comprising members from professional organizations representing the disciplines
of critical care medicine, infectious 
diseases,
 health-care
 infection
 control,
 surgery,
 anesthesiology,
 interventional
radiology, pulmonary medicine, pediatric medicine, 
and  nursing.  The  working  group  was  led  by  the  Society  of  Critical  Care  Medicine
(SCCM), in collaboration with the 
Infectious  Disease  Society  of  America  (IDSA),  Society  for  Healthcare  Epidemiology  of
America (SHEA), Surgical Infection Society 
(SIS),  American  College  of  Chest  Physicians  (ACCP),  American  Thoracic  Society  (ATS),
American Society of Critical 
Care  Anesthesiologists  (ASCCA),  Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control  and
Epidemiology (APIC), Infusion 
Nurses  Society  (INS),  Oncology  Nursing  Society  (ONS),  Society  of  Cardiovascular  and
Interventional Radiology (SCVIR), 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) of the 
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  and  is  intended  to  replace  the
Guideline for Prevention of Intravascular 
Device-Related Infections published in 1996. These guidelines are intended to provide
evidence-based recommendations for 
preventing  catheter-related  infections.  Major  areas  of  emphasis  include  1)  educating
and training health-care providers who insert 
and  maintain  catheters;  2)  using  maximal  sterile  barrier  precautions  during  central
venous catheter insertion; 3) using a 
2%  chlorhexidine  preparation  for  skin  antisepsis;  4)  avoiding  routine  replacement  of
central venous catheters as a strategy 
to prevent infection; and 5) using antiseptic/antibiotic impregnated short-term central
venous catheters if the rate of infection 
is  high  despite  adherence  to  other  strategies  (i.e.,  education  and  training,  maximal
sterile barrier precautions, and 
2%  chlorhexidine  for  skin  antisepsis).  These  guidelines  also  identify  performance
indicators that can be used locally by 
health-care institutions or organizations to monitor their success in implementing these
evidence-based recommendations.
Introduction
This report provides health-care practitioners with background information and specific
recommendations  to reduce 
the incidence of intravascular catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSI).  These
guidelines replace the 
Guideline for Prevention of Intravascular Device-Related 
Infections, which was published in 1996 
(1). 
The Guidelines for the Prevention of Intravascular 
Catheter-Related Infections have been developed for 
practitioners who insert catheters and for persons who are responsible for surveillance
and control of infections in hospital, outpatient, and 
home health-care settings. This report was prepared by a working group composed of
professionals representing the disciplines 
of  critical  care  medicine,  infectious  diseases,  health-care  infection  control,  surgery,
anesthesiology, interventional 
radiology, pulmonary medicine, pediatrics, and nursing. The working group was led by
the Society of Critical Care Medicine 
(SCCM), in collaboration with Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA), Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America 
(SHEA), Surgical Infection Society (SIS), American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP),
American Thoracic Society (ATS), 
American  Society  of  Critical  Care  Anesthesiologists  (ASCCA),  Association  for
Professionals in Infection Control and 
Epidemiology  (APIC),  Infusion  Nurses  Society  (INS),  Oncology  Nursing  Society  (ONS),
Society of Cardiovascular and 
Interventional  Radiology  (SCVIR),  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP),  and  the
Healthcare Infection Control Practices 
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The recommendations presented in 
this report reflect consensus of HICPAC and other professional organizations.
Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections in Adult and Pediatric Patients: 
An Overview
Background
Intravascular catheters are indispensable in modern-day medical practice, particularly
in intensive care units 
(ICUs).  Although  such  catheters  provide  necessary  vascular  access,  their  use  puts
patients at risk for local and systemic 
infectious  complications,  including  local  site  infection,  CRBSI,  septic  thrombophlebitis,
endocarditis, and other metastatic 
infections (e.g., lung abscess, brain abscess, osteomyelitis, and endophthalmitis). 
Health-care  institutions  purchase  millions  of  intravascular  catheters  each  year.  The
incidence of CRBSI varies 
considerably
 by
 type
 of
 catheter,
 frequency
 of
 catheter
 manipulation,
 and
patient-related factors (e.g., underlying disease and acuity 
of  illness).  Peripheral  venous  catheters  are  the  devices  most  frequently  used  for
vascular access. Although the incidence of local 
or bloodstream infections (BSIs) associated with peripheral venous catheters is usually
low, serious infectious 
complications  produce  considerable  annual  morbidity  because  of  the  frequency  with
which such catheters are used. However, the majority 
of  serious  catheter-related  infections  are  associated  with  central  venous  catheters
(CVCs), especially those that are placed 
in patients in ICUs. In the ICU setting, the incidence of infection is often higher than in
the less acute in-patient or 
ambulatory  setting.  In  the  ICU,  central  venous  access  might  be  needed  for  extended
periods of time; patients can be colonized 
with hospital-acquired organisms; and the catheter can be manipulated multiple times
per day for the administration of 
fluids, drugs, and blood products. Moreover, some catheters can be inserted in urgent
situations, during which optimal attention 
to  aseptic  technique  might  not  be  feasible.  Certain  catheters  (e.g.,  pulmonary  artery
catheters and peripheral arterial 
catheters) can be accessed multiple times per day for hemodynamic measurements or
to obtain samples for laboratory 
analysis, augmenting the potential for contamination and subsequent clinical infection.
The magnitude of the potential for CVCs to cause morbidity and mortality resulting from
infectious complications has 
been estimated in several studies (2). In the United States, 15 million CVC days (i.e.,
the total number of days of exposure to 
CVCs by all patients in the selected population during the selected time period) occur in
ICUs each year 
(2). If the average rate of CVC-associated BSIs is 5.3 per 1,000 catheter days in the ICU 
(3), approximately 80,000 CVC-associated BSIs occur in 
ICUs  each  year  in  the  United  States.  The  attributable  mortality  for  these  BSIs  has
ranged from no increase in mortality in 
studies that controlled for severity of illness 
(4--6), to 35% increase in mortality in prospective studies that did not use this 
control (7,8). Thus, the attributable mortality remains unclear. The attributable cost per
infection is an estimated 
$34,508--$56,000 (5,9), and the annual cost of caring for patients with CVC-associated
BSIs ranges from $296 million to $2.3 billion 
(10). 
A total of 250,000 cases of CVC-associated BSIs have been estimated to occur annually
if entire hospitals are assessed 
rather than ICUs exclusively (11). In this case, attributable mortality 
is an estimated 12%--25% for each infection, and the 
marginal cost to the health-care system is $25,000 per episode 
(11). 
 Therefore, by several analyses, the cost of CVC-associated BSI is substantial, both in
terms of morbidity and in terms 
of  financial  resources  expended.  To  improve  patient  outcome  and  reduce  health-care
costs, strategies should be implemented 
to  reduce  the  incidence  of  these  infections.  This  effort  should  be  multidisciplinary,
involving health-care professionals who 
insert  and  maintain  intravascular  catheters,  health-care  managers  who  allocate
resources, and patients who are capable of assisting 
in the care of their catheters. Although several individual strategies have been studied
and shown to be effective in 
reducing CRBSI, studies using multiple strategies have not 
been conducted. Thus, it is not known whether implementing 
multiple strategies will have an additive effect in reducing CRBSI, but it is logical to use
multiple strategies concomitantly.
Terminology and Estimates of Risk
The  terminology  used  to  identify  different  types  of  catheters  is  confusing,  because
many clinicians and researchers 
use  different  aspects  of  the  catheter  for  informal  reference.  A  catheter  can  be
designated by the type of vessel it occupies 
(e.g.,  peripheral  venous,  central  venous,  or  arterial);  its  intended  life  span  (e.g.,
temporary or short-term versus permanent or 
long-term);  its  site  of  insertion  (e.g.,  subclavian,  femoral,  internal  jugular,  peripheral,
and peripherally inserted central 
catheter [PICC]); its pathway from skin to vessel (e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled); its
physical length (e.g., long versus short); 
or  some  special  characteristic  of  the  catheter  (e.g.,  presence  or  absence  of  a  cuff,
impregnation with heparin, antibiotics 
or  antiseptics,  and  the  number  of  lumens).  To  accurately  define  a  specific  type  of
catheter, all of these aspects should be 
described (Table 1). 
The  rate  of  all  catheter-related  infections  (including  local  infections  and  systemic
infections) is difficult to 
determine.  Although  CRBSI  is  an  ideal  parameter  because  it  represents  the  most
serious form of catheter-related infection, the rate of 
such infection depends on how CRBSI is defined. 
Health-care  professionals  should  recognize  the  difference  between  surveillance
definitions and clinical definitions. 
The  surveillance  definitions  for  catheter-associated  BSI  includes  all  BSIs  that  occur  in
patients with CVCs, when other sites 
of  infection  have  been  excluded  (Appendix  A).  That  is,  the  surveillance  definition
overestimates the true incidence of 
CRBSI because not all BSIs originate from a catheter. Some bacteremias are secondary
BSIs from undocumented sources 
(e.g., postoperative surgical sites, intra-abdominal infections, and 
hospital-associated pneumonia or urinary tract infections). 
Thus, surveillance definitions are really definitions for catheter-associated BSIs. A more
rigorous definition might include only 
those BSIs for which other sources were excluded by careful examination of the patient
record, and where a culture of the 
catheter tip demonstrated substantial colonies of an organism identical to those found
in the bloodstream. Such a clinical 
definition  would  focus  on  catheter-related  BSIs.  Therefore,  to  accurately  compare  a
health-care facility's infection rate to published 
data, comparable definitions also should be used.
CDC  and  the  Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO)
recommend that the rate 
of catheter-associated BSIs be expressed as the number of catheter associated BSIs per
1,000 CVC days 
(12,13).  This  parameter  is  more  useful  than  the  rate  expressed  as  the  number  of
catheter-associated infections per 100 catheters (or percentage of 
catheters studied), because it accounts for BSIs over time and therefore adjusts risk for
the number of days the catheter is in use.
Epidemiology and Microbiology 
Since 1970, CDC's National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance System (NNIS) has been
collecting data on the 
incidence and etiologies of hospital-acquired infections, including CVC-associated BSIs
in a group of nearly 300 U.S. hospitals. 
The majority of hospital-acquired BSIs are associated with the use of a CVC, with BSI
rates being substantially higher 
among  patients  with  CVCs  than  among  those  without  CVCs.  Rates  of  CVC-associated
BSI vary considerably by hospital 
size, hospital service/unit, and type of CVC. During 1992--2001, NNIS hospitals reported
ICU rates of CVC-associated 
BSI ranging from 2.9 (in a cardiothoracic ICU) to 11.3 (in a neonatal nursery for infants
weighing <1,000 g) BSIs per 1,000 
CVC days (Table 2) (14). 
The relative risk of catheter-associated BSI also has been assessed in a meta-analysis
of 223 prospective studies of 
adult patients (11). Relative risk of infection was best determined by analyzing rates of
infection both by BSIs per 100 catheters 
and 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter days. These rates, and the NNIS-derived data, can be used as
benchmarks by individual hospitals 
to  estimate  how  their  rates  compare  with  other  institutions.  Rates  are  influenced  by
patient-related parameters, such as severity 
of illness and type of illness (e.g., third-degree burns versus postcardiac surgery), and
by 
catheter-related  parameters,  such  as  the  condition  under  which  the  catheter  was
placed (e.g., elective versus urgent) and catheter type 
(e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled or subclavian versus jugular).
Types of organisms that most commonly cause 
hospital-acquired BSIs change over time. During 1986--1989, 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus, were the most frequently reported causes of BSIs, accounting 
for 27% and 16% of BSIs, respectively (Table 3) 
(15). Pooled data from 1992 through 1999 indicate that 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by enterococci, are now the most frequently
isolated causes of hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 37% 
(12) and S. aureus account for 12.6% of reported hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Also notable was the susceptibility pattern of 
S. aureus isolates. In 1999, for the first time since NNIS has been 
reporting susceptibilities, >50% of all S. 
aureus isolates from ICUs were resistant to oxacillin 
(12). 
In  1999,  enterococci  accounted  for  13.5%  of  BSIs,  an  increase  from  8%  reported  to
NNIS during 1986--1989. 
The percentage of enterococcal ICU isolates resistant to vancomycin also is increasing,
escalating from 0.5% in 1989 to 25.9% 
in 1999 (12). 
Candida spp. caused 8% of hospital-acquired BSIs reported to NNIS during 1986--1989 
(15,16), and during 1992--1999 
(12,17,18).  Resistance  of  Candida  spp.  to  commonly  used  antifungal  agents  is
increasing. Although NNIS has not 
reported  the  percentage  of  BSIs  caused  by  nonalbicans  species  or  fluconazole
susceptibility data, other epidemiologic and clinical 
data  document  that  fluconazole  resistance  is  an  increasingly  relevant  consideration
when designing empiric therapeutic regimens 
for  CRBSIs  caused  by  yeast.  Data  from  the  Surveillance  and  Control  of  Pathogens  of
Epidemiologic Importance 
(SCOPE) Program documented that 10% of C. 
albicans bloodstream isolates from hospitalized patients were resistant to 
fluconazole (17). Additionally, 48% of 
Candida BSIs were caused by nonalbicans species, including 
C. glabrata and C. krusei, which are more likely than 
C. albicans to demonstrate resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole 
(18,19). 
Gram-negative bacilli accounted for 19% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1986--1989
(15) compared with 14% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1992--1999 
(12). An increasing percentage of ICU-related isolates are caused 
by  Enterobacteriaceae  that  produce  extended-spectrum  ß-lactamases  (ESBLs),
particularly 
Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 (20).
 Such
 organisms
 not
 only
 are
 resistant
 to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins, but also to frequently used, broad 
spectrum antimicrobial agents.
Pathogenesis 
Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 This report provides health-care practitioners with background information and specific
recommendations  to reduce 
the incidence of intravascular catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSI).  These
guidelines replace the 
Guideline for Prevention of Intravascular Device-Related 
Infections, which was published in 1996 
(1). 
 The Guidelines for the Prevention of Intravascular 
Catheter-Related Infections have been developed for 
practitioners who insert catheters and for persons who are responsible for surveillance
and control of infections in hospital, outpatient, and 
home health-care settings. This report was prepared by a working group composed of
professionals representing the disciplines 
of  critical  care  medicine,  infectious  diseases,  health-care  infection  control,  surgery,
anesthesiology, interventional 
radiology, pulmonary medicine, pediatrics, and nursing. The working group was led by
the Society of Critical Care Medicine 
(SCCM), in collaboration with Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA), Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America 
(SHEA), Surgical Infection Society (SIS), American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP),
American Thoracic Society (ATS), 
American  Society  of  Critical  Care  Anesthesiologists  (ASCCA),  Association  for
Professionals in Infection Control and 
Epidemiology  (APIC),  Infusion  Nurses  Society  (INS),  Oncology  Nursing  Society  (ONS),
Society of Cardiovascular and 
Interventional  Radiology  (SCVIR),  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP),  and  the
Healthcare Infection Control Practices 
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The recommendations presented in 
this report reflect consensus of HICPAC and other professional organizations.
Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections in Adult and Pediatric Patients: 
An Overview
Background
Intravascular catheters are indispensable in modern-day medical practice, particularly
in intensive care units 
(ICUs).  Although  such  catheters  provide  necessary  vascular  access,  their  use  puts
patients at risk for local and systemic 
infectious  complications,  including  local  site  infection,  CRBSI,  septic  thrombophlebitis,
endocarditis, and other metastatic 
infections (e.g., lung abscess, brain abscess, osteomyelitis, and endophthalmitis). 
Health-care  institutions  purchase  millions  of  intravascular  catheters  each  year.  The
incidence of CRBSI varies 
considerably
 by
 type
 of
 catheter,
 frequency
 of
 catheter
 manipulation,
 and
patient-related factors (e.g., underlying disease and acuity 
of  illness).  Peripheral  venous  catheters  are  the  devices  most  frequently  used  for
vascular access. Although the incidence of local 
or bloodstream infections (BSIs) associated with peripheral venous catheters is usually
low, serious infectious 
complications  produce  considerable  annual  morbidity  because  of  the  frequency  with
which such catheters are used. However, the majority 
of  serious  catheter-related  infections  are  associated  with  central  venous  catheters
(CVCs), especially those that are placed 
in patients in ICUs. In the ICU setting, the incidence of infection is often higher than in
the less acute in-patient or 
ambulatory  setting.  In  the  ICU,  central  venous  access  might  be  needed  for  extended
periods of time; patients can be colonized 
with hospital-acquired organisms; and the catheter can be manipulated multiple times
per day for the administration of 
fluids, drugs, and blood products. Moreover, some catheters can be inserted in urgent
situations, during which optimal attention 
to  aseptic  technique  might  not  be  feasible.  Certain  catheters  (e.g.,  pulmonary  artery
catheters and peripheral arterial 
catheters) can be accessed multiple times per day for hemodynamic measurements or
to obtain samples for laboratory 
analysis, augmenting the potential for contamination and subsequent clinical infection.
The magnitude of the potential for CVCs to cause morbidity and mortality resulting from
infectious complications has 
been estimated in several studies (2). In the United States, 15 million CVC days (i.e.,
the total number of days of exposure to 
CVCs by all patients in the selected population during the selected time period) occur in
ICUs each year 
(2). If the average rate of CVC-associated BSIs is 5.3 per 1,000 catheter days in the ICU 
(3), approximately 80,000 CVC-associated BSIs occur in 
ICUs  each  year  in  the  United  States.  The  attributable  mortality  for  these  BSIs  has
ranged from no increase in mortality in 
studies that controlled for severity of illness 
(4--6), to 35% increase in mortality in prospective studies that did not use this 
control (7,8). Thus, the attributable mortality remains unclear. The attributable cost per
infection is an estimated 
$34,508--$56,000 (5,9), and the annual cost of caring for patients with CVC-associated
BSIs ranges from $296 million to $2.3 billion 
(10). 
A total of 250,000 cases of CVC-associated BSIs have been estimated to occur annually
if entire hospitals are assessed 
rather than ICUs exclusively (11). In this case, attributable mortality 
is an estimated 12%--25% for each infection, and the 
marginal cost to the health-care system is $25,000 per episode 
(11). 
 Therefore, by several analyses, the cost of CVC-associated BSI is substantial, both in
terms of morbidity and in terms 
of  financial  resources  expended.  To  improve  patient  outcome  and  reduce  health-care
costs, strategies should be implemented 
to  reduce  the  incidence  of  these  infections.  This  effort  should  be  multidisciplinary,
involving health-care professionals who 
insert  and  maintain  intravascular  catheters,  health-care  managers  who  allocate
resources, and patients who are capable of assisting 
in the care of their catheters. Although several individual strategies have been studied
and shown to be effective in 
reducing CRBSI, studies using multiple strategies have not 
been conducted. Thus, it is not known whether implementing 
multiple strategies will have an additive effect in reducing CRBSI, but it is logical to use
multiple strategies concomitantly.
Terminology and Estimates of Risk
The  terminology  used  to  identify  different  types  of  catheters  is  confusing,  because
many clinicians and researchers 
use  different  aspects  of  the  catheter  for  informal  reference.  A  catheter  can  be
designated by the type of vessel it occupies 
(e.g.,  peripheral  venous,  central  venous,  or  arterial);  its  intended  life  span  (e.g.,
temporary or short-term versus permanent or 
long-term);  its  site  of  insertion  (e.g.,  subclavian,  femoral,  internal  jugular,  peripheral,
and peripherally inserted central 
catheter [PICC]); its pathway from skin to vessel (e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled); its
physical length (e.g., long versus short); 
or  some  special  characteristic  of  the  catheter  (e.g.,  presence  or  absence  of  a  cuff,
impregnation with heparin, antibiotics 
or  antiseptics,  and  the  number  of  lumens).  To  accurately  define  a  specific  type  of
catheter, all of these aspects should be 
described (Table 1). 
The  rate  of  all  catheter-related  infections  (including  local  infections  and  systemic
infections) is difficult to 
determine.  Although  CRBSI  is  an  ideal  parameter  because  it  represents  the  most
serious form of catheter-related infection, the rate of 
such infection depends on how CRBSI is defined. 
Health-care  professionals  should  recognize  the  difference  between  surveillance
definitions and clinical definitions. 
The  surveillance  definitions  for  catheter-associated  BSI  includes  all  BSIs  that  occur  in
patients with CVCs, when other sites 
of  infection  have  been  excluded  (Appendix  A).  That  is,  the  surveillance  definition
overestimates the true incidence of 
CRBSI because not all BSIs originate from a catheter. Some bacteremias are secondary
BSIs from undocumented sources 
(e.g., postoperative surgical sites, intra-abdominal infections, and 
hospital-associated pneumonia or urinary tract infections). 
Thus, surveillance definitions are really definitions for catheter-associated BSIs. A more
rigorous definition might include only 
those BSIs for which other sources were excluded by careful examination of the patient
record, and where a culture of the 
catheter tip demonstrated substantial colonies of an organism identical to those found
in the bloodstream. Such a clinical 
definition  would  focus  on  catheter-related  BSIs.  Therefore,  to  accurately  compare  a
health-care facility's infection rate to published 
data, comparable definitions also should be used.
CDC  and  the  Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO)
recommend that the rate 
of catheter-associated BSIs be expressed as the number of catheter associated BSIs per
1,000 CVC days 
(12,13).  This  parameter  is  more  useful  than  the  rate  expressed  as  the  number  of
catheter-associated infections per 100 catheters (or percentage of 
catheters studied), because it accounts for BSIs over time and therefore adjusts risk for
the number of days the catheter is in use.
Epidemiology and Microbiology 
Since 1970, CDC's National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance System (NNIS) has been
collecting data on the 
incidence and etiologies of hospital-acquired infections, including CVC-associated BSIs
in a group of nearly 300 U.S. hospitals. 
The majority of hospital-acquired BSIs are associated with the use of a CVC, with BSI
rates being substantially higher 
among  patients  with  CVCs  than  among  those  without  CVCs.  Rates  of  CVC-associated
BSI vary considerably by hospital 
size, hospital service/unit, and type of CVC. During 1992--2001, NNIS hospitals reported
ICU rates of CVC-associated 
BSI ranging from 2.9 (in a cardiothoracic ICU) to 11.3 (in a neonatal nursery for infants
weighing <1,000 g) BSIs per 1,000 
CVC days (Table 2) (14). 
The relative risk of catheter-associated BSI also has been assessed in a meta-analysis
of 223 prospective studies of 
adult patients (11). Relative risk of infection was best determined by analyzing rates of
infection both by BSIs per 100 catheters 
and 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter days. These rates, and the NNIS-derived data, can be used as
benchmarks by individual hospitals 
to  estimate  how  their  rates  compare  with  other  institutions.  Rates  are  influenced  by
patient-related parameters, such as severity 
of illness and type of illness (e.g., third-degree burns versus postcardiac surgery), and
by 
catheter-related  parameters,  such  as  the  condition  under  which  the  catheter  was
placed (e.g., elective versus urgent) and catheter type 
(e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled or subclavian versus jugular).
Types of organisms that most commonly cause 
hospital-acquired BSIs change over time. During 1986--1989, 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus, were the most frequently reported causes of BSIs, accounting 
for 27% and 16% of BSIs, respectively (Table 3) 
(15). Pooled data from 1992 through 1999 indicate that 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by enterococci, are now the most frequently
isolated causes of hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 37% 
(12) and S. aureus account for 12.6% of reported hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Also notable was the susceptibility pattern of 
S. aureus isolates. In 1999, for the first time since NNIS has been 
reporting susceptibilities, >50% of all S. 
aureus isolates from ICUs were resistant to oxacillin 
(12). 
In  1999,  enterococci  accounted  for  13.5%  of  BSIs,  an  increase  from  8%  reported  to
NNIS during 1986--1989. 
The percentage of enterococcal ICU isolates resistant to vancomycin also is increasing,
escalating from 0.5% in 1989 to 25.9% 
in 1999 (12). 
Candida spp. caused 8% of hospital-acquired BSIs reported to NNIS during 1986--1989 
(15,16), and during 1992--1999 
(12,17,18).  Resistance  of  Candida  spp.  to  commonly  used  antifungal  agents  is
increasing. Although NNIS has not 
reported  the  percentage  of  BSIs  caused  by  nonalbicans  species  or  fluconazole
susceptibility data, other epidemiologic and clinical 
data  document  that  fluconazole  resistance  is  an  increasingly  relevant  consideration
when designing empiric therapeutic regimens 
for  CRBSIs  caused  by  yeast.  Data  from  the  Surveillance  and  Control  of  Pathogens  of
Epidemiologic Importance 
(SCOPE) Program documented that 10% of C. 
albicans bloodstream isolates from hospitalized patients were resistant to 
fluconazole (17). Additionally, 48% of 
Candida BSIs were caused by nonalbicans species, including 
C. glabrata and C. krusei, which are more likely than 
C. albicans to demonstrate resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole 
(18,19). 
Gram-negative bacilli accounted for 19% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1986--1989
(15) compared with 14% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1992--1999 
(12). An increasing percentage of ICU-related isolates are caused 
by  Enterobacteriaceae  that  produce  extended-spectrum  ß-lactamases  (ESBLs),
particularly 
Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 (20).
 Such
 organisms
 not
 only
 are
 resistant
 to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins, but also to frequently used, broad 
spectrum antimicrobial agents.
Pathogenesis 
Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Intravascular catheters are indispensable in modern-day medical practice, particularly
in intensive care units 
(ICUs).  Although  such  catheters  provide  necessary  vascular  access,  their  use  puts
patients at risk for local and systemic 
infectious  complications,  including  local  site  infection,  CRBSI,  septic  thrombophlebitis,
endocarditis, and other metastatic 
infections (e.g., lung abscess, brain abscess, osteomyelitis, and endophthalmitis). 
 Health-care  institutions  purchase  millions  of  intravascular  catheters  each  year.  The
incidence of CRBSI varies 
considerably
 by
 type
 of
 catheter,
 frequency
 of
 catheter
 manipulation,
 and
patient-related factors (e.g., underlying disease and acuity 
of  illness).  Peripheral  venous  catheters  are  the  devices  most  frequently  used  for
vascular access. Although the incidence of local 
or bloodstream infections (BSIs) associated with peripheral venous catheters is usually
low, serious infectious 
complications  produce  considerable  annual  morbidity  because  of  the  frequency  with
which such catheters are used. However, the majority 
of  serious  catheter-related  infections  are  associated  with  central  venous  catheters
(CVCs), especially those that are placed 
in patients in ICUs. In the ICU setting, the incidence of infection is often higher than in
the less acute in-patient or 
ambulatory  setting.  In  the  ICU,  central  venous  access  might  be  needed  for  extended
periods of time; patients can be colonized 
with hospital-acquired organisms; and the catheter can be manipulated multiple times
per day for the administration of 
fluids, drugs, and blood products. Moreover, some catheters can be inserted in urgent
situations, during which optimal attention 
to  aseptic  technique  might  not  be  feasible.  Certain  catheters  (e.g.,  pulmonary  artery
catheters and peripheral arterial 
catheters) can be accessed multiple times per day for hemodynamic measurements or
to obtain samples for laboratory 
analysis, augmenting the potential for contamination and subsequent clinical infection.
 The  magnitude  of  the  potential  for  CVCs  to  cause  morbidity  and  mortality  resulting
from infectious complications has 
been estimated in several studies (2). In the United States, 15 million CVC days (i.e.,
the total number of days of exposure to 
CVCs by all patients in the selected population during the selected time period) occur in
ICUs each year 
(2). If the average rate of CVC-associated BSIs is 5.3 per 1,000 catheter days in the ICU 
(3), approximately 80,000 CVC-associated BSIs occur in 
ICUs  each  year  in  the  United  States.  The  attributable  mortality  for  these  BSIs  has
ranged from no increase in mortality in 
studies that controlled for severity of illness 
(4--6), to 35% increase in mortality in prospective studies that did not use this 
control (7,8). Thus, the attributable mortality remains unclear. The attributable cost per
infection is an estimated 
$34,508--$56,000 (5,9), and the annual cost of caring for patients with CVC-associated
BSIs ranges from $296 million to $2.3 billion 
(10). 
 A total of 250,000 cases of CVC-associated BSIs have been estimated to occur annually
if entire hospitals are assessed 
rather than ICUs exclusively (11). In this case, attributable mortality 
is an estimated 12%--25% for each infection, and the 
marginal cost to the health-care system is $25,000 per episode 
(11). 
  Therefore, by several analyses, the cost of CVC-associated BSI is substantial, both in
terms of morbidity and in terms 
of  financial  resources  expended.  To  improve  patient  outcome  and  reduce  health-care
costs, strategies should be implemented 
to  reduce  the  incidence  of  these  infections.  This  effort  should  be  multidisciplinary,
involving health-care professionals who 
insert  and  maintain  intravascular  catheters,  health-care  managers  who  allocate
resources, and patients who are capable of assisting 
in the care of their catheters. Although several individual strategies have been studied
and shown to be effective in 
reducing CRBSI, studies using multiple strategies have not 
been conducted. Thus, it is not known whether implementing 
multiple strategies will have an additive effect in reducing CRBSI, but it is logical to use
multiple strategies concomitantly.
Terminology and Estimates of Risk
The  terminology  used  to  identify  different  types  of  catheters  is  confusing,  because
many clinicians and researchers 
use  different  aspects  of  the  catheter  for  informal  reference.  A  catheter  can  be
designated by the type of vessel it occupies 
(e.g.,  peripheral  venous,  central  venous,  or  arterial);  its  intended  life  span  (e.g.,
temporary or short-term versus permanent or 
long-term);  its  site  of  insertion  (e.g.,  subclavian,  femoral,  internal  jugular,  peripheral,
and peripherally inserted central 
catheter [PICC]); its pathway from skin to vessel (e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled); its
physical length (e.g., long versus short); 
or  some  special  characteristic  of  the  catheter  (e.g.,  presence  or  absence  of  a  cuff,
impregnation with heparin, antibiotics 
or  antiseptics,  and  the  number  of  lumens).  To  accurately  define  a  specific  type  of
catheter, all of these aspects should be 
described (Table 1). 
The  rate  of  all  catheter-related  infections  (including  local  infections  and  systemic
infections) is difficult to 
determine.  Although  CRBSI  is  an  ideal  parameter  because  it  represents  the  most
serious form of catheter-related infection, the rate of 
such infection depends on how CRBSI is defined. 
Health-care  professionals  should  recognize  the  difference  between  surveillance
definitions and clinical definitions. 
The  surveillance  definitions  for  catheter-associated  BSI  includes  all  BSIs  that  occur  in
patients with CVCs, when other sites 
of  infection  have  been  excluded  (Appendix  A).  That  is,  the  surveillance  definition
overestimates the true incidence of 
CRBSI because not all BSIs originate from a catheter. Some bacteremias are secondary
BSIs from undocumented sources 
(e.g., postoperative surgical sites, intra-abdominal infections, and 
hospital-associated pneumonia or urinary tract infections). 
Thus, surveillance definitions are really definitions for catheter-associated BSIs. A more
rigorous definition might include only 
those BSIs for which other sources were excluded by careful examination of the patient
record, and where a culture of the 
catheter tip demonstrated substantial colonies of an organism identical to those found
in the bloodstream. Such a clinical 
definition  would  focus  on  catheter-related  BSIs.  Therefore,  to  accurately  compare  a
health-care facility's infection rate to published 
data, comparable definitions also should be used.
CDC  and  the  Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO)
recommend that the rate 
of catheter-associated BSIs be expressed as the number of catheter associated BSIs per
1,000 CVC days 
(12,13).  This  parameter  is  more  useful  than  the  rate  expressed  as  the  number  of
catheter-associated infections per 100 catheters (or percentage of 
catheters studied), because it accounts for BSIs over time and therefore adjusts risk for
the number of days the catheter is in use.
Epidemiology and Microbiology 
Since 1970, CDC's National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance System (NNIS) has been
collecting data on the 
incidence and etiologies of hospital-acquired infections, including CVC-associated BSIs
in a group of nearly 300 U.S. hospitals. 
The majority of hospital-acquired BSIs are associated with the use of a CVC, with BSI
rates being substantially higher 
among  patients  with  CVCs  than  among  those  without  CVCs.  Rates  of  CVC-associated
BSI vary considerably by hospital 
size, hospital service/unit, and type of CVC. During 1992--2001, NNIS hospitals reported
ICU rates of CVC-associated 
BSI ranging from 2.9 (in a cardiothoracic ICU) to 11.3 (in a neonatal nursery for infants
weighing <1,000 g) BSIs per 1,000 
CVC days (Table 2) (14). 
The relative risk of catheter-associated BSI also has been assessed in a meta-analysis
of 223 prospective studies of 
adult patients (11). Relative risk of infection was best determined by analyzing rates of
infection both by BSIs per 100 catheters 
and 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter days. These rates, and the NNIS-derived data, can be used as
benchmarks by individual hospitals 
to  estimate  how  their  rates  compare  with  other  institutions.  Rates  are  influenced  by
patient-related parameters, such as severity 
of illness and type of illness (e.g., third-degree burns versus postcardiac surgery), and
by 
catheter-related  parameters,  such  as  the  condition  under  which  the  catheter  was
placed (e.g., elective versus urgent) and catheter type 
(e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled or subclavian versus jugular).
Types of organisms that most commonly cause 
hospital-acquired BSIs change over time. During 1986--1989, 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus, were the most frequently reported causes of BSIs, accounting 
for 27% and 16% of BSIs, respectively (Table 3) 
(15). Pooled data from 1992 through 1999 indicate that 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by enterococci, are now the most frequently
isolated causes of hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 37% 
(12) and S. aureus account for 12.6% of reported hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Also notable was the susceptibility pattern of 
S. aureus isolates. In 1999, for the first time since NNIS has been 
reporting susceptibilities, >50% of all S. 
aureus isolates from ICUs were resistant to oxacillin 
(12). 
In  1999,  enterococci  accounted  for  13.5%  of  BSIs,  an  increase  from  8%  reported  to
NNIS during 1986--1989. 
The percentage of enterococcal ICU isolates resistant to vancomycin also is increasing,
escalating from 0.5% in 1989 to 25.9% 
in 1999 (12). 
Candida spp. caused 8% of hospital-acquired BSIs reported to NNIS during 1986--1989 
(15,16), and during 1992--1999 
(12,17,18).  Resistance  of  Candida  spp.  to  commonly  used  antifungal  agents  is
increasing. Although NNIS has not 
reported  the  percentage  of  BSIs  caused  by  nonalbicans  species  or  fluconazole
susceptibility data, other epidemiologic and clinical 
data  document  that  fluconazole  resistance  is  an  increasingly  relevant  consideration
when designing empiric therapeutic regimens 
for  CRBSIs  caused  by  yeast.  Data  from  the  Surveillance  and  Control  of  Pathogens  of
Epidemiologic Importance 
(SCOPE) Program documented that 10% of C. 
albicans bloodstream isolates from hospitalized patients were resistant to 
fluconazole (17). Additionally, 48% of 
Candida BSIs were caused by nonalbicans species, including 
C. glabrata and C. krusei, which are more likely than 
C. albicans to demonstrate resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole 
(18,19). 
Gram-negative bacilli accounted for 19% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1986--1989
(15) compared with 14% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1992--1999 
(12). An increasing percentage of ICU-related isolates are caused 
by  Enterobacteriaceae  that  produce  extended-spectrum  ß-lactamases  (ESBLs),
particularly 
Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 (20).
 Such
 organisms
 not
 only
 are
 resistant
 to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins, but also to frequently used, broad 
spectrum antimicrobial agents.
Pathogenesis 
Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 The  terminology  used  to  identify  different  types  of  catheters  is  confusing,  because
many clinicians and researchers 
use  different  aspects  of  the  catheter  for  informal  reference.  A  catheter  can  be
designated by the type of vessel it occupies 
(e.g.,  peripheral  venous,  central  venous,  or  arterial);  its  intended  life  span  (e.g.,
temporary or short-term versus permanent or 
long-term);  its  site  of  insertion  (e.g.,  subclavian,  femoral,  internal  jugular,  peripheral,
and peripherally inserted central 
catheter [PICC]); its pathway from skin to vessel (e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled); its
physical length (e.g., long versus short); 
or  some  special  characteristic  of  the  catheter  (e.g.,  presence  or  absence  of  a  cuff,
impregnation with heparin, antibiotics 
or  antiseptics,  and  the  number  of  lumens).  To  accurately  define  a  specific  type  of
catheter, all of these aspects should be 
described (Table 1). 
 The  rate  of  all  catheter-related  infections  (including  local  infections  and  systemic
infections) is difficult to 
determine.  Although  CRBSI  is  an  ideal  parameter  because  it  represents  the  most
serious form of catheter-related infection, the rate of 
such infection depends on how CRBSI is defined. 
 Health-care  professionals  should  recognize  the  difference  between  surveillance
definitions and clinical definitions. 
The  surveillance  definitions  for  catheter-associated  BSI  includes  all  BSIs  that  occur  in
patients with CVCs, when other sites 
of  infection  have  been  excluded  (Appendix  A).  That  is,  the  surveillance  definition
overestimates the true incidence of 
CRBSI because not all BSIs originate from a catheter. Some bacteremias are secondary
BSIs from undocumented sources 
(e.g., postoperative surgical sites, intra-abdominal infections, and 
hospital-associated pneumonia or urinary tract infections). 
Thus, surveillance definitions are really definitions for catheter-associated BSIs. A more
rigorous definition might include only 
those BSIs for which other sources were excluded by careful examination of the patient
record, and where a culture of the 
catheter tip demonstrated substantial colonies of an organism identical to those found
in the bloodstream. Such a clinical 
definition  would  focus  on  catheter-related  BSIs.  Therefore,  to  accurately  compare  a
health-care facility's infection rate to published 
data, comparable definitions also should be used.
 CDC  and  the  Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO)
recommend that the rate 
of catheter-associated BSIs be expressed as the number of catheter associated BSIs per
1,000 CVC days 
(12,13).  This  parameter  is  more  useful  than  the  rate  expressed  as  the  number  of
catheter-associated infections per 100 catheters (or percentage of 
catheters studied), because it accounts for BSIs over time and therefore adjusts risk for
the number of days the catheter is in use.
Epidemiology and Microbiology 
Since 1970, CDC's National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance System (NNIS) has been
collecting data on the 
incidence and etiologies of hospital-acquired infections, including CVC-associated BSIs
in a group of nearly 300 U.S. hospitals. 
The majority of hospital-acquired BSIs are associated with the use of a CVC, with BSI
rates being substantially higher 
among  patients  with  CVCs  than  among  those  without  CVCs.  Rates  of  CVC-associated
BSI vary considerably by hospital 
size, hospital service/unit, and type of CVC. During 1992--2001, NNIS hospitals reported
ICU rates of CVC-associated 
BSI ranging from 2.9 (in a cardiothoracic ICU) to 11.3 (in a neonatal nursery for infants
weighing <1,000 g) BSIs per 1,000 
CVC days (Table 2) (14). 
The relative risk of catheter-associated BSI also has been assessed in a meta-analysis
of 223 prospective studies of 
adult patients (11). Relative risk of infection was best determined by analyzing rates of
infection both by BSIs per 100 catheters 
and 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter days. These rates, and the NNIS-derived data, can be used as
benchmarks by individual hospitals 
to  estimate  how  their  rates  compare  with  other  institutions.  Rates  are  influenced  by
patient-related parameters, such as severity 
of illness and type of illness (e.g., third-degree burns versus postcardiac surgery), and
by 
catheter-related  parameters,  such  as  the  condition  under  which  the  catheter  was
placed (e.g., elective versus urgent) and catheter type 
(e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled or subclavian versus jugular).
Types of organisms that most commonly cause 
hospital-acquired BSIs change over time. During 1986--1989, 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus, were the most frequently reported causes of BSIs, accounting 
for 27% and 16% of BSIs, respectively (Table 3) 
(15). Pooled data from 1992 through 1999 indicate that 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by enterococci, are now the most frequently
isolated causes of hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 37% 
(12) and S. aureus account for 12.6% of reported hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Also notable was the susceptibility pattern of 
S. aureus isolates. In 1999, for the first time since NNIS has been 
reporting susceptibilities, >50% of all S. 
aureus isolates from ICUs were resistant to oxacillin 
(12). 
In  1999,  enterococci  accounted  for  13.5%  of  BSIs,  an  increase  from  8%  reported  to
NNIS during 1986--1989. 
The percentage of enterococcal ICU isolates resistant to vancomycin also is increasing,
escalating from 0.5% in 1989 to 25.9% 
in 1999 (12). 
Candida spp. caused 8% of hospital-acquired BSIs reported to NNIS during 1986--1989 
(15,16), and during 1992--1999 
(12,17,18).  Resistance  of  Candida  spp.  to  commonly  used  antifungal  agents  is
increasing. Although NNIS has not 
reported  the  percentage  of  BSIs  caused  by  nonalbicans  species  or  fluconazole
susceptibility data, other epidemiologic and clinical 
data  document  that  fluconazole  resistance  is  an  increasingly  relevant  consideration
when designing empiric therapeutic regimens 
for  CRBSIs  caused  by  yeast.  Data  from  the  Surveillance  and  Control  of  Pathogens  of
Epidemiologic Importance 
(SCOPE) Program documented that 10% of C. 
albicans bloodstream isolates from hospitalized patients were resistant to 
fluconazole (17). Additionally, 48% of 
Candida BSIs were caused by nonalbicans species, including 
C. glabrata and C. krusei, which are more likely than 
C. albicans to demonstrate resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole 
(18,19). 
Gram-negative bacilli accounted for 19% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1986--1989
(15) compared with 14% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1992--1999 
(12). An increasing percentage of ICU-related isolates are caused 
by  Enterobacteriaceae  that  produce  extended-spectrum  ß-lactamases  (ESBLs),
particularly 
Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 (20).
 Such
 organisms
 not
 only
 are
 resistant
 to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins, but also to frequently used, broad 
spectrum antimicrobial agents.
Pathogenesis 
Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Since 1970, CDC's National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance System (NNIS) has been
collecting data on the 
incidence and etiologies of hospital-acquired infections, including CVC-associated BSIs
in a group of nearly 300 U.S. hospitals. 
The majority of hospital-acquired BSIs are associated with the use of a CVC, with BSI
rates being substantially higher 
among  patients  with  CVCs  than  among  those  without  CVCs.  Rates  of  CVC-associated
BSI vary considerably by hospital 
size, hospital service/unit, and type of CVC. During 1992--2001, NNIS hospitals reported
ICU rates of CVC-associated 
BSI ranging from 2.9 (in a cardiothoracic ICU) to 11.3 (in a neonatal nursery for infants
weighing <1,000 g) BSIs per 1,000 
CVC days (Table 2) (14). 
 The relative risk of catheter-associated BSI also has been assessed in a meta-analysis
of 223 prospective studies of 
adult patients (11). Relative risk of infection was best determined by analyzing rates of
infection both by BSIs per 100 catheters 
and 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter days. These rates, and the NNIS-derived data, can be used as
benchmarks by individual hospitals 
to  estimate  how  their  rates  compare  with  other  institutions.  Rates  are  influenced  by
patient-related parameters, such as severity 
of illness and type of illness (e.g., third-degree burns versus postcardiac surgery), and
by 
catheter-related  parameters,  such  as  the  condition  under  which  the  catheter  was
placed (e.g., elective versus urgent) and catheter type 
(e.g., tunneled versus nontunneled or subclavian versus jugular).
 Types of organisms that most commonly cause 
hospital-acquired BSIs change over time. During 1986--1989, 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus, were the most frequently reported causes of BSIs, accounting 
for 27% and 16% of BSIs, respectively (Table 3) 
(15). Pooled data from 1992 through 1999 indicate that 
coagulase-negative staphylococci, followed by enterococci, are now the most frequently
isolated causes of hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Coagulase-negative staphylococci account for 37% 
(12) and S. aureus account for 12.6% of reported hospital-acquired BSIs 
(12). Also notable was the susceptibility pattern of 
S. aureus isolates. In 1999, for the first time since NNIS has been 
reporting susceptibilities, >50% of all S. 
aureus isolates from ICUs were resistant to oxacillin 
(12). 
 In  1999,  enterococci  accounted  for  13.5%  of  BSIs,  an  increase  from  8%  reported  to
NNIS during 1986--1989. 
The percentage of enterococcal ICU isolates resistant to vancomycin also is increasing,
escalating from 0.5% in 1989 to 25.9% 
in 1999 (12). 
 Candida spp. caused 8% of hospital-acquired BSIs reported to NNIS during 1986--1989 
(15,16), and during 1992--1999 
(12,17,18).  Resistance  of  Candida  spp.  to  commonly  used  antifungal  agents  is
increasing. Although NNIS has not 
reported  the  percentage  of  BSIs  caused  by  nonalbicans  species  or  fluconazole
susceptibility data, other epidemiologic and clinical 
data  document  that  fluconazole  resistance  is  an  increasingly  relevant  consideration
when designing empiric therapeutic regimens 
for  CRBSIs  caused  by  yeast.  Data  from  the  Surveillance  and  Control  of  Pathogens  of
Epidemiologic Importance 
(SCOPE) Program documented that 10% of C. 
albicans bloodstream isolates from hospitalized patients were resistant to 
fluconazole (17). Additionally, 48% of 
Candida BSIs were caused by nonalbicans species, including 
C. glabrata and C. krusei, which are more likely than 
C. albicans to demonstrate resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole 
(18,19). 
 Gram-negative  bacilli  accounted  for  19%  of  catheter-associated  BSIs  during
1986--1989 
(15) compared with 14% of catheter-associated BSIs during 1992--1999 
(12). An increasing percentage of ICU-related isolates are caused 
by  Enterobacteriaceae  that  produce  extended-spectrum  ß-lactamases  (ESBLs),
particularly 
Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 (20).
 Such
 organisms
 not
 only
 are
 resistant
 to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins, but also to frequently used, broad 
spectrum antimicrobial agents.
Pathogenesis 
Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Migration of skin organisms at the insertion site into the cutaneous catheter tract with
colonization of the catheter tip is 
the most common route of infection for peripherally inserted, short-term catheters 
(21,22).  Contamination  of  the  catheter  hub  contributes  substantially  to  intraluminal
colonization of long-term catheters 
(23--25). Occasionally, catheters might 
become  hematogenously  seeded  from  another  focus  of  infection.  Rarely,  infusate
contamination leads to CRBSI 
(26). 
 Important pathogenic determinants of catheter-related infection are 1) the material of
which the device is made and 2) 
the  intrinsic  virulence  factors  of  the  infecting  organism.  In  vitro  studies  demonstrate
that catheters made of polyvinyl chloride 
or polyethylene are likely less resistant to the adherence of microorganisms than are
catheters made of 
Teflon®, silicone elastomer, or polyurethane 
(27,28).  Therefore,  the  majority  of  catheters  sold  in  the  United  States  are  no  longer
made of 
polyvinyl  chloride  or  polyethylene.  Some  catheter  materials  also  have  surface
irregularities that enhance the microbial adherence 
of certain species (e.g., coagulase-negative staphylococci, 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa) 
(29--31);  catheters  made  of  these  materials  are  especially  vulnerable  to  microbial
colonization and subsequent infection. 
Additionally,  certain  catheter  materials  are  more  thrombogenic  than  others,  a
characteristic that also might predispose to 
catheter colonization and catheter-related infection 
(31,32). This association has led to emphasis on preventing 
catheter-related thrombus as an additional mechanism for reducing CRBSI. 
 The  adherence  properties  of  a  given  microorganism  also  are  important  in  the
pathogenesis of catheter-related infection. 
For  example,  S.  aureus  can  adhere  to  host  proteins  (e.g.,  fibronectin)  commonly
present on catheters 
(33,34).  Also,  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  adhere  to  polymer  surfaces  more
readily than do other pathogens (e.g., 
Escherichia coli or S.
aureus).  Additionally,  certain  strains  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci  produce  an
extracellular polysaccharide often referred to 
as 
"slime" (35,36). In the presence of catheters, this slime potentiates the pathogenicity of
coagulase-negative staphylococci 
by  allowing  them  to  withstand  host  defense  mechanisms  (e.g.,  acting  as  a  barrier  to
engulfment and killing by 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  or  by  making  them  less  susceptible  to  antimicrobial
agents (e.g., forming a matrix that binds antimicrobials 
before their contact with the organism cell wall) 
(37). Certain Candida spp., in the presence of glucose-containing fluids, 
might  produce  slime  similar  to  that  of  their  bacterial  counterparts,  potentially
explaining the increased proportion of BSIs caused 
by fungal pathogens among patients receiving parenteral nutrition fluids 
(38). 
Strategies for Prevention of Catheter-Related Infections in Adult 
and Pediatric Patients
Quality Assurance and Continuing Education
Measures to minimize the risk for infection associated with intravascular therapy should
strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Measures  to  minimize  the  risk  for  infection  associated  with  intravascular  therapy
should strike a balance between 
patient  safety  and  cost  effectiveness.  As  knowledge,  technology,  and  health-care
settings change, infection control and 
prevention  measures  also  should  change.  Well-organized  programs  that  enable
health-care providers to provide, monitor, and evaluate 
care and to become educated are critical to the success of this effort. Reports spanning
the past two decades have 
consistently  demonstrated  that  risk  for  infection  declines  following  standardization  of
aseptic care 
(39--43),  and  that  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular  catheters  by
inexperienced staff might increase the risk for catheter colonization and 
CRBSI  (43,44).  Specialized  "IV  teams"  have  shown  unequivocal  effectiveness  in
reducing the incidence of catheter-related 
infections and associated complications and costs 
(45--47). Additionally, infection risk increases with nursing staff reductions below 
a critical level (48). 
Site of Catheter Insertion
The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
Phlebitis has long  been  recognized  as a  risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
Femoral  catheters  have  been  demonstrated  to  have  relatively  high  colonization  rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 The  site  at  which  a  catheter  is  placed  influences  the  subsequent  risk  for
catheter-related infection and phlebitis. 
The influence of site on the risk for catheter infections is related in 
part to the risk for thrombophlebitis and density of local skin flora.
 Phlebitis has long been recognized as a risk for infection. For adults, lower extremity
insertion sites are associated with 
a higher risk for infection than are upper extremity sites 
(49--51). In addition, hand veins have a lower risk for phlebitis than 
do veins on the wrist or upper arm (52).
 The density of skin flora at the catheter insertion site is a major risk factor for CRBSI.
Authorities recommend that CVCs 
be placed in a subclavian site instead of a jugular or femoral site to reduce the risk for
infection. No randomized trial 
satisfactorily has compared infection rates for catheters placed in jugular, subclavian,
and femoral sites. Catheters inserted into an 
internal  jugular  vein  have  been  associated  with  higher  risk  for  infection  than  those
inserted into a subclavian or femoral 
vein (22,53,54). 
 Femoral catheters have been demonstrated to have relatively high colonization rates
when used in adults 
(55). Femoral catheters should be avoided, when possible, because they are associated
with a higher risk for deep venous thrombosis than 
are internal jugular or subclavian catheters 
(56--60) and because of a presumption that such catheters are more likely to 
become  infected.  However,  studies  in  pediatric  patients  have  demonstrated  that
femoral catheters have a low incidence of 
mechanical  complications  and  might  have  an  equivalent  infection  rate  to  that  of
nonfemoral catheters 
(61--63).  Thus,  in  adult  patients,  a  subclavian  site  is  preferred  for  infection  control
purposes, although other factors (e.g., the potential for 
mechanical complications, risk for subclavian vein stenosis, and catheter-operator skill)
should be considered when deciding where 
to place the catheter. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, the use of bedside ultrasound
for the placement of CVCs 
substantially reduced mechanical complications compared with the standard landmark
placement technique (relative risk [RR] = 0.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.10--0.45) 
(64). Consideration of comfort, security, and maintenance of asepsis as well as 
patient-specific  factors  (e.g.,  preexisting  catheters,  anatomic  deformity,  and  bleeding
diathesis), relative risk of 
mechanical complications (e.g., bleeding and pneumothorax), the availability of bedside
ultrasound, and the risk for infection 
should guide site selection. 
Type of Catheter Material 
Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Teflon® or polyurethane catheters have been associated with 
fewer infectious complications than catheters made of 
polyvinyl chloride or polyethylene 
(27,65,66).  Steel  needles  used  as  an  alternative  to  catheters  for  peripheral  venous
access have the 
same rate of infectious complications as do 
Teflon® catheters (67,68). However, the use of steel needles frequently is complicated 
by  infiltration  of  intravenous  (IV)  fluids  into  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  a  potentially
serious complication if the infused fluid is 
a vesicant (68). 
Hand Hygiene and Aseptic Technique
For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 For  short  peripheral  catheters,  good  hand  hygiene  before  catheter  insertion  or
maintenance, combined with proper 
aseptic technique during catheter manipulation, provides protection against infection.
Good hand hygiene can be achieved 
through the use of either a waterless, alcohol-based product 
(69) or an antibacterial soap and water with adequate rinsing 
(70). Appropriate aseptic technique does not necessarily require sterile gloves; a new
pair of disposable nonsterile gloves can be 
used in conjunction with a "no-touch" technique for the insertion of peripheral venous
catheters. However, gloves are required 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as standard precautions for the
prevention of bloodborne 
pathogen exposure.
 Compared with peripheral venous catheters, CVCs carry a substantially greater risk for
infection; therefore, the level 
of barrier precautions needed to prevent infection during insertion of CVCs should be
more stringent. Maximal sterile 
barrier  precautions  (e.g.,  cap,  mask,  sterile  gown,  sterile  gloves,  and  large  sterile
drape) during the insertion of CVCs 
substantially reduces the incidence of CRBSI compared with standard precautions (e.g.,
sterile gloves and small drapes) 
(22,71).  Although  the  efficacy  of  such  precautions  for  insertion  of  PICCs  and  midline
catheters has not been studied, the use of maximal 
barrier precautions also is probably applicable to PICCs.
Skin Antisepsis
In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 In  the  United  States,  povidone  iodine  has  been  the  most  widely  used  antiseptic  for
cleansing arterial catheter and 
CVC-  insertion  sites  (72).  However,  in  one  study,  preparation  of  central  venous  and
arterial sites with a 2% aqueous 
chlorhexidine  gluconate  lowered  BSI  rates  compared  with  site  preparation  with  10%
povidone-iodine or 70% alcohol 
(73). Commercially available products containing chlorhexidine have not been available
until recently; in July 2000, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a 2% tincture of chlorhexidine preparation for skin
antisepsis. Other preparations 
of chlorhexidine might not be as effective. Tincture of chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5% is
no more effective in preventing CRBSI 
or  CVC  colonization  than  10%  povidone  iodine,  as  demonstrated  by  a  prospective,
randomized study of adults 
(74). However, in a study involving neonates, 0.5% chlorhexidine reduced peripheral IV
colonization compared with povidone iodine 
(20/418 versus 38/408 catheters; p = 0.01) 
(75). This study, which did not include CVCs, had an insufficient number 
of  participants  to  assess  differences  in  BSI  rates.  A  1%  tincture  of  chlorhexidine
preparation is available in Canada and 
Australia,  but  not  yet  in  the  United  States.  No  published  trials  have  compared  a  1%
chlorhexidine preparation to povidone-iodine.
Catheter Site Dressing Regimens
Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Transparent, semipermeable polyurethane dressings have become a popular means of
dressing catheter insertion 
sites.  Transparent  dressings  reliably  secure  the  device,  permit  continuous  visual
inspection of the catheter site, permit patients 
to bathe and shower without saturating the dressing, and require less frequent changes
than do standard gauze and tape 
dressings; the use of these dressings saves personnel time. 
 In  the  largest  controlled  trial  of  dressing  regimens  on  peripheral  catheters,  the
infectious morbidity associated with the use 
of transparent dressings on approximately 2,000 peripheral catheters was examined 
(65).  Data  from  this  study  suggest  that  the  rate  of  colonization  among  catheters
dressed with transparent dressings (5.7%) is comparable to that of those dressed 
with  gauze  (4.6%)  and  that  no  clinically  substantial  differences  exist  in  either  the
incidences of catheter-site colonization 
or phlebitis. Furthermore, these data suggest that transparent dressings can be safely
left on peripheral venous catheters for 
the duration of catheter insertion without increasing the risk for thrombophlebitis 
(65). 
 A meta-analysis has assessed studies that compared the risk for catheter-related BSIs
for groups using transparent 
dressings versus groups using gauze dressing 
(76). The risk for CRBSIs did not differ between the groups. The choice of dressing can 
be  a  matter  of  preference.  If  blood  is  oozing  from  the  catheter  insertion  site,  gauze
dressing might be preferred. 
 In a multi-center study, a chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) placed over the site of short-term arterial 
and CVCs reduced the risk for catheter colonization and CRBSI 
(77). No adverse systemic effects resulted from use of this device.
Catheter Securement Devices
Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Sutureless  securement  devices  can  be  advantageous  over  suture  in  preventing
catheter-related BSIs. One study, 
which involved only a limited number of patients and was underpowered, compared a
sutureless device with suture for 
the securement of PICCS; in this study, CRBSI was reduced in the group of patients that
received the sutureless device 
(78). 
In-Line Filters 
In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 In-line filters reduce the incidence of infusion-related phlebitis 
(79,80). No data support their efficacy in 
preventing  infections  associated  with  intravascular  catheters  and  infusion  systems.
Proponents of filters cite several potential benefits 
to  using  these  filters,  including  1)  reducing  the  risk  for  infection  from  contaminated
infusate or proximal contamination 
(i.e., introduced proximal to the filter); 2) reducing the risk for phlebitis in patients who
require high doses of medication or 
in  those  in  whom  infusion-related  phlebitis  already  has  occurred;  3)  removing
particulate matter that might contaminate 
IV  fluids  (81);  and  4)  filtering  endotoxin  produced  by  gram-negative  organisms  in
contaminated infusate 
(82).  These  theoretical  advantages  should  be  tempered  by  the  knowledge  that
infusate-related BSI is rare and that filtration of medications or 
infusates  in  the  pharmacy  is  a  more  practical  and  less  costly  way  to  remove  the
majority of particulates. Furthermore, in-line 
filters might become blocked, especially with certain solutions (e.g., dextran, lipids, and
mannitol), thereby increasing the number 
of line manipulations and decreasing the availability of administered drugs 
(83). Thus, for reducing the risk for CRBSI, no 
strong recommendation can be made in favor of using in-line filters. 
Antimicrobial/Antiseptic Impregnated Catheters and Cuffs
Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
 Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs 
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Certain  catheters  and  cuffs  that  are  coated  or  impregnated  with  antimicrobial  or
antiseptic agents can decrease the risk 
for  CRBSI  and  potentially  decrease  hospital  costs  associated  with  treating  CRBSIs,
despite the additional acquisition cost of 
an antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated catheter 
(84). All of the studies involving antimicrobial/antiseptic impregnated 
catheters  have  been  conducted  using  triple-lumen,  noncuffed  catheters  in  adult
patients whose catheters remained in place <30 
days. Although all of the studies have been conducted in adults, these catheters have
been approved by FDA for use in 
patients weighing >3 kg. No antiseptic or antimicrobial impregnated catheters currently
are available for use in weighing <3 kg.
 Chlorhexidine/Silver
 sulfadiazine.
 Catheters
 coated
 with
 chlorhexidine/silver
sulfadiazine only on the external 
luminal surface have been studied as a means to reduce CRBSI. Two meta-analyses 
(2,85) demonstrated that such catheters reduced 
the risk for CRBSI compared with standard noncoated catheters. The mean duration of
catheter placement in one 
meta-analysis ranged from 5.1 to 11.2 days 
(86). The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 3 days in vitro for 
catheters  coated  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine;  this  antimicrobial  activity
decreases over time 
(87). The benefit for the patients who receive these catheters will be realized within the
first 14 days 
(86). A second-generation catheter is now available 
with chlorhexidine coating both the internal and external luminal surfaces. The external
surface has three times the amount 
of chlorhexidine and extended release of the surface bound antiseptics than that in the
first generation catheters. The 
external surface coating of chlorhexidine is combined with silver-sulfadiazine, and the
internal surface is coated with 
chlorhexidine  alone.  Preliminary  studies  indicate  that  prolonged  anti-infective  activity
provides improved efficacy in preventing 
infections  (88).  Although  rare,  anaphylaxis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these
chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheters in 
Japan (89). Whether patients will become colonized or infected with organisms resistant
to chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine has 
not been determined (86). 
  Chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  are  more  expensive  than  standard
catheters. However, one analysis has 
suggested  that  the  use  of  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters  should  lead  to  a
cost savings of $68 to $391 per catheter 
(90) in settings in which the risk for CRBSI is high despite adherence to other preventive
strategies (e.g., maximal barrier 
precautions 
and aseptic techniques). Use of these catheters might be cost effective in ICU patients,
burn patients, neutropenic patients, 
and  other  patient  populations  in  which  the  rate  of  infection  exceeds  3.3  per  1,000
catheter days 
(86). 
 Minocycline/Rifampin. In a multicenter randomized trial, CVCs impregnated on both the
external and internal 
surfaces  with  minocycline/rifampin  were  associated  with  lower  rates  of  CRBSI  when
compared with the first-generation 
chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine impregnated catheters 
(91). The beneficial effect began after day 6 of catheterization. None of the 
catheters were evaluated beyond 30 days. No minocycline/rifampin-resistant organisms
were reported. However, in vitro data 
indicate that these impregnated catheters could increase the incidence of minocycline
and rifampin resistance among 
pathogens, especially staphylococci. The half-life of antimicrobial activity against 
S. epidermidis is 25 days with catheters coated 
with  minocycline/rifampin,  compared  with  3  days  for  the  first-generation  catheters
coated with chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine 
in vitro (87). In vivo, the duration of antimicrobial activity of the minocycline/rifampin
catheter is longer than that of the 
first-generation chlorhexidine/silver sulfadiazine catheter 
(91). No comparative studies have been published using the 
second-generation  chlorhexidine/  silver  sulfadiazine  catheter.  Studies  are  needed  to
evaluated whether the improved performance 
of the minocyline/rifampin catheters results from the antimicrobial agents used or from
the coating of both the internal 
and  external  surfaces.  As  with  chlorhexidine/silver  sulfadiazine  catheters,  some
clinicians have recommended that the 
minocycline/rifampin  catheters  be  considered  in  patient  populations  when  the  rate  of
CRBSI exceeds 3.3 per 1,000 catheter days 
(86). Others suggest that reducing all rates of CRBSI should be the goal 
(92). The decision to use chlorhexidine/silver 
sulfadiazine  or  minocycline/rifampin  impregnated  catheters  should  be  based  on  the
need to enhance prevention of CRBSI after 
standard  procedures  have  been  implemented  (e.g.,  educating  personnel,  using
maximal sterile barrier precautions, and using 
2% chlorhexidine skin antisepsis) and then balanced against the concern for 
emergence of resistant pathogens and the cost of implementing 
this strategy. 
 Platinum/Silver. Ionic metals have broad antimicrobial 
activity and are being used in catheters and cuffs to prevent 
CRBSI. A combination platinum/silver impregnated catheter is available in Europe and
has recently been approved by FDA for use 
in  the  United  States.  Although  these  catheters  are  being  marketed  for  their
antimicrobial properties, no published 
studies have been presented to support an antimicrobial effect. 
 Silver cuffs. Ionic silver has been used in subcutaneous collagen cuffs attached to CVCs
(93). The ionic silver provides antimicrobial activity and the cuff provides a mechanical
barrier to the migration of microorganisms along the external 
surface of the catheter. In studies of catheters left in place 
>20 days, the cuff failed to reduce the incidence of CRBSI 
(94,95).  Two  other  studies  of  short-term  catheters  could  not  demonstrate  efficacy
because of the minimal number of CRBSIs 
observed (93,96). 
Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis
No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 No studies have demonstrated that oral or parenteral antibacterial or antifungal drugs
might reduce the incidence of 
CRBSI  among  adults  (97--99).  However,  among  low  birth  weight  infants,  two  studies
have assessed vancomycin prophylaxis; 
both demonstrated a reduction in CRBSI but no reduction in mortality 
(100,101). Because the prophylactic use of vancomycin 
is an independent risk factor for the acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
(VRE) 
(102),  the  risk  for  acquiring  VRE  likely  outweighs  the  benefit  of  using  prophylactic
vancomycin.
Antibiotic/Antiseptic Ointments
Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
Recommendations for Umbilical Catheters
      I. Replacement of catheters
       
      
       
      A.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  artery  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI,
vascular insufficiency, or thrombosis 
are present (283).  Category II
B.  Remove  and  do  not  replace  umbilical  venous  catheters  if  any  signs  of  CRBSI  or
thrombosis are present 
(283).  Category II
C. No recommendation can be made for treating through an umbilical venous catheter
suspected of being 
infected.  Unresolved issue
D. Replace umbilical venous catheters only if the catheter malfunctions.  
Category II
      II. Catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A. Cleanse the umbilical insertion site with an antiseptic before catheter insertion.
Avoid tincture of iodine because of 
the  potential  effect  on  the  neonatal  thyroid.  Other  iodine-containing  products  (e.g.,
povidone-iodine) can be 
used (75,177,178,284,285).  Category IB
B. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or creams on umbilical catheter insertion sites
because of the potential 
to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA
C.  Add  low  doses  of  heparin  (0.25--1.0  F/ml)  to  the  fluid  infused  through  umbilical
arterial catheters 
(286--288).  Category IB
D. Remove umbilical catheters as soon as possible when no longer needed or when any
sign of vascular insufficiency 
to the lower extremities is observed. Optimally, umbilical artery catheters should not be
left in place >5 days 
(283,289).  Category II
E. Umbilical venous catheters should be removed as soon as possible when no longer
needed but can be used up to 
14 days if managed aseptically (290,291).  Category II
*  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Povidone-iodine  ointment  applied  at  the  insertion  site  of  hemodialysis  catheters  has
been studied as a 
prophylactic  intervention  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  catheter-related  infections.  One
randomized study of 129 hemodialysis 
catheters demonstrated a reduction in the incidence of exit-site infections, catheter-tip
colonization, and BSIs with the routine use 
of povidone-iodine ointment at the catheter insertion site compared with no ointment at
the insertion site 
(103). 
 Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of mupirocin ointment applied at the
insertion sites of CVCs as a means 
to prevent CRBSI (104--106). Although mupirocin reduced the risk for CRBSI 
(106), mupirocin ointment also has been associated 
with  mupirocin  resistance  (107,108),  and  might  adversely  affect  the  integrity  of
polyurethane catheters 
(109,110). 
 Nasal carriers of S. aureus have a higher risk for acquiring CRBSI than do noncarriers 
(103,111). Mupirocin ointment has been used intranasally to decrease nasal carriage of 
S. aureus and lessen the risk for CRBSI. However, resistance to 
mupirocin develops in both S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci soon after
routine use of mupirocin is instituted 
(107,108). 
 Other antibiotic ointments applied to the catheter insertion site also have been studied
and have yielded conflicting 
results (112--114). In addition, rates of catheter colonization with 
Candida spp. might be increased with the use of 
antibiotic ointments that have no fungicidal activity 
(112,114). To avoid compromising the integrity of the catheter, any ointment that 
is  applied  to  the  catheter  insertion  site  should  be  checked  against  the  catheter  and
ointment manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding compatibility.
Antibiotic Lock Prophylaxis
To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
      B.  Sterilization or disinfection of pressure monitoring systems
      
       1. Use disposable transducers 
(272,279--282).  Category IB
2. Sterilize reusable transducers according to the manufacturers' instructions if the use
of disposable transducers 
is not feasible (272,279--282).  Category IA
 To prevent CRBSI, antibiotic lock prophylaxis has been attempted by flushing and filling
the lumen of the catheter with 
an  antibiotic  solution  and  leaving  the  solution  to  dwell  in  the  lumen  of  the  catheter.
Three studies have demonstrated 
the usefulness of such prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with long-term catheters 
(115--117).  In  two  of  the  studies,  patients  received  either  heparin  alone  (10  U/ml)  or
heparin plus 25 micrograms/ml of vancomycin. The third study 
compared vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin (VCH) to vancomycin/heparin (VH)and then
to heparin alone. The rate of CRBSI 
with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was significantly lower (VCH p = 0.022; VH p =
0.028) and the time to the first episode 
of bacteremia with vancomycin-susceptible organisms was substantially longer (VCH p
= 0.036; VH p = 0.011) in 
patients  receiving  either  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  or  vancomycin/heparin
compared with heparin alone 
(115--117). One study involving a limited number of children revealed no difference in
rates of CRBSI between children receiving a 
heparin flush compared with those receiving heparin and vancomycin 
(118). However, because the use of vancomycin is 
an independent risk factor for the acquisition of VRE 
(102), this practice is not recommended routinely.
 An
 anticoagulant/antimicrobial
 combination
 comprising
 minocycline
 and
ethylenediaminetetraraacetic acid (EDTA) 
has  been  proposed  as  a  lock  solution  because  it  has  antibiofilm  and  antimicrobial
activity against gram-positive, 
gram-negative, and Candida organisms 
(119), as well as anticoagulant properties. However, no controlled or randomized trials 
have demonstrated its efficacy. 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000 U
every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
Additional Recommendations for Peripheral Arterial Catheters and 
Pressure Monitoring Devices for Adult and Pediatric Patients
       I.  Selection of pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      Use disposable, rather than reusable, transducer assemblies when possible 
(269--273).  Category IB
      II. Replacement of catheter and pressure monitoring system
       
      
       
      A. Do not routinely replace peripheral arterial catheters to prevent catheter-related
infections 
(132,147, 221,274).  Category II
B.  Replace  disposable  or  reusable  transducers  at  96-hour  intervals.  Replace  other
components of the system 
(including  the  tubing,  continuous-flush  device,  and  flush  solution)  at  the  time  the
transducer is replaced 
(22,270).  Category IB
       III. Care of pressure monitoring systems
       
      
       
      A. General measures
      
        1. Keep all components of the pressure monitoring system (including calibration
devices and flush solution) 
sterile (269,275--277).  Category IA
2.  Minimize  the  number  of  manipulations  of  and  entries  into  the  pressure  monitoring
system. Use a 
closed-flush system (i.e., continuous flush), rather than an open system (i.e., one that
requires a syringe and stopcock), 
to maintain the patency of the pressure monitoring catheters 
(272,278).  Category II
3. When the pressure monitoring system is accessed through a diaphragm rather than
a stopcock, wipe 
the diaphragm with an appropriate antiseptic before accessing the system 
(272).  Category IA
4. Do not administer dextrose-containing solutions 
or parenteral nutrition fluids through the pressure 
monitoring circuit (272,279,280).  Category IA
 Anticoagulant flush solutions are used widely to prevent catheter thrombosis. Because
thrombi and fibrin deposits 
on catheters might serve as a nidus for microbial colonization of intravascular catheters
(120,121), the use of anticoagulants might have a role in the prevention of CRBSI.
 In a meta-analysis evaluating the benefit of heparin prophylaxis (3 U/ml in TPN, 5,000
U every 6 or 12 hours flush, 
or  2,500  U  low  molecular  weight  heparin  subcutaneously)  in  patients  with  short-term
CVCs, the risk for catheter-related 
central venous thrombosis was reduced with the use of prophylactic heparin 
(122). However, no substantial difference in the rate 
for  CRBSI  was  observed.  Because  the  majority  of  heparin  solutions  contain
preservatives with antimicrobial activity, whether 
any decrease in the rate of CRBSI is a result of the reduced thrombus formation, the
preservative, or both is unclear.
 The majority of pulmonary artery, umbilical, and central venous catheters are available
with a heparin-bonded coating. 
The  majority  are  heparin-bonded  with  benzalkonium  chloride,  which  provides  the
catheters with antimicrobial activity 
(123) and provides an anti-thrombotic effect 
(124). 
 Warfarin also has been evaluated as a means for reducing CRBSI by reducing thrombus
formation on catheters 
(125,126). In patients with long-term CVCs, low-dose warfarin (i.e., 1 mg/day) reduced
the incidence of catheter thrombus. No 
data demonstrate that warfarin reduces the incidence of CRBSI. 
Replacement of Catheters 
Peripheral Venous Catheters
Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
      VI. Catheter and catheter-site care
       
      
       
      A.  General measures
        
          Designate one port exclusively for hyperalimen-tation if a multilumen catheter is
used to administer 
parenteral nutrition (266).  Category II
      
       
      
      B.  Antibiotic lock solutions
        
         
      Do not routinely use antibiotic lock solutions to prevent CRBSI. Use prophylactic
antibiotic lock solution only 
in special circumstances (e.g., in treating a patient with a long-term cuffed or tunneled
catheter or port who has a 
history of multiple CRBSIs despite optimal maximal adherence to aseptic technique) 
(115,116,267,268).  Category II
      
       
      
    
       C. Catheter-site dressing regimens
     
      
        
      
      1.  Replace the catheter-site dressing when it becomes damp, loosened, or soiled or
when inspection of the site 
is necessary (65,146,211).  Category IA
2.  Replace dressings used on short-term CVC sites every 2 days for gauze dressings
and at least every 7 days 
for  transparent  dressings,  except  in  those  pediatric  patients  in  which  the  risk  for
dis-lodging the catheter 
outweighs the benefit of changing the dressing 
(211).  Category IB
3. Replace dressings used on tunneled or implanted CVC sites no more than once per
week, 
until the insertion site has healed (211).  Category IB
4.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  regarding  the  necessity  for  any  dressing  on
well-healed exit sites of 
long-term cuffed and tunneled CVCs.  Unresolved issue
 Scheduled replacement of intravascular catheters has been proposed as a method to
prevent phlebitis and 
catheter-related  infections.  Studies  of  short  peripheral  venous  catheters  indicate  that
the incidence of thrombophlebitis and 
bacterial colonization of catheters increases when catheters are left in place >72 hours 
(66,67,127). However, rates of phlebitis are 
not substantially different in peripheral catheters left in place 72 hours compared with
96 hours 
(128).  Because  phlebitis  and  catheter  colonization  have  been  associated  with  an
increased risk for catheter-related infection, short peripheral catheter 
sites 
commonly are rotated at 72--96-hour intervals to reduce both the risk for infection and
patient discomfort associated 
with phlebitis. 
Midline Catheters
Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
        1.  Do not use guidewire exchanges routinely for nontunneled catheters to prevent
infection 
(135,265).  Category IB
2.  Use  a  guidewire  exchange  to  replace  a  malfunctioning  nontunneled  catheter  if  no
evidence of infection is 
present (135,265).  Category IB
3.  Use  a  new  set  of  sterile  gloves  before  handling  the  new  catheter  when  guidewire
exchanges are performed 
(22,71).  Category II
 Midline  catheters  have  been  associated  with  lower  rates  of  phlebitis  than  short
peripheral catheters and with lower rates 
of infection than CVCs (129--131). In one prospective study of 140 midline catheters,
their use was associated with a BSI rate 
of  0.8  per  1,000  catheter-days  (131).  No  specific  risk  factors,  including  duration  of
catheterization, were associated 
with infection. Midline catheters were in place a median of 7 days, but for as long as 49
days. Although the findings of this 
study suggested that midline catheters can be changed only when there is a specific
indication, no prospective, randomized 
studies  have  assessed  the  benefit  of  routine  replacement  as  a  strategy  to  prevent
CRBSI associated with midline catheters.
CVCs, Including PICCs and Hemodialysis Catheters
Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
Scheduled  guidewire  exchanges  of  CVCs  is  another  proposed  strategy  for  preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
       V. Replacement of catheter
      
      A.  Do  not  routinely  replace  CVCs,  PICCs,  hemodialysis  catheters,  or  pulmonary
artery catheters to prevent 
catheter-related infections (132,134,135).  Category IB
B.  Do  not  remove  CVCs  or  PICCs  on  the  basis  of  fever  alone.  Use  clinical  judgment
regarding the appropriateness 
of removing the catheter if infection is evidenced elsewhere or if a noninfectious cause
of fever is suspected 
(224,264).  Category II
C. Guidewire exchange
 Catheter replacement at scheduled time intervals as a method to reduce CRBSI has not
lowered rates. Two trials 
have  assessed  a  strategy  of  changing  the  catheter  every  7  days  compared  with  a
strategy of changing catheters as needed 
(132,133).  One  of  these  studies  involved  112  surgical  ICU  patients  needing  CVCs,
pulmonary artery catheters, or peripheral 
arterial catheters (132), whereas the other study involved only subclavian hemodialysis
catheters 
(133).  In  both  studies,  no  difference  in  CRBSI  was  observed  in  patients  undergoing
scheduled catheter replacement every 7 days compared with patients 
whose catheters were replaced as needed.
 Scheduled guidewire exchanges of CVCs is another proposed strategy for preventing
CRBSI. The results of a 
meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials assessing CVC management failed to
prove any reduction of CRBSI rates through 
routine  replacement  of  CVCs  by  guidewire  exchange  compared  with  catheter
replacement on an as-needed basis 
(134).  Thus,  routine  replacement  of  CVCs  is  not  necessary  for  catheters  that  are
functioning and have no evidence of causing local or 
systemic complications.
 Catheter  replacement  over  a  guidewire  has  become  an  accepted  technique  for
replacing a malfunctioning catheter 
or  exchanging  a  pulmonary  artery  catheter  for  a  CVC  when  invasive  monitoring  no
longer is needed. Catheter insertion over 
a  guidewire  is  associated  with  less  discomfort  and  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
mechanical complications than are 
those percutaneously inserted at a new site 
(135); in addition, this technique provides a means of preserving limited venous access 
in some patients. Replacement of temporary catheters over a guidewire in the presence
of bacteremia is not an 
acceptable replacement strategy, because the source of infection is usually colonization
of the skin tract from the insertion site to the 
vein (22,135). However, in selected patients with tunneled hemodialysis catheters and
bacteremia, catheter exchange over 
a  guidewire,  in  combination  with  antibiotic  therapy,  might  be  an  alternative  as  a
salvage strategy in patients with limited 
venous access (136--139). 
Hemodialysis Catheters
The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
To  reduce  the  rate  of  infection,  hemodialysis  catheters  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
       IV.  Maximal sterile barrier precautions during catheter insertion
      
       A. Use aseptic technique including the use of a cap, mask, sterile gown, sterile
gloves, and a large sterile sheet, 
for the insertion of CVCs (including PICCS) or guidewire exchange 
(22,71).  Category IA
B. Use a sterile sleeve to protect pulmonary artery catheters during insertion 
(148).  Category IB
 The  use  of  catheters  for  hemodialysis  is  the  most  common  factor  contributing  to
bacteremia in dialysis patients 
(140,141).  The  relative  risk  for  bacteremia  in  patients  with  dialysis  catheters  is
sevenfold the risk for patients with primary 
arteriovenous fistulas (142). Despite the National Kidney Foundation's effort to reduce
the number of hemodialysis patients maintained 
with catheter access, catheter use increased from 12.7% in 1995 to 22.2% in 1999 
(143). Rates for bacteremia per 100 patient months were 0.2 for arteriovenous fistulas,
0.5 for grafts, 5.0 for cuffed catheters, and 8.5 for noncuffed catheters 
(CDC, unpublished data, 1999). 
 To reduce the rate of infection, hemodialysis catheters should be avoided in favor of
arteriovenous fistulas and grafts. 
If temporary access is needed for dialysis, a cuffed catheter is preferable to a noncuffed
catheter, even in the ICU setting, if 
the catheter is expected to stay in place for >3 weeks 
(11,144). 
Pulmonary Artery Catheters
Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
      III. Selection of catheter insertion site
      
      A. Weigh the risk and benefits of placing a device at a recommended site to reduce
infectious complications against 
the risk for mechanical complications (e.g., pneumothorax, subclavian artery puncture,
subclavian vein 
laceration, subclavian vein stenosis, hemothorax, thrombosis, air embolism, and 
catheter misplacement) 
(22,55,59,218).  Category IA
B.  Use  a  subclavian  site  (rather  than  a  jugular  or  a  femoral  site)  in  adult  patients  to
minimize infection risk 
for nontunneled CVC placement (22,55,59,60).  
Category IA
C.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  a  preferred  site  of  insertion  to  minimize
infection risk for a nontunneled 
CVC (61--63).  Unresolved issue
D.  Place  catheters  used  for  hemodialysis  and  pheresis  in  a  jugular  or  femoral  vein
rather than a subclavian vein to 
avoid venous stenosis if catheter access is needed 
(259--263).  Category IA
 Pulmonary artery catheters are inserted through a 
Teflon® introducer and typically remain in place an average of 3 days. 
The majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin bonded, which reduces not only
catheter thrombosis but also 
microbial  adherence  to  the  catheter  (145).  Meta-analysis  indicates  that  standard
nonheparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheter rates 
of 
CRBSI are 5.5 per 1,000 catheter days; for heparin-bonded pulmonary artery catheters,
this rate is 2.6 per 1,000 catheter 
days (11). Because the majority of pulmonary artery catheters are heparin-bonded, the
relative risk of infection with these 
catheters is similar to that of CVC (2.6 versus 2.3 per 1,000 catheter days) 
(11). 
 A prospective study of 442 pulmonary artery catheters demonstrated an increased risk
for CRBSI after 5 days (0/442 
CRBSI before 5 days versus 5/442 CSBSI after 5 days; p < 0.001) 
(146). A prospective observational study of 71 pulmonary 
artery  catheters  demonstrated  higher  infection  rates  in  catheters  left  in  place  longer
than 7 days (2% before 7 days versus 16% after 
7  days;  p  =  0.056)  (147).  However,  no  studies  indicate  that  catheter  replacement  at
scheduled time intervals is an 
effective  method  to  reduce  CRBSI  (132,135).  In  patients  who  continue  to  require
hemodynamic monitoring, pulmonary 
artery  catheters  do  not  need  to  be  changed  more  frequently  than  every  7  days.  No
specific recommendation can be made 
regarding routine replacement of catheters that need to be in place for >7 days.
 Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are  usually  packaged  with  a  thin  plastic  sleeve  that
prevents touch contamination when 
placed  over  the  catheter.  In  a  study  of  166  catheters,  patients  who  were  randomly
assigned to have their catheters 
self-contained within this sleeve had a reduced risk for CRBSI compared with those who
had a pulmonary artery catheter placed without 
the sleeve (p = 0.002) (148). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters
Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
       II. General principles
      
        A.  Use  a  CVC  with  the  minimum  number  of  ports  or  lumens  essential  for  the
management of the patient 
(251--254).  Category IB
B.  Use  an  antimicrobial  or  antiseptic-impregnated  CVC  in  adults  whose  catheter  is
expected to remain in place >5 
days  if,  after  implementing  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  reduce  rates  of  CRBSI,  the
CRBSI rate remains above the goal 
set by the individual institution based on benchmark rates (Table 2) and local factors.
The comprehensive strategy 
should  include  the  following  three  components:  educating  persons  who  insert  and
maintain catheters, use of maximal 
sterile 
barrier precautions, and a 2% chlorhexidine preparation for skin antisepsis during CVC
insertion 
(84--86,90,91,255).  Category IB
C. No recommendation can be made for the use of impregnated catheters in children.
       
Unresolved issue
D. Designate personnel who have been trained and exhibit competency in the insertion
of catheters to supervise 
trainees who perform catheter insertion 
(39,43,46,182,187,188).  Category IA
E.  Use  totally  implantable  access  devices  for  patients  who  require  long-term,
intermittent vascular access. For 
patients requiring frequent or continuous access, a PICC or tunneled CVC is preferable 
(256,257).  Category II
F. Use a cuffed CVC for dialysis if the period of temporary access is anticipated to be
prolonged (e.g., >3 
weeks) (144,258).  Category IB
G. Use a fistula or graft instead of a CVC for permanent access for dialysis 
(142).  Category IB
H.  Do  not  use  hemodialysis  catheters  for  blood  drawing  or  applications  other  than
hemodialysis except during dialysis 
or under emergency circumstances.  Category II
I. Use povidone-iodine antiseptic ointment at the hemodialysis catheter exit site after
catheter insertion and at the end 
of each dialysis session only if this ointment does not interact with the material of the
hemodialysis catheter 
per manufacturer's recommendation 
(103,114,144).  Category II
 Peripheral arterial catheters are usually inserted into the radial or femoral artery and
permit continuous blood 
pressure monitoring and blood gas measurements. The rate of CRBSI is comparable to
that of temporary CVCs (2.9 versus 2.3 
per 1,000 catheter days) (11). One study of peripheral arterial catheters demonstrated
no difference in infection rates 
between changing catheters at scheduled times and changing arterial catheters on an
as-needed basis 
(132). One observational study of 71 arterial catheters revealed that 10 local infections
and four CRBSIs occurred in patients who had peripheral 
arterial catheters in place for >4 days compared with one local infection and no CRBSIs
in patients whose catheters were in place 
<4  days  (p  <  0.05)  (147).  Because  the  risk  for  CRBSI  is  likely  similar  to  that  of
short-term CVCs, arterial catheters can 
be approached in a similar way. No specific recommendation can be made regarding
replacement of catheters that need to be 
in place for >5 days.
Replacement of Administration Sets
The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
"Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
      III.  Catheter and catheter-site care
      
        Do not routinely apply prophylactic topical 
antimicrobial or antiseptic ointment or cream to the insertion site 
of peripheral venous catheters (107,213).  Category IA
Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis, and Pulmonary 
Artery Catheters, in Adult and Pediatric Patients
      I. Surveillance
      
      A. Conduct surveillance in ICUs and other patient populations to determine CRBSI
rates, monitor trends in 
those rates, and assist in identifying lapses in infection-control practices 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IA
B. Express ICU data as the number of catheter-associated 
BSIs per 1,000 catheter-days for both adults and children 
and stratify by birth weight categories for neonatal ICUs to facilitate comparisons with
national data in 
comparable patient populations and health-care settings 
(3,12,16,247--250).  Category IB
C. Investigate events leading to unexpected life-threatening 
or fatal outcomes. This includes any process variation for which 
a recurrence would likely present an adverse outcome 
(13).  Category IC
 The  optimal  interval  for  routine  replacement  of  IV  administration  sets  has  been
examined in three well-controlled 
studies.  Data  from  each  of  these  studies  reveal  that  replacing  administration  sets  no
more frequently than 72 hours after initiation 
of  use  is  safe  and  cost-effective  (149--151).  Data  from  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated that rates of phlebitis were 
not substantially different if administration sets were left in place 96 hours compared
with 72 hours 
(128). When a fluid that enhances microbial growth is infused (e.g., lipid emulsions and
blood products), more frequent changes of administration 
sets  are  indicated,  because  these  products  have  been  identified  as  independent  risk
factors for CRBSI 
(152--158). 
 Stopcocks  (used  for  injection  of  medications,  administration  of  IV  infusions,  and
collection of blood samples) represent 
a  potential  portal  of  entry  for  microorganisms  into  vascular  access  catheters  and  IV
fluids. Stopcock contamination is 
common,  occurring  in  45%  and  50%  in  the  majority  of  series.  Whether  such
contamination is a substantial entry point of CRBSI 
has been difficult to prove. 
 "Piggyback" systems are used as an alternative to stopcocks. However, they also pose
a risk for contamination of 
the intravascular fluid if the device entering the rubber membrane of an injection port is
exposed to air or comes into 
direct  contact  with  nonsterile  tape  used  to  fix  the  needle  to  the  port.  Modified
piggyback systems have the potential to 
prevent contamination at these sites (159). 
Needleless Intravascular Catheter Systems 
Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
      II. Selection of peripheral-catheter insertion site
      
        A. In adults, use an upper- instead of a lower-extremity site for catheter insertion.
Replace a catheter inserted in a 
lower-extremity site to an upper-extremity site as soon as possible 
(67,245).  Category IA
B. In pediatric patients, the hand, the dorsum of the foot, or the scalp can be used as
the catheter insertion site.
       
Category II
C. Replacement of catheter
        
      1. Evaluate the catheter insertion site daily, by palpation through the dressing to
discern tenderness and 
by inspection if a transparent dressing is in use. Gauze and opaque dressings should
not be removed if the patient 
has  no  clinical  signs  infection.  If  the  patient  has  local  tenderness  or  other  signs  of
possible CRBSI, an opaque 
dressing should be removed and the site inspected visually.  
Category II
2. Remove peripheral venous catheters if the patient develops signs of phlebitis (e.g.,
warmth, tenderness, 
erythema, and palpable venous cord), infection, or a malfunctioning catheter 
(66).  Category IB
3. In adults, replace short, peripheral venous catheters at least 72--96 hours to reduce
the risk for phlebitis. If 
sites for venous access are limited and no evidence of phlebitis or infection is present,
peripheral venous catheters 
can  be  left  in  place  for  longer  periods,  although  the  patient  and  the  insertion  sites
should be closely 
monitored (66,128,246).  Category IB
4. Do not routinely replace midline catheters to reduce the risk for infection 
(131).  Category IB
5. In pediatric patients, leave peripheral venous catheters in place until IV therapy is
completed, unless 
a complication (e.g., phlebitis and infiltration) occurs 
(174,175,222,223).  Category IB
 Attempts  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  sharp  injuries  and  the  resultant  risk  for
transmission of bloodborne infections to 
health-care  workers  have  led  to  the  design  and  introduction  of  needleless  infusion
systems. When the devices are used according 
to manufacturers' recommendations, they do not substantially affect the incidence of
CRBSI 
(160--167). 
Multidose Parenteral Medication Vials 
Parenteral  medications  commonly  are  dispensed  in  multidose,  parenteral  medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
      XIV.  Prophylactic antimicrobials
      
      Do not administer intranasal or systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis routinely before
insertion or during use of 
an intravascular catheter to prevent catheter colonization or BSI 
(97,98,108,243).  Category IA
Peripheral Venous Catheters, Including Midline Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients
        I.  Selection of peripheral catheter
      
        A.  Select  catheters  on  the  basis  of  the  intended  purpose  and  duration  of  use,
known complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration), and experience of individual catheter operators 
(67,68,244).  Category IB
B. Avoid the use of steel needles for the administration of fluids and medication that
might cause tissue necrosis 
if extravasation occurs (67,68).  Category IA
C. Use a midline catheter or PICC when the duration of IV therapy will likely exceed 6
days 
(244).  Category IB
 Parenteral medications commonly are dispensed in multidose, parenteral medication
vials that might be used for 
prolonged  periods  for  one  or  more  patients.  Although  the  overall  risk  for  extrinsic
contamination of multidose vials is likely 
minimal  (168),  the  consequences  of  contamination  might  result  in  life-threatening
infection 
(169,170).  Single-use  vials  are  frequently  preservative-free  and  might  pose  a  risk  for
contamination if they are punctured several times. 
Special Considerations for Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections 
in Pediatric Patients 
Prevention of CRBSI in children requires additional considerations, although only certain
studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
      XIII. IV-therapy personnel
      
      Designate  trained  personnel  for  the  insertion  and  maintenance  of  intravascular
catheters 
(46,47,210,242).  Category IA 
 Prevention  of  CRBSI  in  children  requires  additional  considerations,  although  only
certain studies have been 
performed specifically in children. Pediatric data have been derived largely from studies
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs and 
pediatric oncology patients. 
Epidemiology 
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
      XII.  In-line filters
      
        Do not use filters routinely for infection-control purposes 
(80,241).  Category IA
 As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  BSIs  in  children  are  associated  with  the  use  of  an
intravascular catheter. From 1995 
through  2000,  the  pooled  mean  catheter-associated  BSI  rate  for  all  pediatric  ICUs
reporting data to NNIS was 7.7 per 1,000 
catheter days (171,172). Umbilical catheter and CVC-associated BSI rates for neonatal
ICUs ranged from 11.3 per 1,000 catheter 
days in children with birth weight <1,000 g to 4.0 per 1,000 catheter days in children
whose birth weight was >2,500 g 
(171). Catheter utilization rates were comparable in adult and pediatric ICUs 
(172,173). 
Microbiology
As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
      XI. Preparation and quality control of IV admixtures
      
      A.  Admix all routine parenteral fluids in the pharmacy in a laminar-flow hood using
aseptic technique 
(237,238).  Category IB
B.  Do not use any container of parenteral fluid that has visible turbidity, leaks, cracks,
or particulate matter or if 
the manufacturer's expiration date has passed 
(237).  Category IB
C. Use single-dose vials for parenteral additives or medications when possible 
(237,239).  Category II
D. Do not combine the leftover content of single-use vials for later use 
(237,239).  Category IA
E.  If multidose vials are used
      
        1.   Refrigerate  multidose  vials  after  they  are  opened  if  recommended  by  the
manufacturer.
       
Category II
2.  Cleanse the access diaphragm of multidose vials with 70% alcohol before inserting a
device into the vial 
(236).  Category IA
3. Use a sterile device to access a multidose vial and avoid touch contamination of the
device before penetrating 
the access diaphragm (235,240).  Category IA
4. Discard multidose vial if sterility is compromised 
(235,240).  Category IA
 As  in  adults,  the  majority  of  CRBSIs  in  children  are  caused  by  coagulase-negative
staphylococci. During 1992--1999, 
these bacteria accounted for 37.7% of BSIs in pediatric ICUs reporting to NNIS 
(12). Exposure to lipids has been identified as 
an  independent  risk  factor  for  development  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal
bacteremia in very low birth weight infants 
(i.e., those weighing <1,000 g) (odds ratio [OR] = 9.4; 95% CI = 1.2--74.2) 
(155), as well as candidemia in the neonatal ICU 
(OR = 5.33; 95% CI = 1.23--48.4) (154). Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 25% of
BSIs reported in pediatric ICUs 
(172), whereas enterococci and 
Candida spp. accounted for 10% and 9%, respectively 
(172). 
Peripheral Venous Catheters 
As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
      X.  IV-injection ports
      
      A.  Clean  injection  ports  with  70%  alcohol  or  an  iodophor  before  accessing  the
system 
(164,235,236). Category IA
B. Cap all stopcocks when not in use 
(235).  Category IB
 As  in  adults,  the  use  of  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  pediatric  patients  might  be
complicated by phlebitis, 
infusion extravasation, and catheter infection 
(174). Catheter location, infusion of parenteral nutritional fluids with continuous 
IV lipid emulsions, and length of ICU stay before catheter insertion have all increased
pediatric patients' risk for 
phlebitis. However, contrary to the risk in adults, the risk for phlebitis in children has
not increased with the duration of 
catheterization (174,175). 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters 
In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
      C.  Parenteral fluids
      
       1. Complete the infusion of lipid-containing solutions (e.g., 3-in-1 solutions) within
24 hours of hanging 
the solution (156--158,226,229).  Category IB
2.  Complete  the  infusion  of  lipid  emulsions  alone  within  12  hours  of  hanging  the
emulsion. If 
volume considerations require more time, the infusion should be completed within 24
hours 
(156--158).  Category IB
3. Complete infusions of blood or other blood products within 4 hours of hanging the
blood 
(231--234).  Category II
4. No recommendation can be made for the hang time of other parenteral fluids.
       
Unresolved issue
 In a prospective study of 340 peripheral arterial catheters in children, the following two
risk factors for 
catheter-related  infection  were  identified:  1)  use  of  an  arterial  system  that  permitted
backflow of blood into the pressure tubing and 
2) duration of catheterization (176). Although a correlation was found between duration
of arterial catheterization and risk 
for catheter colonization, the risk remained constant for 2--20 days at 6.2% 
(176). 
Umbilical Catheters
Although
 the
 umbilical
 stump
 becomes
 heavily
 colonized
 soon
 after
 birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
      IX.  Replacement of administration sets*, needleless systems, and parenteral fluids
      
      A. Administration sets
        
          1. Replace administration sets, including secondary sets and add-on devices, no
more frequently than at 
72-hour intervals, unless catheter-related infection is suspected or documented 
(23, 149--151).  Category IA
2. Replace tubing used to administer blood, blood products, or lipid emulsions (those
combined with amino 
acids  and  glucose  in  a  3-in-1  admixture  or  infused  separately)  within  24  hours  of
initiating the infusion 
(158,226--
229).   Category  IB.  If  the  solution  contains  only  dextrose  and  amino  acids,  the
administration set does not 
need to be replaced more frequently than every 72 hours 
(226).  Category II
3. Replace tubing used to administer propofol infusions every 6 or 12 hours, depending
on its use, per 
the manufacturer's recommendation (230).  Category IA
      B. Needleless intravascular devices
      
      1. Change the needleless components at least as 
frequently as the administration set (160--162, 
164--167).  Category II
2. Change caps no more frequently than every 72 hours or according to manufacturers' 
recommendations (160,162,165,166).  Category II
3.  Ensure  that  all  components  of  the  system  are  compatible  to  minimize  leaks  and
breaks in the system 
(163).  Category II
4. Minimize contamination risk by wiping the access port with an appropriate antiseptic
and accessing the 
port only with sterile devices (162,163,165).  
Category IB
 Although  the  umbilical  stump  becomes  heavily  colonized  soon  after  birth,
umbilical-vessel catheterization often is used 
for vascular access in newborn infants. Umbilical vessels can be cannulated easily and
permit both collection of blood samples 
and measurement of hemodynamic status. The incidences of catheter colonization and
BSI are similar for umbilical vein 
catheters and umbilical artery catheters. In several studies, an estimated 40%--55% of
umbilical artery catheters were colonized and 
5%  resulted  in  CRBSI;  umbilical  vein  catheters  were  associated  with  colonization  in
22%--59% of cases 
(177--179) and with 
CRBSI  in  3%--8%  of  cases  (178).  Although  CRBSI  rates  are  similar  for  umbilical
catheters in the high position (i.e., above 
the diaphragm) compared with the low position (i.e., below the diaphragm and above
the aortic bifurcation), catheters placed 
in  the  high  position  result  in  a  lower  incidence  of  vascular  complications  without  an
increase in adverse sequelae 
(178). 
 Risk factors for infection differ for umbilical artery and umbilical vein catheters. In one
study, neonates with very low 
birth weight who also received antibiotics for 
>10 days were at increased risk for umbilical artery CRBSIs 
(178). In comparison, those with higher birth weight and receipt of parenteral nutrition
fluids were at increased risk for umbilical vein 
CRBSI.  Duration  of  catheterization  was  not  an  independent  risk  factor  for  infection  of
either type of umbilical catheter. 
CVCs 
Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
      VII. Catheter-site dressing regimens
      
      A. Use either sterile gauze or sterile, transparent, semipermeable dressing to cover
the catheter site 
(146,210--212).  Category IA
B. Tunneled CVC sites that are well healed might not require dressings.  
Category II
C. If the patient is diaphoretic, or if the site is bleeding or oozing, a gauze dressing is
preferable to a transparent, 
semi-permeable dressing (146,210--212).  Category II
D.  Replace  catheter-site  dressing  if  the  dressing  becomes  damp,  loosened,  or  visibly
soiled 
(146,210).  Category IB
E. Change dressings at least weekly for adult and adolescent patients depending on the
circumstances of the 
individual patient (211).  Category II
F.  Do  not  use  topical  antibiotic  ointment  or  creams  on  insertion  sites  (except  when
using dialysis catheters) because 
of their potential to promote fungal infections and antimicrobial resistance 
(107,213).  Category IA (See Central Venous Catheters, Including PICCs, Hemodialysis,
and Pulmonary Artery Catheters, in Adult and 
Pediatric Patients, Section II.I.)
      G. Do not submerge the catheter under water. Showering should be permitted if
precautions can be taken to reduce 
the  likelihood  of  introducing  organisms  into  the  catheter  (e.g.,  if  the  catheter  and
connecting device are protected 
with an impermeable cover during the shower 
(214,215).  Category II
      VIII.  Selection and replacement of intravascular catheters
      
      A. Select the catheter, insertion technique, and insertion site with the lowest risk for
complications (infectious 
and noninfectious) for the anticipated type and duration of IV therapy 
(22,55,59, 216--218).  Category IA
B. Promptly remove any intravascular catheter that is no longer essential 
(219,220).  Category IA
C. Do not routinely replace central venous or arterial catheters solely for the purposes
of reducing the incidence 
of infection (134,135,221).  Category IB
D. Replace peripheral venous catheters at least every 72--96 hours in adults to prevent
phlebitis 
(128).  Leave  peripheral  venous  catheters  in  place  in  children  until  IV  therapy  is
completed, unless complications (e.g., phlebitis 
and infiltration) occur (174,175,222,223).  Category IB
E. When adherence to aseptic technique cannot be ensured (i.e., when catheters are
inserted during a 
medical emergency), replace all catheters as soon as possible and after no longer than 
48 hours (22,71,201,202).  Category II
F. Use clinical judgment to determine when to replace a catheter that could be a source
of infection (e.g., do 
not routinely replace catheters in patients whose only indication of infection is fever).
Do not routinely replace 
venous catheters in patients who are bacteremic or fungemic if the source of infection
is unlikely to be the catheter 
(224).  Category II
G.  Replace  any  short-term  CVC  if  purulence  is  observed  at  the  insertion  site,  which
indicates infection 
(224,225).  Category IB
H. Replace all CVCs if the patient is hemodynamically unstable and CRBSI is suspected 
(224,225).  Category II
I. Do not use guidewire techniques to replace catheters in patients suspected of having
catheter-related 
infection (134,135).  Category IB
 Because  of  the  limited  vascular  sites  in  children,  attention  should  be  given  to  the
frequency with which catheters are 
replaced in these patients. In a study in which survival analysis techniques were used to
examine the relation between the duration 
of central venous catheterization and complications in pediatric ICU patients, all of the
patients studied (n = 397) 
remained uninfected for a median of 23.7 days 
(180). In addition, no relation was found between duration of catheterization and 
the  daily  probability  of  infection  (r  =  0.21;  p  >  0.1),  suggesting  that  routine
replacement of CVCs likely does not reduce 
the incidence of catheter-related infection 
(180). 
Catheter Site Care
Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
      VI.  Catheter site care
      
      A.  Cutaneous antisepsis
        
          1. Disinfect clean skin with an appropriate antiseptic before catheter insertion
and during dressing 
changes.  Although  a  2%  chlorhexidine-based  preparation  is  preferred,  tincture  of
iodine, an iodophor, or 70% 
alcohol can be used (73,75,207,208).  Category IA
2.  No  recommendation  can  be  made  for  the  use  of  chlorhexidine  in  infants  aged  <2
months.
       
Unresolved issue
3.  Allow  the  antiseptic  to  remain  on  the  insertion  site  and  to  air  dry  before  catheter
insertion. Allow 
povidone iodine to remain on the skin for at least 2 minutes, or longer if it is not yet dry
before insertion 
(73,75,207,208).  Category IB
4. Do not apply organic solvents (e.g., acetone and ether) to the skin before insertion of
catheters or 
during dressing changes (209).  Category IA
 Although data regarding the use of the chlorhexidine-impregnated sponge 
(Biopatch™) in children are limited, 
one  randomized,  controlled  study  involving  705  neonates  reported  a  substantial
decrease in colonized catheter tips in infants in 
the  Biopatch™ group  compared  with  the  group  that  had  standard  dressings  (15%
versus 24%; RR = 0.6; 95% CI = 0.5--0.9), 
but no difference in the rates of CRBSI or BSI without a source. 
Biopatch™ was associated with localized contact dermatitis 
in infants of very low birth weight. Of 98 neonates with very low birth weight, 15 (15%)
developed localized contact 
dermatitis; four (1.5%) of 237 neonates weighing >1,000 g developed this reaction (p <
0.0001). Infants with gestational age <26 
weeks who had CVCs placed at age <8 days were at increased risk for having localized
contact dermatitis, whereas no infants in 
the control group developed this local reaction 
(181).
Performance Indicators
Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
      V.  Catheter insertion
      
      Do not routinely use arterial or venous cutdown procedures as a method to insert
catheters 
(204--206).  Category IA
 Performance  indicators  for  reducing  CRBSI  are  1)  implementation  of  educational
programs that include didactic 
and  interactive  components  for  those  who  insert  and  maintain  catheters;  2)  use  of
maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during catheter placement; 3) use of chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis; and 4) rates of
catheter discontinuation when the catheter is 
no longer essential for medical management. The impact these recommendations will
have on individual institutions should 
be evaluated using specific performance indicators.
Recommendations for Placement 
of Intravascular Catheters in Adults and Children
These recommendations are designed to reduce the infectious complications associated
with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
 I. Health-care worker education and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
      III.  Hand hygiene
      
       A.   Observe  proper  hand-hygiene  procedures  either  by  washing  hands  with
conventional antiseptic-containing soap 
and water or with waterless alcohol-based gels or foams. Observe hand hygiene before
and after palpating 
catheter  insertion  sites,  as  well  as  before  and  after  inserting,  replacing,  accessing,
repairing, or dressing an 
intravascular catheter. Palpation of the insertion site should not be performed after the
application of antiseptic, unless 
aseptic technique is maintained 
(43,70,196--200). Category IA
B. Use of gloves does not obviate the need for hand hygiene 
(43,198,199).  Category IA
      IV. Aseptic technique during catheter insertion and care
      
        A. Maintain aseptic technique for the insertion and care of intravascular catheters 
(22,71,201,202).  Category IA
B. Wear clean or sterile gloves when inserting an intravascular catheter as required by
the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.  
Category IC. Wearing clean gloves rather than sterile gloves 
is acceptable for the insertion of peripheral intravascular 
catheters if the access site is not touched after the application 
of skin antiseptics. Sterile gloves should be worn for the insertion of arterial and central
catheters 
(201,203).  Category IA
C. Wear clean or sterile gloves when changing the dressing on intravascular catheters.
       
Category IC
 These  recommendations  are  designed  to  reduce  the  infectious  complications
associated with intravascular catheter 
use.  Recommendations  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  institution's
experience with catheter-related 
infections,  experience  with  other  adverse  catheter-related  complications  (e.g.,
thrombosis, hemorrhage, and pneumothorax), 
and  availability  of  personnel  skilled  in  the  placement  of  intravascular  devices.
Recommendations are provided for 1) 
intravascular-catheter use in general; 2) specific devices; and 3) special circumstances
(i.e., intravascular-device use in pediatric patients 
and  CVC  use  for  parenteral  nutrition  and  hemodialysis  access).  Recommendations
regarding the frequency of replacing 
catheters, dressings, administration sets, and fluids also are provided (Appendix B).
 As  in  previous  guidelines  issued  by  CDC  and  HICPAC,  each  recommendation  is
categorized on the basis of 
existing  scientific  data,  theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  economic  impact.  The
CDC/HICPAC system for 
categorizing recommendations is as follows:
 Category  IA.  Strongly  recommended  for  implementation  and  strongly  supported  by
well-designed experimental, clinical, 
or epidemiologic studies.
        Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation and supported by some
experimental, clinical, or 
epidemiologic studies, and a strong theoretical rationale.
        Category IC. Required by state or federal regulations, rules, or standards.
        Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported by suggestive clinical or
epidemiologic studies or a 
theoretical rationale.
        Unresolved  issue.  Represents  an  unresolved  issue  for  which  evidence  is
insufficient or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.  I. Health-care worker education
and training
      
        A. Educate health-care workers regarding the indications for intravascular catheter
use, proper procedures for 
the
 insertion
 and
 maintenance
 of
 intravascular
 catheters,
 and
 appropriate
infection-control measures to 
prevent intravascular catheter-related infections 
(39,43,45--47,182--187).  Category IA
B.  Assess  knowledge  of  and  adherence  to  guidelines  periodically  for  all  persons  who
insert and manage 
intravascular catheters (39,43,46,182,188).  
Category IA
C. Ensure appropriate nursing staff levels in ICUs to minimize the incidence of CRBSIs 
(48,189,190).  Category IB
       II. Surveillance 
      
      A. Monitor the catheter sites visually or by palpation through the intact dressing on
a regular basis, depending on 
the clinical situation of individual patients. If patients have tenderness at the insertion
site, fever without obvious 
source, or other manifestations suggesting local or BSI, the dressing should be removed
to allow thorough examination 
of the site (1,191--193).  Category IB
B.  Encourage  patients  to  report  to  their  health-care  provider  any  changes  in  their
catheter site or any new 
discomfort.  Category II|
      C.  Record  the  operator,  date,  and  time  of  catheter  insertion  and  removal,  and
dressing changes on a standardized 
form.  Category II
D. Do not routinely culture catheter tips 
(8,194,195).  Category IA
 D. No recommendation can be made for the use of chlorhexidine sponge dressings to
reduce the incidence of 
infection.  Unresolved issue
E.  Do  not  use  chlorhexidine  sponge  dressings  in  neonates  aged  <7  days  or  of
gestational age <26 weeks 
(181).  Category II
F. No recommendation can be made for the use of sutureless securement devices.
       
Unresolved issue
G. Ensure that catheter-site care is compatible with the catheter material 
(109,110).  Category IB
H. Use a sterile sleeve for all pulmonary artery catheters 
(148).  Category IB
 *  Administration  sets  include  the  area  from  the  spike  of  tubing  entering  the  fluid
container to the hub of the vascular access device. However, a short extension tube 
might be connected to the catheter and might be considered a portion of the catheter
to facilitate aseptic technique when changing administration sets.
References
 Pearson ML. Guideline for prevention of intravascular device-related infections. Part I.
Intravascular device-related infections: an overview. 
The  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1996;24:262--77.
 Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  intravascular  catheter-related  infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;132:391--402.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from October 1986--April 1998, issued June 1998. Am 
J Infect Control 1998;26:522--33.
 Digiovine B, Chenoweth C, Watts C, Higgins M. The attributable mortality and costs of
primary nosocomial bloodstream infections in the 
intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:976--81.
 Rello  J,  Ochagavia  A,  Sabanes  E,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  outcome  of  intravenous
catheter-related infections in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000;162:1027--30.
 Soufir L, Timsit JF, Mahe C, Carlet J, Regnier B, Chevret S. Attributable morbidity and
mortality of catheter-related septicemia in critically 
ill  patients:  a  matched,  risk-adjusted,  cohort  study.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1999;20:396--401.
 Collignon  PJ.  Intravascular  catheter  associated  sepsis:  a  common  problem.  The
Australian Study on Intravascular Catheter Associated Sepsis. Med 
J Aust 1994;161:374--8.
 Pittet D, Tarara D, Wenzel RP. Nosocomial bloodstream infection in critically ill patients.
Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable 
mortality. JAMA 1994;271:1598--601.
 Dimick  JB,  Pelz  RK,  Consunji  R,  Swoboda  SM,  Hendrix  CW,  Lipsett  PA.  Increased
resource use associated with catheter-related 
bloodstream infection in the surgical intensive care unit. Arch Surg 2001;136:229--34.
 Mermel  LA.  Correction:  catheter  related  bloodstream-infections.  Ann  Intern  Med
2000;133:395.
 Kluger  DM,  Maki  DG.  The  relative  risk  of  intravascular  device  related  bloodstream
infections in adults [Abstract]. In: Abstracts of the 
39th  Interscience  Conference  on  Antimicrobial  Agents  and  Chemotherapy.  San
Francisco, CA: American Society for Microbiology, 1999:514.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1990--May 1999, issued June 1999. Am 
J Infect Control 1999;27:520--32.
 Joint  Commission  on  the  Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations.  Accreditation
manual for hospitals. In: Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations,  ed.  Chicago,  IL:  Joint  Commission  on  the
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1994:121--40.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from January 1992--June 2001, issued August 2001. Am 
J Infect Control 2001;6:404--21.
 Schaberg  DR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Major  trends  in  the  microbial  etiology  of
nosocomial infection. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl):S72--S75.
 Banerjee  SN,  Emori  TG,  Culver  DH,  et  al.  Secular  trends  in  nosocomial  primary
bloodstream infections in the United States, 1980--1989. 
National
 Nosocomial
 Infections
 Surveillance
 System.
 Am
 J
 Med
1991;91(suppl):S86--S89.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to 
Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal  susceptibility  in  the  SCOPE
Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;31:327--32.
 Pfaller  MA,  Jones  RN,  Messer  SA,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  National  surveillance  of
nosocomial blood stream infection due to species of 
Candida  other  than  Candida  albicans:  frequency  of  occurrence  and  antifungal
susceptibility in the SCOPE Program. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 
1998;30:121--9.
 Nguyen  MH,  Peacock  JE  Jr.,  Morris  AJ,  et  al.  The  changing  face  of  candidemia:
emergence of 
non-Candida albicans species and antifungal 
resistance. Am J Med 1996;100:617--23.
 Fridkin SK, Gaynes RP. Antimicrobial resistance in intensive care units. Clin Chest Med
1999;20:303--16.
 Maki  DG,  Weise  CE,  Sarafin  HW.  A  semiquantitative  culture  method  for  identifying
intravenous-catheter-related infection. N Engl J 
Med 1977;296:1305--9.
 Mermel  LA,  McCormick  RD,  Springman  SR,  Maki  DG.  The  pathogenesis  and
epidemiology of catheter-related infection with pulmonary 
artery  Swan-Ganz  catheters:  a  prospective  study  utilizing  molecular  subtyping.  Am  J
Med 1991;91(suppl):S197--S205.
 Sitges-Serra  A,  Linares  J,  Perez  JL,  Jaurrieta  E,  Lorente  L.  A  randomized  trial  on  the
effect of tubing changes on hub contamination and 
catheter sepsis during parenteral nutrition. Parenter Enteral Nutr 1985;9:322--5.
 Linares J, Sitges-Serra A, Garau J, Perez JL, Martin R. Pathogenesis of catheter sepsis: a
prospective study with quantitative and 
semiquantitative
 cultures
 of
 catheter
 hub
 and
 segments.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1985;21:357--60.
 Raad II, Costerton W, Sabharwal U, Sacilowski M, Anaissie E, Bodey GP. Ultrastructural
analysis of indwelling vascular catheters: a 
quantitative  relationship  between  luminal  colonization  and  duration  of  placement.  J
Infect Dis 1993;168:400--7.
 Maki DG. Infections associated with intravascular lines. In: Remington JS, ed. Current
Clinical Topics in Infectious Diseases. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982:309--63.
 Sheth  NK,  Franson  TR,  Rose  HD,  Buckmire  FL,  Cooper  JA,  Sohnle  PG.  Colonization  of
bacteria on polyvinyl chloride and Teflon 
intravascular catheters in hospitalized patients. J Clin Microbiol 1983;18:1061--3.
 Ashkenazi  S,  Weiss  E,  Drucker  MM,  Bodey  GP.  Bacterial  adherence  to  intravenous
catheters and needles and its influence by cannula type 
and bacterial surface hydrophobicity. J Lab Clin Med 1986;107:136--40.
 Locci R, Peters G, Pulverer G. Microbial colonization of prosthetic 
devices. IV. Scanning electron microscopy of intravenous catheters invaded by 
yeasts. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg [B] 1981;173:419--24.
 Locci  R,  Peters  G,  Pulverer  G.  Microbial  colonization  of  prosthetic  devices.  I.
Microtopographical characteristics of intravenous catheters as 
detected  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  Zentralbl  Bakteriol  Mikrobiol  Hyg  [B]
1981;173:285--92.
 Nachnani  GH,  Lessin  LS,  Motomiya  T,  Jensen  WN,  Bodey  GP.  Scanning  electron
microscopy of thrombogenesis on vascular catheter surfaces. 
N Engl J Med 1972;286:139--40.
 Stillman  RM,  Soliman  F,  Garcia  L,  Sawyer  PN.  Etiology  of  catheter-associated  sepsis.
Correlation with thrombogenicity. Arch Surg 
1977;112:1497--9.
 Herrmann M, Lai QJ, Albrecht RM, Mosher DF, Proctor RA. Adhesion of 
Staphylococcus aureus to surface-bound platelets: role of 
fibrinogen/fibrin and platelet integrins. J Infect Dis 1993;167:312--22.
 Herrmann M, Suchard SJ, Boxer LA, Waldvogel FA, Lew PD. Thrombospondin binds to 
Staphylococcus aureus and promotes 
staphylococcal adherence to surfaces. Infect Immun 1991;59:279--88.
 Ludwicka  A,  Uhlenbruck  G,  Peters  G,  et  al.  Investigation  on  extracellular  slime
substance produced by 
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Zentralbl 
Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg 1984;258:256--67.
 Gray ED, Peters G, Verstegen M, Regelmann WE. Effect of extracellular slime substance
from 
Staphylococcus epidermidis on the human 
cellular immune response. Lancet 1984;1:365--7.
 Farber BF, Kaplan MH, Clogston AG. 
Staphylococcus  epidermidis  extracted  slime  inhibits  the  antimicrobial  action  of
glycopeptide antibiotics. J 
Infect Dis 1990;161:37--40.
 Branchini  ML,  Pfaller  MA,  Rhine-Chalberg  J,  Frempong  T,  Isenberg  HD.  Genotypic
variation and slime production among blood and 
catheter isolates of Candida parapsilosis. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:452--6.
 Sherertz  RJ,  Ely  EW,  Westbrook  DM,  et  al.  Education  of  physicians-in-training  can
decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;132:641--8.
 Ryan  JA  Jr.,  Abel  RM,  Abbott  WM,  et  al.  Catheter  complications  in  total  parenteral
nutrition: a prospective study of 200 consecutive patients. 
N Engl J Med 1974;290:757--61.
 Sanders RA, Sheldon GF. Septic complications of total parenteral nutrition: a five year
experience. Am J Surg 1976;132:214--20.
 Murphy LM, Lipman TO. Central venous catheter care in parenteral nutrition: a review.
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987;11:190--201.
 Eggimann P, Harbarth S, Constantin MN, Touveneau S, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D. Impact of
a prevention strategy targeted at vascular-access care 
on incidence of infections acquired in intensive care. Lancet 2000;355:1864--8.
 Armstrong CW, Mayhall CG, Miller KB, et al. Prospective study of catheter replacement
and other risk factors for infection of 
hyperalimentation catheters. J Infect Dis 1986;154:808--16.
 Nehme  AE.  Nutritional  support  of  the  hospitalized  patient:  the  team  concept.  JAMA
1980;243:1906--8.
 Soifer NE, Borzak S, Edlin BR, Weinstein RA. Prevention of peripheral venous catheter
complications with an intravenous therapy team: 
a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:473--7.
 Tomford  JW,  Hershey  CO.  The  IV  therapy  team:  impact  on  patient  care  and  costs  of
hospitalization. NITA 1985;8:387--9.
 Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR. The role of understaffing in
central venous catheter-associated bloodstream 
infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:150--8.
 Bansmer G, Keith D, Tesluk H. Complications following use of indwelling catheters of
inferior vena cava. JAMA 1958;167:1606--11.
 Crane
 C.
 Venous
 interruption
 of
 septic
 thrombophlebitis.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med
1960;262:947--51.
 Indar  R.  The  dangers  of  indwelling  polyethelene  cannulae  in  deep  veins.  Lancet
1959;1:284--6.
 Maki DG, Mermel LA. Infections due to infusion therapy. In: Bennett JV, Brachman PS,
eds. Hospital Infections. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippencott-Raven, 1998:689--724.
 Heard  SO,  Wagle  M,  Vijayakumar  E,  et  al.  Influence  of  triple-lumen  central  venous
catheters coated with chlorhexidine and silver sulfadiazine on 
the incidence of catheter-related bacteremia. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:81--7.
 Richet  H,  Hubert  B,  Nitemberg  G,  et  al.  Prospective  multicenter  study  of
vascular-catheter-related complications and risk factors for positive 
central-catheter
 cultures
 in
 intensive
 care
 unit
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Microbiol
1990;28:2520--5.
 Goetz AM, Wagener MM, Miller JM, Muder RR. Risk of infection due to central venous
catheters: effect of site of placement and catheter 
type. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:842--5.
 Joynt GM, Kew J, Gomersall CD, Leung VY, Liu EK. Deep venous thrombosis caused by
femoral venous catheters in critically ill adult 
patients. Chest 2000;117:178--83.
 Mian NZ, Bayly R, Schreck DM, Besserman EB, Richmand D. Incidence of deep venous
thrombosis associated with femoral venous 
catheterization. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:1118--21.
 Durbec O, Viviand X, Potie F, Vialet R, Albanese J, Martin C. A prospective evaluation of
the use of femoral venous catheters in critically ill 
adults. Crit Care Med 1997;25:1986--9.
 Trottier SJ, Veremakis C, O'Brien J, Auer AI. Femoral deep vein thrombosis associated
with central venous catheterization: results from a 
prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 1995;23:52--9.
 Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;286:700--7.
 Venkataraman ST, Thompson AE, Orr RA. Femoral vascular 
catheterization in critically ill infants and children. Clin Pediatr 1997;36:311--9.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous femoral
venous catheterizations: a prospective study of 
complications. J Pediatr 1989;114:411--5.
 Goldstein  AM,  Weber  JM,  Sheridan  RL.  Femoral  venous  access  is  safe  in  burned
children: an analysis of 224 catheters. J Pediatr 1997;130:442--6.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Pribble CG. Ultrasound guidance for placement of
central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the 
literature. Crit Care Med 1996;24:2053--8.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Evaluation  of  dressing  regimens  for  prevention  of  infection  with
peripheral intravenous catheters: gauze, a 
transparent  polyurethane  dressing,  and  an  iodophor-transparent  dressing.  JAMA
1987;258:2396--403.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M.  Risk  factors  for  infusion-related  phlebitis  with  small  peripheral
venous catheters: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med 1991;114:845--54.
 Band JD, Maki DG. Steel needles used for intravenous therapy: morbidity in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Arch Intern Med 
1980;140:31--4.
 Tully JL, Friedland GH, Baldini LM, Goldmann DA. Complications of intravenous therapy
with steel needles and 
Teflon® catheters: a comparative study. Am J Med 1981;70:702--6.
 Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbath S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-wide programme to
improve compliance with hand hygiene. 
Lancet 2000;356:1307--9.
 Larson  EL,  Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  et  al.  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand
antisepsis in health care settings. Am J Infect 
Control 1995;23:251--69.
 Raad  II,  Hohn  DC,  Gilbreath  BJ,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter-related
infections by using maximal sterile barrier precautions 
during insertion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:231--8.
 Clemence  MA,  Walker  D,  Farr  BM.  Central  venous  catheter  practices:  results  of  a
survey. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:5--12.
 Maki  DG,  Ringer  M,  Alvarado  CJ.  Prospective  randomised  trial  of  povidone-iodine,
alcohol, and chlorhexidine for prevention of infection 
associated with central venous and arterial catheters. Lancet 1991;338:339--43.
 Humar  A,  Ostromecki  A,  Direnfeld  J,  et  al.  Prospective  randomized  trial  of  10%
povidone-iodine versus 0.5% tincture of chlorhexidine as 
cutaneous antisepsis for prevention of central venous catheter infection. Clin Infect Dis
2000;31:1001--7.
 Garland JS, Buck RK, Maloney P, et al. Comparison of 10% povidone-iodine and 0.5%
chlorhexidine gluconate for the prevention of 
peripheral  intravenous  catheter  colonization  in  neonates:  a  prospective  trial.  Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1995;14:510--6.
 Hoffmann KK, Weber DJ, Samsa GP, Rutala WA. Transparent polyurethane film as an
intravenous catheter dressing: a meta-analysis of the 
infection risks. JAMA 1992;267:2072--6.
 Maki  DG,  Mermel  LA,  Klugar  D,  et  al.  The  efficacy  of  a  chlorhexidine  impregnated
sponge (Biopatch) for the prevention of intravascular 
catheter-related  infection-  a  prospective  randomized  controlled  multicenter  study
[Abstract]. Presented at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents
 and
 Chemotherapy.
 Toronto,
 Ontario,
 Canada:
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology, 2000. 
 Yamamoto  AJ,  Solomon  JA,  Soulen  MC,  et  al.  Sutureless  securement  device  reduces
complications of peripherally inserted central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2001 (in press).
 Rusho  WJ,  Bair  JN.  Effect  of  filtration  on  complications  of  postoperative  intravenous
therapy. Am J Hosp Pharm 1979;36:1355--6.
 Maddox  RR,  John  JF  Jr.,  Brown  LL,  Smith  CE.  Effect  of  inline  filtration  on  postinfusion
phlebitis. Clin Pharm 1983;2:58--61.
 Turco  SJ,  Davis  NM.  Particulate  matter  in  intravenous  infusion  fluids---phase  3.  Am  J
Hosp Pharm 1973;30:611--3.
 Baumgartner TG, Schmidt GL, Thakker KM, et al. Bacterial endotoxin retention by inline
intravenous filters. Am J Hosp Pharm 1986;43:681--4.
 Butler DL, Munson JM, DeLuca PP. Effect of inline filtration on the potency of low-dose
drugs. Am J Hosp Pharm 1980;37:935--41.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Dupuis J, et al. Central venous catheters coated with minocycline
and rifampin for the prevention of 
catheter-related  colonization  and  bloodstream  infections:  a  randomized,  double-blind
trial. The Texas Medical Center Catheter Study Group. Ann Intern 
Med 1997;127:267--74.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Saha S, Lumley T, Sullivan SD. Efficacy of antiseptic-impregnated
central venous catheters in preventing 
catheter-related bloodstream infection: a meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;281:261--7.
 Maki  DG,  Stolz  SM,  Wheeler  S,  Mermel  LA.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related bloodstream infection by use of an 
antiseptic-impregnated  catheter:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Ann  Intern  Med
1997;127:257--66.
 Raad II, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Mansouri M, Bodey GP. The broad-spectrum activity
and efficacy of catheters coated with minocycline 
and rifampin. J Infect Dis 1996;173:418--24.
 Bassetti  S,  Hu  J,  D'Agostino  RB  Jr.,  Sherertz  RJ.  Prolonged  antimicrobial  activity  of  a
catheter containing chlorhexidine-silver sulfadiazine 
extends  protection  against  catheter  infections  in  vivo.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother
2001;45:1535--8.
 Oda  T,  Hamasaki  J,  Kanda  N,  Mikami  K.  Anaphylactic  shock  induced  by  an
antiseptic-coated central venous catheter. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:1242--4.
 Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central
venous catheters for the prevention of 
catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA 1999;282:554--60.
 Darouiche RO, Raad II, Heard SO, et al. A comparison of two antimicrobial-impregnated
central venous catheters. Catheter Study Group. N Engl 
J Med 1999;340:1--8.
 Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press, 2000.
 Maki  DG,  Cobb  L,  Garman  JK,  Shapiro  JM,  Ringer  M,  Helgerson  RB.  An  attachable
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of infection with 
central  venous  catheters:  a  prospective  randomized  multicenter  trial.  Am  J  Med
1988;85:307--14.
 Dahlberg PJ, Agger WA, Singer JR, et al. Subclavian hemodialysis catheter infections: a
prospective, randomized trial of an attachable 
silver-impregnated cuff for prevention of catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1995;16:506--11.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Coit D, et al. A prospective, randomized evaluation of the effect
of silver impregnated subcutaneous cuffs for 
preventing tunneled chronic venous access catheter infections in cancer patients. Ann
Surg 1993;218:206--10.
 Bonawitz SC, Hammell EJ, Kirkpatrick JR. Prevention of central venous 
catheter sepsis: a prospective randomized trial. Am Surg 1991;57:618--23.
 McKee R, Dunsmuir R, Whitby M, Garden OJ. Does antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of
catheter insertion reduce the incidence of 
catheter-related sepsis in intravenous nutrition? J Hosp Infect 1985;6:419--25.
 Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH. Double-blind placebo
controlled study of vancomycin prophylaxis for 
central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:95--102.
 Ljungman  P,  Hagglund  H,  Bjorkstrand  B,  Lonnqvist  B,  Ringden  O.  Peroperative
teicoplanin for prevention of gram-positive infections in 
neutropenic patients with indwelling central venous catheters: a randomized, controlled
study. Support Care Cancer 1997;5:485--8.
 Kacica  MA,  Horgan  MJ,  Ochoa  L,  Sandler  R,  Lepow  ML,  Venezia  RA.  Prevention  of
gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less than 1500 g. 
J Pediatr 1994;125:253--8.
 Spafford  PS,  Sinkin  RA,  Cox  C,  Reubens  L,  Powell  KR.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related coagulase-negative staphylococcal sepsis 
in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259--63.
 CDC.  Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  vancomycin  resistance.
Recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-12).
 Levin  A,  Mason  AJ,  Jindal  KK,  Fong  IW,  Goldstein  MB.  Prevention  of  hemodialysis
subclavian vein catheter infections by topical 
povidone-iodine. Kidney Int 1991;40:934--8.
 Casewell MW. The nose: an underestimated source of 
Staphylococcus aureus causing wound infection. J Hosp Infect 1998;40(suppl):S3--S11.
 Hill  RL,  Fisher  AP,  Ware  RJ,  Wilson  S,  Casewell  MW.  Mupirocin  for  the  reduction  of
colonization of internal jugular cannulae---a 
randomized controlled trial. J Hosp Infect 1990;15:311--21.
 Sesso R, Barbosa D, Leme IL, et al. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  prophylaxis  in  hemodialysis  patients  using  central  venous
catheter: effect of 
mupirocin ointment. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:1085--92.
 Zakrzewska-Bode  A,  Muytjens  HL,  Liem  KD,  Hoogkamp-Korstanje  JA.  Mupirocin
resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci, after 
topical prophylaxis for the reduction of colonization of central venous catheters. J Hosp
Infect 1995;31:189--93.
 Miller  MA,  Dascal  A,  Portnoy  J,  Mendelson  J.  Development  of  mupirocin  resistance
among methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin ointment. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:811--3.
 Rao  SP,  Oreopoulos  DG.  Unusual  complications  of  a  polyurethane  PD  catheter.  Perit
Dial Int 1997;17:410--2.
 Riu  S,  Ruiz  CG,  Martinez-Vea  A,  Peralta  C,  Oliver  JA.  Spontaneous  rupture  of
polyurethane peritoneal catheter: a possible deleterious 
effect of mupirocin ointment. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998;13:1870--1.
 von Eiff C, Becker K, Machka K, Stammer H, Peters G. Nasal carriage as a source of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:11--6.
 Zinner SH, Denny-Brown BC, Braun P, Burke JP, Toala P, Kass EH. Risk of infection with
intravenous indwelling catheters: effect of application 
of antibiotic ointment. J Infect Dis 1969;120:616--9.
 Norden CW. Application of antibiotic ointment to the site of venous catheterization---a
controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1969;120:611--5.
 Maki  DG,  Band  JD.  A  comparative  study  of  polyantibiotic  and  iodophor  ointments  in
prevention of vascular catheter-related infection. Am J 
Med 1981;70:739--44.
 Henrickson  KJ,  Axtell  RA,  Hoover  SM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous
catheter-related infections and thrombotic events in 
immunocompromised  children  by  the  use  of  vancomycin/ciprofloxacin/heparin  flush
solution: a randomized, multicenter, double-blind trial. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:1269--78.
 Carratala  J,  Niubo  J,  Fernandez-Sevilla  A,  et  al.  Randomized,  double-blind  trial  of  an
antibiotic-lock technique for prevention of 
gram-positive central venous catheter-related infection in neutropenic 
patients with cancer. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:2200--4.
 Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of bacteremia attributed
to luminal colonization of tunneled central 
venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organisms. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1591--7.
 Rackoff  WR,  Weiman  M,  Jakobowski  D,  et  al.  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  the
efficacy of a heparin and vancomycin solution in 
preventing central venous catheter infections in children. J Pediatr 1995;127:147--51.
 Raad II, Buzaid A, Rhyne J, et al. Minocycline and ethylene-diaminetetraacetate for the
prevention of recurrent vascular catheter infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:149--51.
 Raad II, Luna M, Khalil SA, Costerton JW, Lam C, Bodey GP. The relationship between
the thrombotic and infectious complications of 
central venous catheters. JAMA 1994;271:1014--6.
 Timsit  JF,  Farkas  JC,  Boyer  JM,  et  al.  Central  vein  catheter-related  thrombosis  in
intensive care patients: incidence, risk factors, and relationship 
with catheter-related sepsis. Chest 1998;114:207--13.
 Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, Andrew M. Benefit of heparin in central venous
and pulmonary artery catheters: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Chest 1998;113:165--71.
 Mermel  LA,  Stolz  SM,  Maki  DG.  Surface  antimicrobial  activity  of  heparin-bonded  and
antiseptic-impregnated vascular catheters. J Infect 
Dis 1993;167:920--4.
 Pierce  CM,  Wade  A,  Mok  Q.  Heparin-bonded  central  venous  lines  reduce  thrombotic
and infective complications in critically ill children. 
Intensive Care Med 2000;26:967--72.
 Bern  MM,  Lokich  JJ,  Wallach  SR,  et  al.  Very  low  doses  of  warfarin  can  prevent
thrombosis in central venous catheters: a randomized prospective 
trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:423--8.
 Boraks  P,  Seale  J,  Price  J,  et  al.  Prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  associated
thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with 
haematological malignancies. Br J Haematol 1998;101:483--6.
 Collin J, Collin C. Infusion thrombophlebitis. Lancet 1975;2:458.
 Lai KK. Safety of prolonging peripheral cannula and i.v. tubing use from 72 hours to 96
hours. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:66--70.
 Fontaine PJ. Performance of a new softening expanding midline 
catheter in home intravenous therapy patients. J Intraven Nurs 1991;14:91--9.
 Harwood  IR,  Greene  LM,  Kozakowski-Koch  JA,  Rasor  JS.  New  peripherally  inserted
midline catheter: a better alternative for intravenous 
antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;12:233--9.
 Mermel  LA,  Parenteau  S,  Tow  SM.  The  risk  of  midline  catheterization  in  hospitalized
patients. A prospective study. Ann Intern Med 
1995;123:841--4.
 Eyer S, Brummitt C, Crossley K, Siegel R, Cerra F. Catheter-related sepsis: prospective,
randomized study of three methods of long-term 
catheter maintenance. Crit Care Med 1990;18:1073--9.
 Uldall  PR,  Merchant  N,  Woods  F,  Yarworski  U,  Vas  S.  Changing  subclavian
haemodialysis cannulas to reduce infection. Lancet 1981;1:1373.
 Cook  D,  Randolph  A,  Kernerman  P,  et  al.  Central  venous  catheter  replacement
strategies: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care 
Med 1997;25:1417--24.
 Cobb  DK,  High  KP,  Sawyer  RG,  et  al.  A  controlled  trial  of  scheduled  replacement  of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J 
Med 1992;327:1062--8.
 Robinson  D,  Suhocki  P,  Schwab  SJ.  Treatment  of  infected  tunneled  venous  access
hemodialysis catheters with guidewire exchange. Kidney 
Int 1998;53:1792--4.
 Beathard
 GA.
 Management
 of
 bacteremia
 associated
 with
 tunneled-cuffed
hemodialysis catheters. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:1045--9.
 Saad  TF.  Bacteremia  associated  with  tunneled,  cuffed  hemodialysis  catheters.  Am  J
Kidney Dis 1999;34:1114--24.
 Duszak  R  Jr.,  Haskal  ZJ,  Thomas-Hawkins  C,  et  al.  Replacement  of  failing  tunneled
hemodialysis catheters through pre-existing 
subcutaneous  tunnels:  a  comparison  of  catheter  function  and  infection  rates  for  de
novo placements and over-the-wire exchanges. J Vasc Interv Radiol 
1998;9:321--7.
 Jaar BG, Hermann JA, Furth SL, Briggs W, Powe NR. Septicemia in diabetic hemodialysis
patients: comparison of incidence, risk factors, 
and mortality with nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2000;35:282--92.
 Powe  NR,  Jaar  B,  Furth  SL,  Hermann  J,  Briggs  W.  Septicemia  in  dialysis  patients:
incidence, risk factors, and prognosis. Kidney Int 
1999;55:1081--90.
 Hoen B, Paul-Dauphin A, Hestin D, Kessler M. EPIBACDIAL: a multicenter prospective
study of risk factors for bacteremia in chronic 
hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998;9:869--76.
 Tokars JI, Miller ER, Alter MJ, et al. National surveillance of 
dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 1997. Semin Dial 2000;13:75--85.
 Foundation NK. III. NKF-K/DOQI Clinical practice guidelines for 
vascular access: update 2000. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37(suppl):S137--S81.
 Mermel  LA.  Intravascular  catheters  impregnated  with  benzalkonium  chloride.  J
Antimicrob Chemother 1993;32:905--6.
 Maki DG, Stolz SS, Wheeler S, Mermel LA. A prospective, randomized trial of gauze and
two polyurethane dressings for site care of 
pulmonary  artery  catheters:  implications  for  catheter  management.  Crit  Care  Med
1994;22:1729--37.
 Raad  II,  Umphrey  J,  Khan  A,  Truett  LJ,  Bodey  GP.  The  duration  of  placement  as  a
predictor of peripheral and pulmonary arterial catheter 
infections. J Hosp Infect 1993;23:17--26.
 Cohen  Y,  Fosse  JP,  Karoubi  P,  et  al.  The  "hands-off"  catheter  and  the  prevention  of
systemic infections associated with pulmonary artery catheter: 
a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:284--7.
 Josephson A, Gombert ME, Sierra MF, Karanfil LV, Tansino GF. The relationship between
intravenous fluid contamination and the frequency 
of tubing replacement. Infect Control 1985;6:367--70.
 Maki  DG,  Botticelli  JT,  LeRoy  ML,  Thielke  TS.  Prospective  study  of  replacing
administration sets for intravenous therapy at 48- vs 72-hour 
intervals: 72 hours is safe and cost-effective. JAMA 1987;258:1777--81.
 Snydman  DR,  Donnelly-Reidy  M,  Perry  LK,  Martin  WJ.  Intravenous  tubing  containing
burettes can be safely changed at 72 hour intervals. 
Infect Control 1987;8:113--6.
 Hanna  HA,  Raad  II.  Blood  products:  a  significant  risk  factor  for  long-term
catheter-related bloodstream infections in cancer patients. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:165--6.
 Raad  II,  Hanna  HA,  Awad  A,  et  al.  Optimal  frequency  of  changing  intravenous
administration sets: is it safe to prolong use beyond 72 hours? 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:136--9.
 Saiman L, Ludington E, Dawson JD, et al. Risk factors for 
Candida species colonization of neonatal intensive care unit patients. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2001;20:1119--24.
 Avila-Figueroa  C,  Goldmann  DA,  Richardson  DK,  Gray  JE,  Ferrari  A,  Freeman  J.
Intravenous lipid emulsions are the major determinant 
of  coagulase-negative  staphylococcal  bacteremia  in  very  low  birth  weight  newborns.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:10--7.
 Crocker  KS,  Noga  R,  Filibeck  DJ,  Krey  SH,  Markovic  M,  Steffee  WP.  Microbial  growth
comparisons of five commercial parenteral lipid emulsions. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1984;8:391--5.
 Jarvis WR, Highsmith AK. Bacterial growth and endotoxin production in lipid emulsion. J
Clin Microbiol 1984;19:17--20.
 Melly MA, Meng HC, Schaffner W. Microbiol growth in lipid emulsions used in parenteral
nutrition. Arch Surg 1975;110:1479--81.
 Inoue  Y,  Nezu  R,  Matsuda  H,  et  al.  Prevention  of  catheter-related  sepsis  during
parenteral nutrition: effect of a new connection device. J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:581--5.
 Arduino MJ, Bland LA, Danzig LE, McAllister SK, Aguero SM. Microbiologic evaluation of
needleless and needle-access devices. Am J 
Infect Control 1997;25:377--80.
 Brown JD, Moss HA, Elliott TS. The potential for catheter microbial 
contamination from a needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:181--9.
 Cookson ST, Ihrig M, O'Mara EM, et al. Increased bloodstream infection rates in surgical
patients associated with variation from recommended 
use  and  care  following  implementation  of  a  needleless  device.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:23--7.
 Do  AN,  Ray  BJ,  Banerjee  SN,  et  al.  Bloodstream  infection  associated  with  needleless
device use and the importance of infection-control 
practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis 1999;179:442--8.
 Luebke MA, Arduino MJ, Duda DL, et al. Comparison of the microbial barrier properties
of a needleless and a conventional 
needle-based intravenous access system. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:437--41.
 McDonald  LC,  Banerjee  SN,  Jarvis  WR.  Line-associated  bloodstream  infections  in
pediatric intensive-care-unit patients associated with a 
needleless device and intermittent intravenous therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1998;19:772--7.
 Mendelson  MH,  Short  LJ,  Schechter  CB,  et  al.  Study  of  a  needleless  intermittent
intravenous-access system for peripheral infusions: analysis of 
staff, patient, and institutional outcomes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:401--6.
 Seymour VM, Dhallu TS, Moss HA, Tebbs SE, Elliot TS. A prospective clinical study to
investigate the microbial contamination of a 
needleless connector. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:165--8.
 Longfield  RN,  Smith  LP,  Longfield  JN,  Coberly  J,  Cruess  D.  Multiple-dose  vials:
persistence of bacterial contaminants and infection 
control implications. Infect Control 1985;6:194--9.
 Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia marcescens associated
with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect 
Control 2001;29:312--5.
 Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens bloodstream infections
from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialysis center. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491--7.
 CDC. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System report, data summary
from April 1995--April 2000, issued June 2000. Am 
J Infect Control 2000;28:429--35.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  pediatric
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:103--9.
 Richards  MJ,  Edwards  JR,  Culver  DH,  Gaynes  RP.  Nosocomial  infections  in  medical
intensive care units in the United States: National 
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;27:887--92.
 Garland  JS,  Dunne  WM  Jr.,  Havens  P,  et  al.  Peripheral  intravenous  catheter
complications in critically ill children: a prospective study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:1145--50.
 Garland  JS,  Nelson  DB,  Cheah  TE,  Hennes  HH,  Johnson  TM.  Infectious  complications
during peripheral intravenous therapy with Teflon 
catheters: a prospective study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:918--21.
 Furfaro  S,  Gauthier  M,  Lacroix  J,  Nadeau  D,  Lafleur  L,  Mathews  S.  Arterial
catheter-related infections in children: a 1-year cohort analysis. Am J 
Dis Child 1991;145:1037--43.
 Krauss AN, Albert RF, Kannan MM. Contamination of umbilical catheters in the newborn
infant. J Pediatr 1970;77:965--9.
 Landers S, Moise AA, Fraley JK, Smith EO, Baker CJ. Factors associated with umbilical
catheter-related sepsis in neonates. Am J Dis 
Child 1991;145:675--80.
 Balagtas  RC,  Bell  CE,  Edwards  LD,  Levin  S.  Risk  of  local  and  systemic  infections
associated with umbilical vein catheterization: a prospective 
study in 86 newborn patients. Pediatrics 1971;48:359--67.
 Stenzel JP, Green TP, Fuhrman BP, Carlson PE, Marchessault RP. Percutaneous central
venous catheterization in a pediatric intensive care 
unit: a survival analysis of complications. Crit Care Med 1989;17:984--8.
 Garland JS, Alex CP, Mueller CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing povidone-iodine to
a chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated dressing 
for  prevention  of  central  venous  catheter  infections  in  neonates.  Pediatrics
2001;107:1431--6.
 Davis D, O'Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-Vaisey A. Impact of
formal continuing medical education: do 
conferences,  workshops,  rounds,  and  other  traditional  continuing  education  activities
change physician behavior or health care outcomes? JAMA 
1999;282:867--74.
 Conly JM, Hill S, Ross J, Lertzman J, Louie TJ. Handwashing practices in an intensive care
unit: the effects of an educational program 
and its relationship to infection rates. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:330--9.
 East  SA.  Planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation  of  a  successful  hospital-based
peripherally inserted central catheter program. J Intraven 
Nurs 1994;17:189--92.
 Kyle  KS,  Myers  JS.  Peripherally  inserted  central  catheters.  Development  of  a
hospital-based program. J Intraven Nurs 1990;13:287--90.
 BeVier PA, Rice CE. Initiating a pediatric peripherally inserted central 
catheter and midline catheter program. J Intraven Nurs 1994;17:201--5.
 Tomford JW, Hershey CO, McLaren CE, Porter DK, Cohen DI. Intravenous therapy team
and peripheral venous catheter-associated complications: 
a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1191--4.
 Wenzel  RP,  Wentzel  RP.  The  development  of  academic  programs  for  quality
assessment. Arch Intern Med 1991;151:653--4.
 Robert  J,  Fridkin  SK,  Blumberg  HM,  et  al.  The  influence  of  the  composition  of  the
nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates in a 
surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:12--7.
 Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy unit. J 
Hosp Infect 1999;43:109--13.
 White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter-related 
infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:231--5.
 Lorenzen  AN,  Itkin  DJ.  Surveillance  of  infection  in  home  care.  Am  J  Infect  Control
1992;20:326--9.
 White  MC.  Infections  and  infection  risks  in  home  care  settings.  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol 1992;13:535--9.
 Raad  II,  Baba  M,  Bodey  GP.  Diagnosis  of  catheter-related  infections:  the  role  of
surveillance and targeted quantitative skin cultures. Clin Infect 
Dis 1995;20:593--7.
 Widmer AF, Nettleman M, Flint K, Wenzel RP. The clinical impact of culturing central
venous catheters: a prospective study. Arch Intern 
Med 1992;152:1299--302.
 Boyce  JM,  Farr  BM,  Jarvis  WR,  et  al.  Guideline  for  hand  hygiene  in  the  healthcare
setting. Am J Infect Control 2002 (in press).
 Bischoff  WE,  Reynolds  TM,  Sessler  CN,  Edmond  MB,  Wenzel  RP.  Handwashing
compliance by health care workers: the impact of introducing 
an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1017--21.
 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial contamination of
the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care. 
Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821--6.
 Simmons  B,  Bryant  J,  Neiman  K,  Spencer  L,  Arheart  K.  The  role  of  handwashing  in
prevention of endemic intensive care unit infections. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:589--94.
 Boyce  JM,  Kelliher  S,  Vallande  N.  Skin  irritation  and  dryness  associated  with  two
hand-hygiene regimens: soap-and-water hand washing versus 
hand  antisepsis  with  an  alcoholic  hand  gel.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
2000;21:442--8.
 Capdevila  JA.  Catheter-related  infection:  an  update  on  diagnosis,  treatment,  and
prevention. Int J Infect Dis 1998;2:230--6.
 Abi-Said D, Raad II, Umphrey J, Gonzalez V, Richardson D, Marts K, Hohn D. Infusion
therapy team and dressing changes of central 
venous catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:101--5.
 CDC.  Update:  universal  precautions  for  prevention  of  transmission  of  human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other 
bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82, 388.
 Povoski SP. A prospective analysis of the cephalic vein cutdown approach for chronic
indwelling central venous access in 100 consecutive 
cancer patients. Ann Surg Oncol 2000;7:496--502.
 Arrighi DA, Farnell MB, Mucha P Jr., Iistrup DM, Anderson DL. Prospective, randomized
trial of rapid venous access for patients in 
hypovolemic shock. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18:927--30.
 Ahmed Z, Mohyuddin Z. Complications associated with different insertion techniques
for Hickman catheters. Postgrad Med J 1998;74:104--7.
 Little  JR,  Murray  PR,  Traynor  PS,  Spitznagel  E.  A  randomized  trial  of  povidone-iodine
compared with iodine tincture for venipuncture 
site  disinfection:  effects  on  rates  of  blood  culture  contamination.  Am  J  Med
1999;107:119--25.
 Mimoz O, Pieroni L, Lawrence C, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of two antiseptic
solutions for prevention of central venous or arterial 
catheter  colonization  and  infection  in  intensive  care  unit  patients.  Crit  Care  Med
1996;24:1818--23.
 Maki DG, McCormack KN. Defatting catheter insertion sites in total parenteral nutrition
is of no value as an infection control measure. 
Controlled clinical trial. Am J Med 1987;83:833--40.
 Bijma R, Girbes AR, Kleijer DJ, Zwaveling JH. Preventing central venous catheter-related
infection in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:618--20.
 Rasero L, Degl'Innocenti M, Mocali M, et al. Comparison of two different time interval
protocols for central venous catheter dressing in 
bone  marrow  transplant  patients:  results  of  a  randomized,  multicenter  study.
Haematologica 2000;85:275--9.
 Madeo M, Martin CR, Turner C, Kirkby V, Thompson DR. A randomized trial comparing
Arglaes (a transparent dressing containing silver ions) 
to  Tegaderm  (a  transparent  polyurethane  dressing)  for  dressing  peripheral  arterial
catheters and central vascular catheters. Intensive Crit Care 
Nurs 1998;14:187--91.
 Flowers  RH,  Schwenzer  KJ,  Kopel  RF,  Fisch  MJ,  Tucker  SI,  Farr  BM.  Efficacy  of  an
attachable subcutaneous cuff for the prevention of 
intravascular
 catheter-related
 infection:
 a
 randomized,
 controlled
 trial.
 JAMA
1989;261:878--83.
 Robbins  J,  Cromwell  P,  Korones  DN.  Swimming  and  central  venous  catheter-related
infections in the child with cancer. J Pediatr Oncol 
Nurs 1999;16:51--6.
 Howell PB, Walters PE, Donowitz GR, Farr BM. Risk factors for infection of adult patients
with cancer who have tunneled central venous 
catheters. Cancer 1995;75:1367--75.
 Goetz  AM,  Miller  J,  Wagener  MM,  Muder  RR.  Complications  related  to  intravenous
midline catheter usage: a 2-year study. J Intraven 
Nurs 1998;21:76--80.
 Martin  C,  Viviand  X,  Saux  P,  Gouin  F.  Upper-extremity  deep  vein  thrombosis  after
central venous catheterization via the axillary vein. Crit Care 
Med 1999;27:2626--9.
 Robinson  JF,  Robinson  WA,  Cohn  A,  Garg  K,  Armstrong  JD.  Perforation  of  the  great
vessels during central venous line placement. Arch Intern 
Med 1995;155:1225--8.
 Lederle FA, Parenti CM, Berskow LC, Ellingson KJ. The idle intravenous catheter. Ann
Intern Med 1992;116:737--8.
 Parenti CM, Lederle FA, Impola CL, Peterson LR. Reduction of unnecessary intravenous
catheter use: internal medicine house staff participate in 
a successful quality improvement project. Arch Intern Med 1994;154:1829--32.
 Thomas  F,  Burke  JP,  Parker  J,  et  al.  The  risk  of  infection  related  to  radial  vs  femoral
sites for arterial catheterization. Crit Care Med 1983;11:807--12.
 Nelson  DB,  Garland  JS.  The  natural  history  of  Teflon  catheter-associated  phlebitis  in
children. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:1090--2.
 Shimandle  RB,  Johnson  D,  Baker  M,  Stotland  N,  Karrison  T,  Arnow  PM.  Safety  of
peripheral intravenous catheters in children. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:736--40.
 O'Grady NP, Barie PS, Bartlett J, et al. Practice parameters for evaluating new fever in
critically ill adult patients. Task Force of the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine of the Society of Critical Care Medicine in collaboration
with the Infectious Disease Society of America. Crit Care 
Med 1998;26:392--408.
 Mermel LA, Farr BM, Sherertz RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of intravascular
catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2001;32:1249--72.
 Mershon  J,  Nogami  W,  Williams  JM,  Yoder  C,  Eitzen  HE,  Lemons  JA.  Bacterial/fungal
growth in a combined parenteral nutrition solution. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:498--502.
 Gilbert  M,  Gallagher  SC,  Eads  M,  Elmore  MF.  Microbial  growth  patterns  in  a  total
parenteral nutrition formulation containing lipid emulsion. 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1986;10:494--7.
 Maki  DG,  Martin  WT.  Nationwide  epidemic  of  septicemia  caused  by  contaminated
infusion products. IV. Growth of microbial pathogens in 
fluids for intravenous infusions. J Infect Dis 1975;131:267--72.
 Didier  ME,  Fischer  S,  Maki  DG.  Total  nutrient  admixtures  appear  safer  than  lipid
emulsion alone as regards microbial contamination: 
growth properties of microbial pathogens at room temperature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
1998;22:291--6.
 Bennett  SN,  McNeil  MM,  Bland  LA,  et  al.  Postoperative  infections  traced  to
contamination of an intravenous anesthetic, propofol. N Engl J 
Med 1995;333:147--54.
 Roth  VR,  Arduino  MJ,  Nobiletti  J,  et  al.  Transfusion-related  sepsis  due  to  Serratia
liquefaciens in the United States. Transfusion 2000;40:931--5.
 Blajchman  MA.  Reducing  the  risk  of  bacterial  contamination  of  cellular  blood
components. Dev Biol Stand 2000;102:183--93.
 Barrett  BB,  Andersen  JW,  Anderson  KC.  Strategies  for  the  avoidance  of  bacterial
contamination of blood components. Transfusion 1993;33:228--33.
 Wagner  SJ,  Friedman  LI,  Dodd  RY.  Transfusion-associated  bacterial  sepsis.  Clin
Microbiol Rev 1994;7:290--302.
 Plott  RT,  Wagner  RF  Jr.,  Tyring  SK.  Iatrogenic  contamination  of  multidose  vials  in
simulated use. A reassessment of current patient 
injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441--4.
 Salzman  MB,  Isenberg  HD,  Rubin  LG.  Use  of  disinfectants  to  reduce  microbial
contamination of hubs of vascular catheters. J Clin 
Microbiol 1993;31:475--9.
 ASPH  Council  on  Professional  Affairs.  ASHP  guidelines  on  quality  assurance  for
pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst 
Pharm 2000;57:1150--69.
 Herruzo-Cabrera
 R,
 Garcia-Caballero
 J,
 Vera-Cortes
 ML,
 Vazquez-Encinar
 A,
Garcia-Caballero F, Rey-Calero J, Garcia de Lorenzo A. Growth 
of microorganisms in parenteral nutrient solutions. Am J Hosp Pharm 1984;41:1178--80.
 Green KA, Shouldachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. Gadolinium-based MR
contrast media: potential for growth of 
microbial  contaminants  when  single  vials  are  used  for  multiple  patients.  Am  J
Roentgenol 1995;165:669--71.
 Arrington  ME,  Gabbert  KC,  Mazgaj  PW,  Wolf  MT.  Multidose  vial  contamination  in
anesthesia. Aana J 1990;58:462--6.
 Falchuk KH, Peterson L, McNeil BJ. Microparticulate-induced 
phlebitis: its prevention by in-line filtration. N Engl J Med 1985;312:78--82.
 Cohran J, Larson E, Roach H, Blane C, Pierce P. Effect of intravascular surveillance and
education program on rates of nosocomial 
bloodstream infections. Heart Lung 1996;25:161--4.
 Netto dos Santos KR, de Souza Fonseca L, Gontijo Filho PP. Emergence of high-level
mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from Brazilian university hospitals. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1996;17:813--6.
 Ryder MA. Peripheral access options. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 1995;4:395--427.
 Maki DG, Goldman DA, Rhame FS. Infection control in intravenous therapy. Ann Intern
Med 1973;79:867--87.
 Tager IB, Ginsberg MB, Ellis SE, et al. An epidemiologic study of the risks associated
with peripheral intravenous catheters. Am J 
Epidemiol 1983;118:839--51.
 Horan  TC,  Emori  TG.  Definitions  of  key  terms  used  in  the  NNIS  System.  Am  J  Infect
Control 1997;25:112--6.
 Khuri-Bulos NA, Shennak M, Agabi S, et al. Nosocomial infections in the intensive care
units at a university hospital in a developing 
country:  comparison  with  National  Nosocomial  Infections  Surveillance  intensive  care
unit rates. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:547--52.
 Pittet  D,  Wenzel  RP.  Nosocomial  bloodstream  infections.  Secular  trends  in  rates,
mortality, and contribution to total hospital deaths. Arch 
Intern Med 1995;155:1177--84.
 CDC. Monitoring hospital-acquired infections to promote patient safety---United States,
1990--1999. MMWR
  2000;49:149--53.
 Clark-Christoff  N,  Watters  VA,  Sparks  W,  Snyder  P,  Grant  JP.  Use  of  triple-lumen
subclavian catheters for administration of total parenteral 
nutrition. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1992;16:403--7.
 Early TF, Gregory RT, Wheeler JR, Snyder SO Jr., Gayle RG. Increased infection rate in
double-lumen versus single-lumen Hickman catheters 
in cancer patients. South Med J 1990;83:34--6.
 Hilton E, Haslett TM, Borenstein MT, Tucci V, Isenberg HD, Singer C. Central catheter
infections: single- versus triple-lumen catheters: influence 
of  guide  wires  on  infection  rates  when  used  for  replacement  of  catheters.  Am  J  Med
1988;84:667--72.
 Yeung  C,  May  J,  Hughes  R.  Infection  rate  for  single  lumen  v  triple  lumen  subclavian
catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1988;9:154--8.
 Collin
 GR.
 Decreasing
 catheter
 colonization
 through
 the
 use
 of
 an
antiseptic-impregnated catheter: a continuous quality improvement project. 
Chest 1999;115:1632--40.
 Groeger JS, Lucas AB, Thaler HT, et al. Infectious morbidity associated with long-term
use of venous access devices in patients with cancer. 
Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1168--74.
 Pegues  D,  Axelrod  P,  McClarren  C,  et  al.  Comparison  of  infections  in  Hickman  and
implanted port catheters in adult solid tumor patients. J 
Surg Oncol 1992;49:156--62.
 Moss  AH,  Vasilakis  C,  Holley  JL,  Foulks  CJ,  Pillai  K,  McDowell  DE.  Use  of  a  silicone
dual-lumen catheter with a Dacron cuff as a 
long-term vascular access for hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;16:211--5.
 Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, Milcent T. Post catheterization vein stenosis
in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 
50 subclavian and 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991;6:722--4.
 Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, Sartain J, Blondin J, Harter H. Superiority of
the internal jugular over the subclavian access 
for temporary dialysis. Nephron 1990;54:154--61.
 Barrett N, Spencer S, McIvor J, Brown EA. Subclavian stenosis: a major complication of
subclavian dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 1988;3:423--5.
 Trerotola  SO,  Kuhn-Fulton  J,  Johnson  MS,  Shah  H,  Ambrosius  WT,  Kneebone  PH.
Tunneled infusion catheters: increased incidence of 
symptomatic venous thrombosis after subclavian versus internal jugular venous access.
Radiology 2000;217:89--93.
 Macdonald  S,  Watt  AJ,  McNally  D,  Edwards  RD,  Moss  JG.  Comparison  of  technical
success and outcome of tunneled catheters inserted via 
the jugular and subclavian approaches. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2000;11:225--31.
 Widmer AF. Management of catheter-related bacteremia and fungemia 
in patients on total parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13(suppl):S18--S25.
 Powell C, Kudsk KA, Kulich PA, Mandelbaum JA, Fabri PJ. Effect of frequent guidewire
changes on triple-lumen catheter sepsis. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1988;12:462--4.
 Snydman  DR,  Murray  SA,  Kornfeld  SJ,  Majka  JA,  Ellis  CA.  Total  parenteral
nutrition-related infections: prospective epidemiologic study 
using semiquantitative methods. Am J Med 1982;73:695--9.
 Easom A. Prophylactic antibiotic lock therapy for hemodialysis catheters. Nephrol Nurs
J 2000;27:75.
 Vercaigne  LM,  Sitar  DS,  Penner  SB,  Bernstein  K,  Wang  GQ,  Burczynski  FJ.
Antibiotic-heparin lock: in vitro antibiotic stability combined 
with heparin in a central venous catheter. Pharmacotherapy 2000;20:394--9.
 Donowitz  LG,  Marsik  FJ,  Hoyt  JW,  Wenzel  RP.  Serratia  marcescens  bacteremia  from
contaminated pressure transducers. JAMA 1979;242:1749--51.
 Luskin  RL,  Weinstein  RA,  Nathan  C,  Chamberlin  WH,  Kabins  SA.  Extended  use  of
disposable pressure transducers: a bacteriologic 
evaluation. JAMA 1986;255:916--20.
 Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Endemic rate of fluid contamination and related septicemia in
arterial pressure monitoring. Am J Med 1981;70:733--8.
 Mermel  LA,  Maki  DG.  Epidemic  bloodstream  infections  from  hemodynamic  pressure
monitoring: signs of the times. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1989;10:47--53.
 Tenold R, Priano L, Kim K, Rourke B, Marrone T. Infection potential of nondisposable
pressure transducers prepared prior to use. Crit Care 
Med 1987;15:582--3.
 Leroy O, Billiau V, Beuscart C, et al. Nosocomial infections associated with long-term
radial artery cannulation. Intensive Care Med 1989;15:241--6.
 Fisher MC, Long SS, Roberts EM, Dunn JM, Balsara RK. 
Pseudomonas maltophilia bacteremia in children undergoing open heart surgery. 
JAMA 1981;246:1571--4.
 Stamm WE, Colella JJ, Anderson RL, Dixon RE. Indwelling arterial catheters as a source
of nosocomial bacteremia: an outbreak caused 
by Flavobacterium Species. N Engl J Med 1975;292:1099--102.
 Weinstein RA, Emori TG, Anderson RL, Stamm WE. Pressure transducers as a source of
bacteremia after open heart surgery: report of an 
outbreak and guidelines for prevention. Chest 1976;69:338--44.
 Shinozaki T, Deane RS, Mazuzan JE Jr., Hamel AJ, Hazelton D. Bacterial contamination of
arterial lines: a prospective study. JAMA 
1983;249:223--5.
 Solomon SL, Alexander H, Eley JW, et al. Nosocomial fungemia in neonates associated
with intravascular pressure-monitoring devices. Pediatr 
Infect Dis 1986;5:680--5.
 Weems JJ Jr., Chamberland ME, Ward J, Willy M, Padhye AA, Solomon SL. 
Candida parapsilosis fungemia associated with parenteral nutrition 
and contaminated blood pressure transducers. J Clin Microbiol 1987;25:1029--32.
 Beck-Sague CM, Jarvis WR, Brook JH, et al. Epidemic bacteremia due to Acinetobacter
baumannii in five intensive care units. Am J 
Epidemiol 1990;132:723--33.
 Villarino ME, Jarvis WR, O'Hara C, Bresnahan J, Clark N. Epidemic of 
Serratia marcescens bacteremia in a cardiac intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2433--6.
 Boo NY, Wong NC, Zulkifli SS, Lye MS. Risk factors associated with umbilical vascular
catheter-associated thrombosis in newborn infants. J 
Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:460--5.
 Cronin  WA,  Germanson  TP,  Donowitz  LG.  Intravascular  catheter  colonization  and
related bloodstream infection in critically ill neonates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:301--8.
 Miller  KL,  Coen  PE,  White  WJ,  Hurst  WJ,  Achey  BE,  Lang  CM.  Effectiveness  of  skin
absorption of tincture of I in blocking radioiodine from 
the human thyroid gland. Health Phys 1989;56:911--4.
 Ankola  PA,  Atakent  YS.  Effect  of  adding  heparin  in  very  low  concentration  to  the
infusate to prolong the patency of umbilical artery catheters. Am 
J Perinatol 1993;10:229--32.
 Horgan MJ, Bartoletti A, Polansky S, Peters JC, Manning TJ, Lamont BM. Effect of heparin
infusates in umbilical arterial catheters on frequency 
of thrombotic complications. J Pediatr 1987;111:774--8.
 David RJ, Merten DF, Anderson JC, Gross S. Prevention of umbilical artery catheter clots
with heparinized infusates. Dev Pharmacol 
Ther 1981;2:117--26.
 Fletcher MA, Brown DR, Landers S, Seguin J. Umbilical arterial catheter use: report of
an audit conducted by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:94--9.
 Seguin  J,  Fletcher  MA,  Landers  S,  Brown  D,  Macpherson  T.  Umbilical  venous
catheterizations: audit by the Study Group for Complications 
of Perinatal Care. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:67--70.
 Loisel  DB,  Smith  MM,  MacDonald  MG,  Martin  GR.  Intravenous  access  in  newborn
infants: impact of extended umbilical venous catheter use 
on requirement for peripheral venous lines. J Perinatol 1996;16:461--6.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:128--40.
 Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, Horan TC, Hughes JM. CDC definitions for nosocomial
infections, 1988. Erratum. Am J Infect 
Control 1988;16:177.
 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/29/2002
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 7/29/2002 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 7/29/2002
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5110a1.htm
