Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. The material in this report was
developed by the National Institute
 for
Occupational Safety and Health in collaboration with the Center for
 Infe
ctious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control.  Introduction  
    Background
    This document is a response to recently enacted legislation, Public
    Law 100-607, The Health Omnibus Programs Extension Act of 1988,
 Title
    II, Programs with Respect to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
 ("AIDS
    Amendments of 1988"). Subtitle E, General Provisions, Section
 253(a) of
    Title II specifies that "the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services,
    acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control,
 shall
    develop, issue, and disseminate guidelines to all health workers,
    public safety workers (including emergency response employees) in
 the
    United States concerning--
    (1)   methods  to  reduce  the  risk  in  the  workplace  of   becoming  infected  with  the
etiologic agent for
acquired immune deficiency syndrome; and
(2)  circumstances under which exposure to such  etiologic agent may occur."
It is further noted that "The Secretary Õof Health and Human
 Serviceså
shall transmit the guidelines issued under subsection (a) to the
Secretary of Labor for use by the Secretary of Labor in the
 development
of standards to be issued under the Occupational Safety and Health
 Act
of 1970," and that "the Secretary, acting through the Director of
 the
Centers for Disease Control, shall develop a model curriculum for
emergency response employees with respect to the prevention of
 exposure
to the etiologic agent for acquired immune deficiency syndrome
 during
the process of responding to emergencies."
Following development of these guidelines and curriculum, "Õtåhe
Secretary shall--
(A)  transmit to State public health officers copies of the
 guidelines
and the model curriculum developed under paragraph (1) with the
 request
that such officers disseminate such copies as appropriate
 throughout
the State; and
(B)  make such copies available to the public."
B.   Purpose and Organization of Document
The purpose of this document is to provide an overview of the modes
 of
transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the
 workplace, an
assessment of the risk of transmission under various assumptions,
principles underlying the control of risk, and specific
 risk-control
recommendations for employers and workers.  This document also
 includes
information on medical management of persons who have sustained an
exposure at the workplace to these viruses (e.g., an emergency
 medical
technicians who incur a needle-stick injury while performing
professional duties). These guidelines are intended for use by a
technically informed audience.  As noted above, a separate model
curriculum based on the principles and practices discussed in this
document is being developed for use in training workers and will
contain less technical wording.
Information concerning the protection of workers against
 acquisition
of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) while performing job
 duties,
the virus that causes AIDS, is presented here.  Information on
hepatitis B virus (HBV) is also presented in this document on the
 basis
of the following assumptions:
the modes of transmission for hepatitis B virus (HBV) are similar
 to
those of HIV,
the potential for HBV transmission in the occupational setting is
greater than for HIV,
there is a larger body of experience relating to controlling
transmission of HBV in the workplace, and
general practices to prevent the transmission of HBV will also
 minimize  the risk of transmission of HIV.
Blood-borne transmission of other pathogens not specifically
 addressed
here will be interrupted by adherence to the precautions noted
 below.
It is important to note that the implementation of control measures
 for
HIV and HBV does not obviate the need for continued adherence to
general infection-control principles and general hygiene measures
(e.g., hand washing) for preventing transmission of other
 infectious
diseases to both worker and client.  General guidelines for control
 of
these diseases have been published (1,2,3).
This document was developed primarily to provide guidelines for
fire-service personnel, emergency medical technicians, paramedics,
 and
law-enforcement and correctional-facility personnel.  Throughout
 the
report, paramedics and emergency medical technicians are called
"emergency medical workers" and fire-service, law-enforcement, and
correctional-facility personnel, "public-safety workers."
  Previously
issued guidelines address the needs of hospital-, laboratory-, and
clinic-based health-care workers (4,5).  A condensation of general
guidelines for protection of workers from transmission of
 blood-borne
pathogens, derived from the Joint Advisory Notice of the
 Departments of
Labor and Health and Human Services (6), is provided in section
 III.
C.   Modes and Risk of Virus Transmission in the Workplace
Although the potential for HBV transmission in the workplace
 setting
is greater than for HIV, the modes of transmission for these two
viruses are similar.  Both have been transmitted in occupational
settings only by percutaneous inoculation or contact with an open
wound, nonintact (e.g., chapped, abraded, weeping, or dermatitic)
 skin,
or mucous membranes to blood, blood-contaminated body fluids, or
concentrated virus.  Blood is the single most important source of
 HIV
and HBV in the workplace setting.  Protection measures against HIV
 and
HBV for workers should focus primarily on preventing these types of
exposures to blood as well as on delivery of HBV vaccination.
The risk of hepatitis B infection following a parenteral (i.e.,
 needle
stick or cut) exposure to blood is directly proportional to the
probability that the blood contains hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg), the immunity status of the recipient, and on the
 efficiency of
transmission (7).The probability of the source of the blood being
 HBsAg
positive from 1 to 3 per thousand in the general population to
 5%-15%
in groups at high risk for HBV infection, such as immigrants from
 areas
of high endemicity (China and Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa,
 most
Pacific islands, and the Amazon Basin); clients in institutions for
 the
mentally retarded; intravenous drug users; homosexually active
 males;
and household (sexual and non-sexual) contacts of HBV carriers.  Of
persons who have not had prior hepatitis B vaccination or
 postexposure
prophylaxis, 6%-30% of persons who receive a needle-stick exposure
 from
an HBsAg-positive individual will become infected (7).
The risk of infection with HIV following one needle-stick exposure
 to
blood from a patient known to be infected with HIV is approximately
0.5% (4,5).  This rate of transmission is considerably lower than
 that
for HBV, probably as a result of the significantly lower
 concentrations
of virus in the blood of HIV-infected persons.  Table 1 presents
theoretical data concerning the likelihood of infection given
 repeated
needle-stick injuries involving patients whose HIV serostatus is
unknown.  Though inadequately quantified, the risk from exposure of
nonintact skin or mucous membranes is likely to be far less than
 that
from percutaneous inoculation.
D.   Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus to Workers  
    Health-care workers
    In 1987, the CDC estimated the total number of HBV infections in
 the
    United States to be 300,000 per year, with approximately 75,000
 (25%)
    of infected persons developing acute hepatitis.  Of these infected
    individuals, 18,000-30,000 (6%-10%) will become HBV carriers, at
 risk
    of developing chronic liver disease (chronic active hepatitis,
    cirrhosis, and primary liver cancer), and infectious to others.
    CDC has estimated that 12,000 health-care workers whose jobs entail
    exposure to blood become infected with HBV each year, that 500-600
 of
    them are hospitalized as a result of that infection, and that
 700-1,200
    of those infected become HBV carriers.  Of the infected workers,
    approximately 250 will die (12-15 from fulminant hepatitis, 170-200
    from cirrhosis, and 40-50 from liver cancer).  Studies indicate
 that
    10%-30% of health-care or dental workers show serologic evidence of
    past or present HBV infection.
    
          2.   Emergency medical and public-safety workers
    Emergency medical workers have an increased risk for hepatitis B
    infection (8,9,10).  The degree of risk correlates with the
 frequency
    and extent of blood exposure during the conduct of work activities.
  A
    few studies are available concerning risk of HBV infection for
 other
    groups of public-safety workers (law-enforcement personnel and
    correctional-facility workers), but reports that have been
 published do
    not document any increased risk for HBV infection (11,12,13).
    Nevertheless, in occupational settings in which workers may be
    routinely exposed to blood or other body fluids as described below,
 an
    increased risk for occupational acquisition of HBV infection must
 be
    assumed to be present.  
    Vaccination for hepatitis B virus
    A safe and effective vaccine to prevent hepatitis B has been
 available
    since 1982.  Vaccination has been recommended for health-care
 workers
    regularly exposed to blood and other body fluids potentially
    contaminated with HBV (7,14,15).  In 1987, the Department of Health
 and
    Human Services and the Department of Labor stated that hepatitis B
    vaccine should be provided to all such workers at no charge to the
    worker (6).
    Available vaccines stimulate active immunity against HBV infection
 and
    provide over 90% protection against hepatitis B for 7 or more years
    following vaccination (7).  Hepatitis B vaccines also are 70%-88%
    effective when given within 1 week after HBV exposure.  Hepatitis B
    immune globulin (HBIG), a preparation of immunoglobulin with high
    levels of antibody to HBV (anti-HBs), provides temporary passive
    protection following exposure to HBV.  Combination treatment with
    hepatitis B vaccine and HBIG is over 90% effective in preventing
    hepatitis B following a documented exposure (7).
    E. Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus to Workers  
    Health-care workers with AIDS
    As of September 19, 1988, a total of 3,182 (5.1%) of 61,929 adults
    with AIDS, who had been reported to the CDC national surveillance
    system and for whom occupational information was available,
 reported
    being employed in a health-care setting.  Of the health-care
 workers
    with AIDS, 95% reported high-risk behavior; for the remaining 5%
 (169
    workers), the means of HIV acquisition was undetermined.
    
Of these 169 health-care workers with AIDS with undetermined risk,
    information is incomplete for 28 (17%) because of death or refusal
 to
    be interviewed; 97 (57%) are still being investigated.  The
 remaining
    44 (26%) health-care workers were interviewed directly or had other
    follow-up information available. The occupations of these 44 were
 nine
    nursing assistants (20%); eight physicians (18%), four of whom were
    surgeons; eight housekeeping or maintenance workers (18%); six
 nurses
    (14%); four clinical laboratory technicians (9%); two respiratory
    therapists (5%); one dentist (2%); one paramedic (2%); one embalmer
    (2%); and four others who did not have contact with patients (9%).
    Eighteen of these 44 health-care workers reported parenteral and/or
    other non-needle-stick exposure to blood or other body fluids from
    patients in the 10 years preceding their diagnosis of AIDS.  None
 of
    these exposures involved a patient with AIDS or known HIV
 infection,
    and HIV seroconversion of the health-care worker was not documented
    following a specific exposure.
    2.Human immunodeficiency virus transmission in the workplace
    As of July 31, 1988, 1,201 health-care workers had been enrolled
 and
    tested for HIV antibody in ongoing CDC surveillance of health-care
    workers exposed via needle stick or splashes to skin or mucous
    membranes to blood from patients known to be HIV-infected (16).  Of
 860
    workers who had received needle-stick injuries or cuts with sharp
    objects (i.e., parenteral exposures) and whose serum had been
 tested
    for HIV antibody at least 180 days after exposure, 4 were positive,
    yielding a seroprevalence rate of 0.47%.  Three of these
 individuals
    experienced an acute retroviral syndrome associated with documented
    seroconversion. Investigation revealed no nonoccupational risk
 factors
    for these three workers.  Serum collected within 30 days of
 exposure
    was not available from the fourth person.  This worker had an
    HIV-seropositive sexual partner, and heterosexual acquisition of
    infection cannot be excluded.  None of the 103 workers who had
    contamination of mucous membranes or nonintact skin and whose serum
 had
    been tested at least 180 days after exposure developed serologic
    evidence of HIV infection.
    Two other ongoing prospective studies assess the risk of nosocomial
    acquisition of HIV infection among health-care workers in the
 United
    States.  As of April 1988, the National Institutes of Health had
 tested
    983 health-care workers,  137 with documented needle-stick injuries
 and
    345 health-care workers who had sustained mucousmembrane exposures
 to
    blood or other body fluids of HIV-infected patients; none had
    seroconverted (17) (one health-care worker who subsequently
 experienced
    an occupational HIV seroconversion has since been reported from NIH
    Õ18å).  As of March 15, 1988, a similar study at the University of
    California of 212 health-care workers with 625 documented
 accidental
    parenteral exposures involving HIV-infected patients had
    
identified one seroconversion following a needle stick (19).
    Prospective studies in the United Kingdom and Canada show no
 evidence
    of HIV transmission among 220 health-care workers with parenteral,
    mucous-membrane, or cutaneous exposures (20,21).
    In addition to the health-care workers enrolled in these
 longitudinal
    surveillance studies, case histories have been published in the
    scientific literature for 19 HIV-infected health-care workers (13
 with
    documented seroconversion and 6 without documented seroconversion).
    None of these workers reported nonoccupational risk factors.  
    Emergency medical service and public-safety workers
    In addition to the one paramedic with undetermined risk discussed
    above, three public-safety workers (law-enforcement officers) are
    classified in the undetermined risk group.  Follow-up
 investigations of
    these workers could not determine conclusively if HIV infection was
    acquired during the performance of job duties.
    II.Principles of Infection Control and Their Application to
 Emergency
    and Public-Safety Workers  
    General Infection Control
    Within the health-care setting, general infection control
 procedures
    have been developed to minimize the risk of patient acquisition of
    infection from contact with contaminated devices, objects, or
 surfaces
    or of transmission of an infectious agent from health-care workers
 to
    patients (1,2,3).  Such procedures also protect workers from the
 risk
    of becoming infected.  General infection-control procedures are
    designed to prevent transmission of a wide range of microbiological
    agents and to provide a wide margin of safety in the varied
 situations
    encountered in the health-care environment.
    General infection-control principles are applicable to other work
    environments where workers contact other individuals and where
    transmission of infectious agents may occur.  The modes of
 transmission
    noted in the hospital and medical office environment are observed
 in
    the work situations of emergency and public-safety workers, as
 well.
    Therefore, the principles of infection control developed for
 hospital
    and other health-care settings are also applicable to these work
    situations.  Use of general infection control measures, as adapted
 to
    the work environments of emergency and public-safety workers, is
    important to protect both workers and individuals with whom they
 work
    from a variety of infectious agents, not just HIV and HBV.
    Because emergency and public-safety workers work in environments
 that
    provide inherently unpredictable risks of exposures, general
    infection-control procedures should be adapted to these work
    situations.  Exposures are unpredictable, and protective measures
 may
    often be used in situations that do not appear to present risk.
    Emergency and public-safety workers perform their duties in the
    community under extremely variable conditions; thus, control
 measures
    that are simple and uniform across all situations have the greatest
    likelihood of worker compliance. Administrative procedures to
 ensure
    compliance also can be more readily developed than when procedures
 are
    complex and highly variable.
    B.Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions to Prevent
 Occupational
    HIV and HBV Transmission
    In 1985, CDC developed the strategy of "universal blood and body
 fluid
    precautions" to address concerns regarding transmission of HIV in
 the
    health-care setting (4).  The concept, now referred to simply as
    "universal precautions" stresses that all patients should be
 assumed to
    be infectious for HIV and other blood-borne pathogens.  In the
 hospital
    and other health-care setting, "universal precautions" should be
    followed when workers are exposed to blood, certain other body
 fluids
    (amniotic fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, pleural
 fluid,
    synovial fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, semen, and vaginal
 secretions), or
    any body fluid visibly contaminated with blood.  Since HIV and HBV
    transmission has not been documented from exposure to other body
 fluids
    (feces, nasal secretions, sputum, sweat, tears, urine, and
 vomitus),
    "universal precautions" do not apply to these fluids.  Universal
    precautions also do not apply to saliva, except in the dental
 setting,
    where saliva is likely to be contaminated with blood (7).
    For the purpose of this document, human "exposure" is defined as
    contact with blood or other body fluids to which universal
 precautions
    apply through percutaneous inoculation or contact with an open
 wound,
    nonintact skin, or mucous membrane during the performance of normal
 job
    duties.  An "exposed worker" is defined, for the purposes of this
    document, as an individual exposed, as described above, while
    performing normal job duties.
    The unpredictable and emergent nature of exposures encountered by
    emergency and public-safety workers may make differentiation
 between
    hazardous body fluids and those which are not hazardous very
 difficult
    and often impossible.  For example, poor lighting may limit the
    worker's ability to detect visible blood in vomitus or feces.
    Therefore, when emergency medical and public-safety workers
 encounter
    body fluids under uncontrolled, emergency circumstances in which
    differentiation between fluid types is difficult, if not
 impossible,
    they should treat all body fluids as potentially hazardous.
    The application of the principles of universal precautions to the
    situations encountered by these workers results in the development
 of
    guidelines (listed below) for work practices, use of personal
    protective equipment, and other protective measures.  To minimize
 the
    risks of acquiring HIV and HBV during performance of job duties,
    emergency and public-safety workers should be protected from
 exposure
    to blood and other body fluids as circumstances dictate. Protection
 can
    be achieved through adherence to work ractices designed to minimize
 or
    eliminate exposure and through use of personal protective equipment
    (i.e., gloves, masks, and protective clothing), which provide a
 barrier
    between the worker and the exposure source.  In some situations,
    redesign of selected aspects of the job through equipment
 modifications
    or environmental control can further reduce risk.  These approaches
 to
    primary prevention should be used together to achieve maximal
 reduction
    of the risk of exposure.
    If exposure of an individual worker occurs, medical management,
    consisting of collection of pertinent medical and occupational
 history,
    provision of treatment, and counseling regarding future work and
    personal behaviors, may reduce risk of developing disease as a
 result
    of the exposure episode (22).  Following episodic (or continuous)
    exposure, decontamination and disinfection of the work environment,
    devices, equipment, and clothing or other forms of personal
 protective
    equipment can reduce subsequent risk of exposures.  Proper disposal
 of
    contaminated waste has similar benefits.
    III. Employer Responsibilities  
    General
    Detailed recommendations for employer responsibilities in
 protecting
    workers from acquisition of blood-borne diseases in the workplace
 have
    been published in the Department of Labor and Department of Health
 and
    Human Services Joint Advisory Notice and are summarized here (6).
  In
    developing programs to protect workers, employers should follow a
    series of steps:  1) classification of work activity, 2)
 development of
    standard operating procedures, 3) provision of training and
 education,
    4) development of procedures to ensure and monitor compliance, and
 5)
    workplace redesign. As a first step, every employer should classify
    work activities into one of three categories of potential exposure
    (Table 3).  Employers should make protective equipment available to
 all
    workers when they are engaged in Category I or II activities.
    Employers should ensure that the appropriate protective equipment
 is
    used by workers when they perform Category I activities.
    
     As a second step, employers should establish a detailed work
    practices program that includes standard operating procedures
 (SOPs)
    for all activities having the potential for exposure.  Once these
 SOPs
    are developed, an initial and periodic worker education program to
    assure familiarity with work practices should be provided to
    potentially exposed workers.  No worker should engage in such tasks
 or
    activities before receiving training pertaining to the SOPs, work
    practices, and protective equipment required for that task.
  Examples
    of personal protective equipment for the prehospital setting
 (defined
    as a setting where delivery of emergency health care takes place
 away
    from a hospital or other health-care setting) are provided in Table
 4.
    (A curriculum for such training programs is being developed in
    conjunction with these guidelines and should be consulted for
 further
    information concerning such training programs.)
    To facilitate and monitor compliance with SOPs, administrative
    procedures should be developed and records kept as described in the
    Joint Advisory Notice (6). Employers should monitor the workplace
 to
    ensure that required work practices are observed and that
 protective
    clothing and equipment are provided and properly used.  The
 employer
    should maintain records documenting the administrative procedures
 used
    to classify job activities and copies of all SOPs for tasks or
    activities involving predictable or unpredictable exposure to blood
 or
    other body fluids to which universal precautions apply.  In
 addition,
    training records, indicating the dates of training sessions, the
    content of those training sessions along with the names of all
 persons
    conducting the training, and the names of all those receiving
 training
    should also be maintained.
    Whenever possible, the employer should identify devices and other
    approaches to modifying the work environment which will reduce
 exposure
    risk.  Such approaches are desirable, since they don't require
    individual worker action or management activity.  For example,
 jails
    and correctional facilities should have classification procedures
 that
    require the segregation of offenders who indicate through their
 actions
    or words that they intend to attack correctional-facility staff
 with
    the intent of transmitting HIV or HBV.  
    Medical
    In addition to the general responsibilities noted above, the
 employer
    has the specific responsibility to make available to the worker a
    program of medical management.  This program is designed to provide
 for
    the reduction of risk of infection by HBV and for counseling
 workers
    concerning issues regarding HIV and HBV.  These services should be
    provided by a licensed health professional.  All phases of
    
medical management and counseling should ensure that the
    confidentiality of the worker's and client's medical data is
    protected.  
        Hepatitis B vaccination
        All workers whose jobs involve participation in tasks or activities
        with exposure to blood or other body fluids to which universal
        precautions apply (as defined above on page ) should be vaccinated
 with
        hepatitis B vaccine.
        2.Management of percutaneous exposure to blood and other infectious
        body fluids
        Once an exposure has occurred (as defined above), a blood sample
        should be drawn after consent is obtained from the individual from
 whom
        exposure occurred and tested for hepatitis B surface antigen
 (HBsAg)
        and antibody to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV antibody).  Local
        laws regarding consent for testing source individuals should be
        followed.  Policies should be available for testing source
 individuals
        in situations where consent cannot be obtained (e.g., an
 unconscious
        patient).  Testing of the source individual should be done at a
        location where appropriate pretest counseling is available;
 posttest
        counseling and referral for treatment should be provided.  It is
        extremely important that all individuals who seek consultation for
 any
        HIV-related concerns receive counseling as outlined in the "Public
        Health Service Guidelines for Counseling and Antibody Testing to
        Prevent HIV Infection and AIDS" (22).  
            Hepatitis  B  virus  postexposure  management   For  an  exposure  to  a  source
individual found to be positive for
 HBsAg,
        the worker who has not previously been given hepatitis B vaccine
 should
        receive the vaccine series.  A single dose of hepatitis B immune
        globulin (HBIG) is also recommended, if this can be given within 7
 days
        of exposure.  For exposures from an HBsAg-positive source to
 workers
        who have previously received vaccine, the exposed worker should be
        tested for antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), and
        given one dose of vaccine and one dose of HBIG if the antibody
 level in
        the worker's blood sample is inadequate (i.e., 10 SRU by RIA,
 negative
        by EIA) (7).
        If the source individual is negative for HBsAg and the worker has
 not
        been vaccinated, this opportunity should be taken to provide
 hepatitis
        B vaccination.
        
If the source individual refuses testing or he/she cannot be
        identified, the unvaccinated worker should receive the hepatitis B
        vaccine series. HBIG administration should be considered on an
        individual basis when the source individual is known or suspected
 to be
        at high risk of HBV infection.  Management and treatment, if any,
 of
        previously vaccinated workers who receive an exposure from a source
 who
        refuses testing or is not identifiable should be individualized
 (7).
        b.Human immunodeficiency virus postexposure management
        For any exposure to a source individual who has AIDS, who is found
 to
        be positive for HIV infection (4), or who refuses testing, the
 worker
        should be counseled regarding the risk of infection and evaluated
        clinically and serologically for evidence of HIV infection as soon
 as
        possible after the exposure.  In view of the evolving nature of HIV
        postexposure management, the health-care provider should be well
        informed of current PHS guidelines on this subject.  The worker
 should
        be advised to report and seek medical evaluation for any acute
 febrile
        illness that occurs within 12 weeks after the exposure.  Such an
        illness, particularly one characterized by fever, rash, or
        lymphadenopathy, may be indicative of recent HIV infection.
 Following
        the initial test at the time of exposure, seronegative workers
 should
        be retested 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months after exposure to
 determine
        whether transmission has occurred. During this follow-up period
        (especially the first 6-12 weeks after exposure, when most infected
        persons are expected to seroconvert), exposed workers should follow
        U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) recommendations for preventing
        transmission of HIV (22).  These include refraining from blood
 donation
        and using appropriate protection during sexual intercourse (23).
        During all phases of follow-up, it is vital that worker
 confidentiality
        be protected.
        If the source individual was tested and found to be seronegative,
        baseline testing of the exposed worker with follow-up testing 12
 weeks
        later may be performed if desired by the worker or
        recommended by the health-care provider.
        If the source individual cannot be identified, decisions regarding
        appropriate follow-up should be individualized.  Serologic testing
        should be made available by the employer to all workers who may
        
be concerned they have been infected with HIV through an
 occupational
        exposure as defined above.  
        Management of human bites
        On occasion, police and correctional-facility officers are
        intentionally bitten by suspects or prisoners. When such bites
 occur,
        routine medical and surgical therapy (including an assessment of
        tetanus vaccination status) should be implemented as soon as
 possible,
        since such bites frequently result in infection with organisms
 other
        than HIV and HBV.  Victims of bites should be evaluated as
 described
        above for exposure to blood or other infectious body fluids.
        Saliva of some persons infected with HBV has been shown to contain
        HBV-DNA at concentrations 1/1,000 to 1/10,000 of that found in the
        infected person's serum (5,24).  HbsAg-positive saliva has been
 shown
        to be infectious when injected into experimental animals and in
 human
        bite exposures (25-27).  However, HBsAg-positive saliva has not
 been
        shown to be infectious when applied to oral mucous membranes in
        experimental primate studies (27) or through contamination of
 musical
        instruments or cardiopulmonary resuscitation dummies used by HBV
        carriers (28,29). Epidemiologic studies of nonsexual household
 contacts
        of HIV-infected patients, including several small series in which
 HIV
        transmission failed to occur after bites or after percutaneous
        inoculation or contamination of cuts and open wounds with saliva
 from
        HIV-infected patients, suggest that the potential for salivary
        transmission of HIV is remote (5,30-33).  One case report from
 Germany
        has suggested the possibility of transmission of HIV in a household
        setting from an infected child to a sibling through a human bite
 (34).
        The bite did not break the skin or result in bleeding. Since the
 date
        of seroconversion to HIV was not known for either child in this
 case,
        evidence for the role of saliva in the transmission of virus is
 unclear
        (34).)  
        Documentation of exposure and reporting
        As part of the confidential medical record, the circumstances of
        exposure should be recorded.  Relevant information includes the
        activity in which the worker was engaged at the time of exposure,
 the
        extent to which appropriate work practices and protective equipment
        were used, and a description of the source of exposure.
        Employers have a responsibility under various federal and state
 laws
        and regulations to report occupational illnesses and injuries.
        Existing programs in the
        
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
        (NIOSH), Department of Health and Human Services; the Bureau of
 Labor
        Statistics, Department of Labor (DOL); and the Occupational Safety
 and
        Health Administration (DOL) receive such information for the
 purposes
        of surveillance and other objectives.  Cases of infectious disease,
        including AIDS and HBV infection, are reported to the Centers for
        Disease Control through State health departments.  
        Management of HBV- or HIV-infected workers
        Transmission of HBV from health-care workers to patients has been
        documented.  Such transmission has occurred during certain types of
        invasive procedures (e.g., oral and gynecologic surgery) in which
        health-care workers, when tested, had very high concentrations of
 HBV
        in their blood (at least 100 million infectious virus particles per
        milliliter, a concentration much higher than occurs with HIV
        infection), and the health-care workers sustained a puncture wound
        while performing invasive procedures or had exudative or weeping
        lesions or microlacerations that allowed virus to contaminate
        instruments or open wounds of patients (35,36).  A worker who is
 HBsAg
        positive and who has transmitted hepatitis B virus to another
        individual during the performance of his or her job duties should
 be
        excluded from the performance of those job duties which place other
 indi
        viduals at risk for acquisition of hepatitis B infection.
        Workers with impaired immune systems resulting from HIV infection
 or
        other causes are at increased risk of acquiring or experiencing
 serious
        complications of infectious disease.  Of particular concern is the
 risk
        of severe infection following exposure to other persons with
 infectious
        diseases that are easily transmitted if appropriate precautions are
 not
        taken (e.g., measles, varicella).  Any worker with an impaired
 immune
        system should be counseled about the potential risk associated with
        providing health care to persons with any transmissible infection
 and
        should continue to follow existing recommendations for infection
        control to minimize risk of exposure to other infectious agents
 (2,3).
        Recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
 (ACIP)
        and institutional policies concerning requirements for vaccinating
        workers with live-virus vaccines (e.g., measles, rubella) should
 also
        be considered.
        The question of whether workers infected with HIV can adequately
 and
        safely be allowed to perform patient-care duties or whether their
 work
        assignments should be changed must be determined on an individual
        basis.  These decisions should be made by the worker's
        
personal physician(s) in conjunction with the employer's medical
        advisors.
        C.   Disinfection, Decontamination, and Disposal
        As described in Section I.C., the only documented occupational
 risks
        of HIV and HBV infection are associated with parenteral (including
 open
        wound) and mucous membrane exposure to blood and other potentially
        infectious body fluids.  Nevertheless, the precautions described
 below
        should be routinely followed.  
        Needle and sharps disposal
        All workers should take precautions to prevent injuries caused by
        needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp instruments or devices
 during
        procedures; when cleaning used instruments; during disposal of used
        needles; and when handling sharp instruments after procedures.  To
        prevent needle-stick injuries, needles should not be recapped,
        purposely bent or broken by hand, removed from disposable syringes,
 or
        otherwise manipulated by hand.  After they are used, disposable
        syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp items should
 be
        placed in puncture-resistant containers for disposal; the
        puncture-resistant containers should be located as close as
 practical
        to the use area (e.g., in the ambulance or, if sharps are carried
 to
        the scene of victim assistance from the ambulance, a small
        puncture-resistant container should be carried to the scene, as
 well).
        Reusable needles should be left on the syringe body and should be
        placed in a puncture-resistant container for transport to the
        reprocessing area.  
        Hand washing
        Hands and other skin surfaces should be washed immediately and
        thoroughly if contaminated with blood, other body fluids to which
        universal precautions apply, or potentially contaminated articles.
        Hands should always be washed after gloves are removed, even if the
        gloves appear to be intact.  Hand washing should be completed using
 the
        appropriate facilities, such as utility or restroom sinks.
  Waterless
        antiseptic hand cleanser should be provided on responding units to
 use
        when hand-washing facilities are not available.  When hand-washing
        facilities are available, wash hands with warm water and soap.
  When
        hand-washing facilities are not available, use a waterless
 antiseptic
        hand cleanser.  The manufacturer's recommendations for the product
        should be followed.  3.   Cleaning, disinfecting, and sterilizing
  Table 5 presents the methods and applications for cleaning,
disinfecting, and sterilizing equipment and surfaces in the
 prehospital
setting.  These methods also apply to housekeeping and other
 cleaning
tasks. Previously issued guidelines for health-care workers contain
 more  detailed descriptions (4).
4.   Cleaning and decontaminating spills of blood
All spills of blood and blood-contaminated fluids should be
 promptly
cleaned up using an EPA-approved germicide or a 1:100 solution of
household bleach in the following manner while wearing gloves.
  Visible
material should first be removed with disposable towels or other
appropriate means that will ensure against direct contact with
 blood.
If splashing is anticipated, protective eyewear should be worn
 along
with an impervious gown or apron which provides an effective
 barrier to
splashes.  The area should then be decontaminated with an
 appropriate
germicide.  Hands should be washed following removal of gloves.
  Soiled
cleaning equipment should be cleaned and decontaminated or placed
 in an
appropriate container and disposed of according to agency policy.
Plastic bags should be available for removal of contaminated items
 from
the site of the spill.
Shoes and boots can become contaminated with blood in certain
instances.  Where there is massive blood contamination on floors,
 the
use of disposable impervious shoe coverings should be considered.
Protective gloves should be worn to remove contaminated shoe
coverings.  The coverings and gloves should be disposed of in
 plastic
bags.  A plastic bag should be included in the crime scene kit or
 the
car which is to be used for the disposal of contaminated items.
  Extra
plastic bags should be stored in the police cruiser or emergency
vehicle.
5.   Laundry
Although soiled linen may be contaminated with pathogenic
microorganisms, the risk of actual disease transmission is
 negligible.
Rather than rigid procedures and specifications, hygienic storage
 and
processing of clean and soiled linen are recommended. Laundry
facilities and/or services should be made routinely available by
 the
employer.  Soiled linen should be handled as little as possible and
with minimum agitation to prevent gross microbial contamination of
 the
air and of persons handling the linen.  All soiled linen should be
bagged at the location where it was used.  Linen soiled with blood
should be placed and transported in bags that prevent leakage.
  Normal
laundry cycles should be used according to the washer and detergent
manufacturers' recommendations.
6.   Decontamination and laundering of protective clothing
Protective work clothing contaminated with blood or other body
 fluids
to which universal precautions apply should be placed and
 transported
in bags or containers that prevent leakage.  Personnel involved in
 the
bagging, transport, and laundering of contaminated clothing should
 wear
gloves.  Protective clothing and station and work uniforms should
 be
washed and dried according to the manufacturer's instructions.
  Boots
and leather goods may be brush-scrubbed with soap and hot water to
remove contamination.
7.   Infective waste
The selection of procedures for disposal of infective waste is
determined by the relative risk of disease transmission and
 application
of local regulations, which vary widely.  In all cases, local
regulations should be consulted prior to disposal procedures and
followed.  Infective waste, in general, should either be
 incinerated or
should be decontaminated before disposal in a sanitary landfill.
  Bulk
blood, suctioned fluids, excretions, and secretions may be
 carefully
poured down a drain connected to a sanitary sewer, where permitted.
Sanitary sewers may also be used to dispose of other infectious
 wastes
capable of being ground and flushed into the sewer, where
 permitted.
Sharp items should be placed in puncture-proof containers and other
blood-contaminated items should be placed in leak-proof plastic
 bags
for transport to an appropriate disposal location.
Prior to the removal of protective equipment, personnel remaining
 on
the scene after the patient has been cared for should carefully
 search
for and remove contaminated materials.  Debris should be disposed
 of as
noted above.
IV.  Fire and Emergency Medical Services
The guidelines that appear in this section apply to fire and
 emergency
medical services.  This includes structural fire fighters,
 paramedics,
emergency medical technicians, and advanced life support personnel.
Fire fighters often provide emergency medical services and
 therefore
encounter the exposures common to paramedics and emergency medical
technicians.  Job duties are often performed in uncontrolled
environments, which, due to a lack of time and other factors, do
 not
allow for application of a complex decision-making process to the
emergency at hand.
The general principles presented here have been developed from
 existing
principles of occupational safety and health in Šconjunction with
 data
from studies of health-care workers in hospital settings.  The
 basic
premise is that workers must be protected from exposure to blood
 and
other potentially infectious body fluids in the course of their
 work
activities.  There is a paucity of data concerning the risks these
worker groups face, however, which complicates development of
 control
principles. Thus, the guidelines presented below are based on
principles of prudent public health practice.
Fire and emergency medical service personnel are engaged in
 delivery of
medical care in the prehospital setting.  The following guidelines
 are
intended to assist these personnel in making decisions concerning
 use
of personal protective equipment and resuscitation equipment, as
 well
as for decontamination, disinfection, and disposal procedures.  
    Personal Protective Equipment
    Appropriate personal protective equipment should be made available
    routinely by the employer to reduce the risk of exposure as defined
    above.  For many situations, the chance that the rescuer will be
    exposed to blood and other body fluids to which universal
 precautions
    apply can be determined in advance.  Therefore, if the chances of
 being
    exposed to blood is high (e.g., CPR, IV insertion, trauma,
 delivering
    babies), the worker should put on protective attire before
 beginning
    patient care.  Table 4 sets forth examples of recommendations for
    personal protective equipment in the prehospital setting; the list
 is
    not intended to be all-inclusive.  
        Gloves
        Disposable gloves should be a standard component of emergency
 response
        equipment, and should be donned by all personnel prior to
 initiating
        any emergency patient care tasks involving exposure to blood or
 other
        body fluids to which universal precautions apply.  Extra pairs
 should
        always be available.  Considerations in the choice of disposable
 gloves
        should include dexterity, durability, fit, and the task being
        performed.  Thus, there is no single type or thickness of glove
        appropriate for protection in all situations. For situations where
        large amounts of blood are likely to be encountered, it is
 important
        that gloves fit tightly at the wrist to prevent blood contamination
 of
        hands around the cuff.  For multiple trauma victims, gloves should
 be
        changed between patient contacts, if the emergency situation
 allows.
        Greater personal protective equipment measures are indicated for
        situations where broken glass and sharp edges are likely to be
        encountered, such as extricating a person from an automobile wreck.
        Structural fire-fighting gloves that meet the Federal OSHA
        
requirements for fire-fighters gloves (as contained in 29 CFR
 1910.156
        or National Fire Protection Association Standard 1973, Gloves for
        Structural Fire Fighters) should be worn in any situation where
 sharp
        or rough surfaces are likely to be encountered (37).
        While wearing gloves, avoid handling personal items, such as combs
 and
        pens, that could become soiled or contaminated.  Gloves that have
        become contaminated with blood or other body fluids to which
 universal
        precautions apply should be removed as soon as possible, taking
 care to
        avoid skin contact with the exterior surface.  Contaminated gloves
        should be placed and transported in bags that prevent leakage and
        should be disposed of or, in the case of reusable gloves, cleaned
 and
        disinfected properly.  
        Masks, eyewear, and gowns
        Masks, eyewear, and gowns should be present on all emergency
 vehicles
        that respond or potentially respond to medical emergencies or
 victim
        rescues.  These protective barriers should be used in accordance
 with
        the level of exposure encountered.  Minor lacerations or small
 amounts
        of blood do not merit the same extent of barrier use as required
 for
        exsanguinating victims or massive arterial bleeding.  Management of
 the
        patient who is not bleeding, and who has no bloody body fluids
 present,
        should not routinely require use of barrier precautions.  Masks and
        eyewear (e.g., safety glasses) should be worn together, or a
 faceshield
        should be used by all personnel prior to any situation where
 splashes
        of blood or other body fluids to which universal precautions apply
 are
        likely to occur.  Gowns or aprons should be worn to protect
 clothing
        from splashes with blood.  If large splashes or quantities of blood
 are
        present or anticipated, impervious gowns or aprons should be worn.
  An e
        xtra change of work clothing should be available at all times.  
        Resuscitation equipment
        No transmission of HBV or HIV infection during mouth-to-mouth
        resuscitation has been documented. However, because of the risk of
        salivary transmission of other infectious diseases (e.g., herpes
        simplex and Neisseria meningitidis) and the theoretical risk of HIV
 and
        HBV transmission during artificial ventilation of trauma victims,
        disposable airway equipment or resuscitation bags should be used.
        Disposable resuscitation equipment and devices should be used once
 and
        disposed of or, if reusable,thoroughly cleaned and disinfected
 after
        each use according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
        
Mechanical respiratory assist devices (e.g., bag-valve masks,
 oxygen
        demand valve resuscitators) should be available on all emergency
        vehicles and to all emergency response personnel that respond or
        potentially respond to medical emergencies or victim rescues.
        Pocket mouth-to-mouth resuscitation masks designed to isolate
 emergency
        response personnel (i.e., double lumen systems) from contact with
        victims' blood and blood-contaminated saliva, respiratory
 secretions,
        and vomitus should be provided to all personnel who provide or
 potential
        ly provide emergency treatment.
        V.   Law-Enforcement and Correctional-Facility Officers
        Law-enforcement and correctional-facility officers may face the
 risk of
        exposure to blood during the conduct of their duties. For example,
 at
        the crime scene or during processing of suspects, law-enforcement
        officers may encounter blood-contaminated hypodermic needles or
        weapons, or be called upon to assist with body removal.
        Correctional-facility officers may similarly be required to search
        prisoners or their cells for hypodermic needles or weapons, or
 subdue
        violent and combative inmates.
        The following section presents information for reducing the risk of
        acquiring HIV and HBV infection by law-enforcement and
        correctional-facility officers as a consequence of carrying out
 their
        duties.  However, there is an extremely diverse range of potential
        situations which may occur in the control of persons with
        unpredictable, violent, or psychotic behavior.  Therefore, informed
        judgment of the individual officer is paramount when unusual
        circumstances or events arise.  These recommendations should serve
 as
        an adjunct to rational decision making in those situations where
        specific guidelines do not exist, particularly where immediate
 action
        is required to preserve life or prevent significant injury.
        The following guidelines are arranged into three sections:  a
 section
        addressing concerns shared by both law-enforcement and
        correctional-facility officers, and two sections dealing separately
        with law-enforcement officers and correctional-facility officers,
        respectively.  Table 4 contains selected examples of personal
        protective equipment that may be employed by law-enforcement and
        correctional-facility officers.  
        Law-Enforcement and Correctional-Facilities Considerations  
            Fights and assaults
            Law-enforcement and correctional-facility officers are exposed to a
            range of assaultive and disruptive behavior through which they may
            potentially become exposed to blood or other body fluids containing
            blood.  Behaviors of particular concern are biting,
            attacks resulting in blood exposure, and attacks with sharp
 objects.
            Such behaviors may occur in a range of law-enforcement situations
            including arrests, routine interrogations, domestic disputes, and
            lockup operations, as well as in correctional-facility activities.
            Hand-to-hand combat may result in bleeding and may thus incur a
 greater
            chance for blood-to-blood exposure, which increases the chances for
            blood-borne disease transmission.
            Whenever the possibility for exposure to blood or
 blood-contaminated
            body fluids exists, the appropriate protection should be worn, if
            feasible under the circumstances.  In all cases, extreme caution
 must
            be used in dealing with the suspect or prisoner if there is any
            indication of assaultive or combative behavior. When blood is
 present
            and a suspect or an inmate is combative or threatening to staff,
 gloves
            should always be put on as soon as conditions permit.  In case of
 blood
            contamination of clothing, an extra change of clothing should be
            available at all times.  
            Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
            Law-enforcement and correctional personnel are also concerned about
            infection with HIV and HBV through administration of
 cardiopulmonary
            resuscitation (CPR). Although there have been no documented cases
 of
            HIV transmission through this mechanism, the possibility of
            transmission of other infectious diseases exists. Therefore,
 agencies
            should make protective masks or airways available to officers and
            provide training in their proper use.  Devices with one-way valves
 to
            prevent the patients' saliva or vomitus from entering the
 caregiver's
            mouth are preferable.
            B.   Law-Enforcement Considerations  
            Searches and evidence handling
            Criminal justice personnel have potential risks of acquiring HBV or
            HIV infection through exposures which occur during searches and
            evidence handling. Penetrating injuries are known to occur, and
            puncture wounds or needle sticks in particular pose a hazard during
            searches of persons, vehicles, or cells, and during evidence
 handling.
            The following precautionary measures will help to reduce the risk
 of
            infection:
            An officer should use great caution in searching the clothing of
            suspects.  Individual discretion, based on the circumstances at
 hand,
            should determine if a suspect or prisoner should empty his own
 pockets
            or if the officer should use his
            
own skills in determining the contents of a suspect's clothing.
            A safe distance should always be maintained between the officer and
 the  suspect.
Wear protective gloves if exposure to blood is likely to be
encountered.
Wear protective gloves for all body cavity searches.
If cotton gloves are to be worn when working with evidence of
potential latent fingerprint value at the crime scene, they can be
 worn
over protective disposable gloves when exposure to blood may occur.
Always carry a flashlight, even during daylight shifts, to search
hidden areas.  Whenever possible, use long-handled mirrors and
flashlights to search such areas (e.g., under car seats).
If searching a purse, carefully empty contents directly from purse,
 by
turning it upside down over a table.
Use puncture-proof containers to store sharp instruments and
 clearly
marked plastic bags to store other possibly contaminated items.
To avoid tearing gloves, use evidence tape instead of metal staples
 to
seal evidence.Local procedures for evidence handling should be
followed.  In general, items should be air dried before sealing in
plastic.
Not all types of gloves are suitable for conducting searches.
  Vinyl
or latex rubber gloves provide little protection against sharp
instruments, and they are not puncture-proof.  There is a direct
trade-off between level of protection and manipulability.  In other
words, the thicker the gloves, the more protection they provide,
 but
the less effective they are in locating objects.  Thus, there is no
single type or thickness of glove appropriate for protection in all
situations. Officers should select the type and thickness of glove
which provides the best balance of protection and search
 efficiency.
Officers and crime scene technicians may confront unusual hazards,
especially when the crime scene involves violent behavior, such as
 a
homicide where large amounts of blood are present.  Protective
 gloves
should be available and worn in this setting.  In addition, for
 very
large spills, consideration should be given to other protective
clothing, such as overalls, aprons, boots, or protective shoe
 covers.
They should be changed if torn or soiled, and always removed prior
 to
leaving the scene.  While wearing gloves, avoid handling personal
 items,  such as combs and pens, that could become soiled or contaminated.
 Face
masks and eye protection or a face shield are required for
 laboratory
and evidence technicians whose jobs which entail potential
 exposures to
blood via a splash to the face, mouth, nose, or eyes. Airborne
 particles  of dried blood may be generated when a stain is scraped. It is
recommended that protective masks and eyewear or face shields be
 worn
by laboratory or evidence technicians when removing the blood stain
 for
laboratory analyses.
While processing the crime scene, personnel should be alert for the
presence of sharp objects such as hypodermic needles, knives,
 razors,
broken glass, nails, or other sharp objects.
2.   Handling deceased persons and body removal
For detectives, investigators, evidence technicians, and others who
may have to touch or remove a body, the response should be the same
 as
for situations requiring CPR or first aid:  wear gloves and cover
 all
cuts and abrasions to create a barrier and carefully wash all
 exposed
areas after any contact with blood.  The precautions to be used
 with
blood and deceased persons should also be used when handling
 amputated
limbs, hands, or other body parts.  Such procedures should be
 followed
after contact with the blood of anyone, regardless of whether they
 are
known or suspected to be infected with HIV or HBV.
3.   Autopsies
Protective masks and eyewear (or face shields), laboratory coats,
gloves, and waterproof aprons should be worn when performing or
attending all autopsies. All autopsy material should be considered
infectious for both HIV and HBV.  Onlookers with an opportunity for
exposure to blood splashes should be similarly protected.
  Instruments
and surfaces contaminated during postmortem procedures should be
decontaminated with an appropriate chemical germicide (4).  Many
laboratories have more detailed standard operating procedures for
conducting autopsies; where available, these should be followed.
  More
detailed recommendations for health-care workers in this setting
 have
been published (4).
4.   Forensic laboratories
Blood from all individuals should be considered infective.  To
supplement other worksite precautions, the following precautions
 are
recommended for workers in forensic laboratories.
a.All specimens of blood should be put in a well-constructed,
appropriately labelled container with a secure lid to prevent
 leaking
during transport.  Care should be taken when collecting each
 specimen
to avoid contaminating the outside of the container and of the
laboratory form accompanying the specimen.
b.All persons processing blood specimens should wear gloves.  Masks
and protective eyewear or face shields should be worn if
mucous-membrane contact with blood is anticipated (e.g., removing
 tops
from vacuum tubes).  Hands should be washed after completion of
 specimen  processing.
c.For routine procedures, such as histologic and pathologic studies
or microbiological culturing, a biological safety cabinet is not
necessary. However, biological safety cabinets (Class I or II)
 should
be used whenever procedures are conducted that have a high
 potential
for generating droplets.  These include activities such as
 blending,
sonicating, and vigorous mixing.
d.Mechanical pipetting devices should be used for manipulating all
liquids in the laboratory.  Mouth pipetting must not be done.
e.Use of needles and syringes should be limited to situations in
which there is no alternative, and the recommendations for
 preventing
injuries with needles outlined under universal precautions should
 be
followed.
f.Laboratory work surfaces should be cleaned of visible materials
 and
then decontaminated with an appropriate chemical germicide after a
spill of blood, semen, or blood-contaminated body fluid and when
 work
activities are completed.
g.Contaminated materials used in laboratory tests should be
decontaminated  before reprocessing or be placed in bags and
 disposed
of in accordance with institutional and local regulatory policies
 for
disposal of infective waste.
 h.   Scientific equipment that has been contaminated
with blood should be cleaned and then decontaminated before being
repaired in the laboratory or transported to the manufacturer.
i.All persons should wash their hands after completing laboratory
activities and should remove protective clothing before leaving the
laboratory.
j.Area posting of warning signs should be considered to remind
employees of continuing hazard of infectious disease transmission
 in
the laboratory setting.
C.   Correctional-Facility Considerations  
    Searches
    Penetrating injuries are known to occur in the
 correctional-facility
    setting, and puncture wounds or needle sticks in particular pose a
    hazard during searches of prisoners or their cells.  The following
    precautionary measures will help to reduce the risk of infection:
    A correctional-facility officer should use great caution in
 searching
    the clothing of prisoners. Individual discretion, based on the
    circumstances at hand, should determine if a prisoner should empty
 his
    own pockets or if the officer should use his own skills in
 determining
    the contents of a prisoner's clothing.
    A safe distance should always be maintained between the officer and
    the prisoner.
    Always carry a flashlight, even during daylight shifts, to search
    hidden areas.  Whenever possible, use long-handled mirrors and
    flashlights to search such areas (e.g., under commodes, bunks, and
 in
    vents in jail cells).
    Wear protective gloves if exposure to blood is likely to be
    encountered.
    Wear protective gloves for all body cavity searches.
    Not all types of gloves are suitable for conducting searches.
  Vinyl
    or latex rubber gloves can provide little, if any, protection
 against
    sharp instruments, and they are not puncture-proof.  There is a
 direct
    trade-off between level of protection and manipulability.  In other
    words, the thicker the gloves, the more protection they provide,
 but
    the less effective they are in locating objects.  Thus, there is
    
no single type or thickness of glove appropriate for
    protection in all situations.  Officers should select the type and
    thickness of glove which provides the best balance of protection
 and sea
    rch efficiency.  
    Decontamination and disposal
    Prisoners may spit at officers and throw feces; sometimes these
    substances have been purposefully contaminated with blood.
  Although
    there are no documented cases of HIV or HBV transmission in this
 manner
    and transmission by this route would not be expected to occur,
 other
    diseases could be transmitted.  These materials should be removed
 with
    a paper towel after donning gloves, and the area then
 decontaminated
    with an appropriate germicide. Following clean-up, soiled towels
 and
    gloves should be disposed of properly.
    VI.  References
    1.Garner JS, Favero MS.  Guideline for handwashing and hospital
    environmental control, 1985.  Atlanta:  Public Health Service,
 Centers
    for Disease Control, 1985.  HHS publication no. 99-1117.
    2.Garner JS, Simmons BP.  Guideline for isolation precautions in
    hospitals.  Infect Control 1983; 4 (suppl):245-325.
    3.Williams WW.  Guideline for infection control in hospital
    personnel.  Infect Control 1983; 4(suppl):326-49.
    4.Centers for Disease Control.  Recommendations for prevention of
 HIV
    transmission in health-care settings.  MMWR 1987; 36 (suppl 2S).
    5.Centers for Disease Control.  Update:  Universal precautions for
    prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus,
 hepatitis B
    virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings.
  MMWR
    1988; 37:377-382,387-88.
    6.U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Department of Health and Human
    Services.  Joint Advisory Notice:  protection against occupational
    exposure to hepatitis B virus (HBV) and human immunodeficiency
 virus
    (HIV).  Federal Register 1987; 52:41818-24.
    7.Centers for Disease Control.  Recommendations for protection
 against
    viral hepatitis.  MMWR 1985; 34:313-324, 329-335.
    8.Kunches LM, Craven DE, Werner BG, Jacobs LM.  Hepatitis B
 exposure
    in emergency medical personnel:  prevalence of serologic markers
 and
    need for immunization.  Amer J Med 1983; 75:269-272.
    
9.  Pepe PE, Hollinger FB, Troisi CL, Heiberg D.  Viral hepatitis
 risk
    in urban emergency medical services personnel.  Annals Emergency
 Med
    1986; 15(4):454-457.
    10.Valenzuela TD, Hook EW, Copass MK, Corey L.  Occupational
 exposure
    to hepatitis B in paramedics.  Arch Intern Med 1985; 145:1976-1977.
    11.Morgan-Capner P, Hudson P.  Hepatitis B markers in Lancashire
    police officers.  Epidemiol Inf 1988; 100:145-151.
    12.Peterkin M, Crawford RJ.  Hepatitis B vaccine for police forces
    ÕLetterå?  Lancet 1986; 2:1458-59.
    13.Radvan GH, Hewson EG, Berenger S, Brookman DJ.  The Newcastle
    hepatitis B outbreak:  observations on cause, management, and
    prevention.  Med J Australia 1986; 144:461-464.
    14.Centers for Disease Control.  Inactivated hepatitis B virus
    vaccine.  MMWR 1982; 26:317-322, 327-328.
    15.Centers for Disease Control.  Update on hepatitis B prevention.
    MMWR 1987; 36:353-360, 366.
    16.Marcus R, and the CDC Cooperative Needlestick Surveillance
 Group.
    Surveillance of health care workers exposed to blood from patients
    infected with the human immunodeficiency virus.  N Engl J Med 1988;
    319:1118-23.
    17.Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Saah AJ, Schmitt JM, Lane HC.
 Longitudinal
    assessment of risk for occupational/nosocomial transmission of
 human
    immunodeficiency virus, type 1 in health care workers.  Abstract
 #634;
    presented at the 1988 ICAAC Conference, New Orleans.
    18.Barnes DM.  Health workers and AIDS:  Questions persist. Science
    1988; 241:161-2.
    19.Gerberding JL, Littell CG, Chambers HF, Moss AR, Carlson J, Drew
 W,
    Levy J, Sande MA.  Risk of occupational HIV transmission in
 intensively
    exposed health-care workers: Follow-up.  Abstract #343; presented
 at
    the 1988 ICAAC Conference, New Orleans.
    20.Health and Welfare Canada.  National surveillance program on
    occupational exposures to HIV among health-care workers in Canada.
    Canada Dis Weekly Rep 1987; 13-37:163-6.
    21.McEvoy M, Porter K, Mortimer P, Simmons N, Shanson D.
 Prospective
    study of clinical, laboratory, and ancillary staff with accidental
    exposures to blood or body fluids from patients infected with HIV.
  Br
    Med J 1987; 294:1595-7.
    
22.  Centers for Disease Control.  Public Health Service
 guidelines for
    counseling and antibody testing to prevent HIV infection and AIDS.
  MMWR
    1987; 36:;509-515.
    23.Centers for Disease Control.  Additional recommendations to
 reduce
    sexual and drug abuse-related transmission of human T-lymphotropic
 virus
    type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus.  MMWR 1986; 35:152-55.
    24.Jenison SA, Lemon SM, Baker LN, Newbold JE.  Quantitative
 analysis
    of hepatitis B virus DNA in saliva and semen of chronically
 infected
    homosexual men.  J Infect Dis 1987; 156:299-306.
    25.Cancio-Bello TP, de Medina M, Shorey J, Valledor MD, Schiff ER.
  An
    institutional outbreak of hepatitis B related to a human biting
    carrier.  J Infect Dis 1982; 146:652-6.
    26.MacQuarrie MB, Forghani B, Wolochow DA.  Hepatitis B transmitted
 by
    a human bite.  JAMA 1974; 230:723-4.
    27.Scott RM, Snitbhan R, Bancroft WH, Alter HJ, Tingpalapong M.
    Experimental transmission of hepatitis B virus by semen and saliva.
  J
    Infect Dis 1980; 142:67-71.
    28.Glaser JB, Nadler JP.  Hepatitis B virus in a cardiopulmonary
    resuscitation training course:  Risk of transmission from a surface
    antigen-positive participant. Arch Intern Med 1985; 145:1653-5.
    29.Osterholm MT, Bravo ER, Crosson JT, et al.  Lack of transmission
 of
    viral hepatitis type B after oral exposure to HBsAg-positive
 saliva.  Br
    Med J 1979; 2:1263-4.
    30.Lifson AR.  Do alternate modes for transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus exist?  A review.  JAMA 1988; 259:1353-6.
    31.Friedland GH, Saltzman BR, Rogers MF, et al.  Lack of
 transmission
    of HTLV-III/LAV infection to household contacts of patients with
 AIDS or
    AIDS-related complex with oral candidiasis.  N Engl J Med 1986;
    314:344-9.
    32.Curran JW, Jaffe HW, Hardy AM, et al.  Epidemiology of HIV
 infection
    and AIDS in the United States.  Science 1988; 239:610-6.
    33.Jason JM, McDougal JS, Dixon G, et al.  HTLV-III/LAV antibody
 and
    immune status of household contacts and sexual partners of persons
 with
    hemophilia.  JAMA 1986; 255:212-5.
    34.Wahn V, Kramer HH, Voit T, Brster HT, Scrampical B, Scheid A.
    Horizontal transmission of HIV infection between two siblings
 ÕLetterå.
    Lancet 1986; 2:694.
    
35.  Kane MA, Lettau LA.  Transmission of HBV from dental
 personnel to
    patients.  J Am Dent Assoc 1985; 110:634-6.
    36.Lettau LA, Smith JD, Williams D, et al.  Transmission of
 hepatitis
    B virus with resultant restriction of surgical practice.  JAMA
 1986;
    255:934-7.
    37.International Association of Fire Fighters.  Guidelines to
 prevent
    transmission of communicable disease during emergency care for fire
    fighters, paramedics, and emergency medical technicians.
  International
    Association of Fire Fighters, New York City, New York, 1988.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001450.htm
