A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Guidelines  for  animals  in  healthcare
facilities  from  the  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care
Facilities  (2003).  Animals  in  health-care  facilities  traditionally  have  been  limited  to
laboratories and research areas. However, their presence in patient-care areas is now
more frequent, both in acute-care and long-term care settings, prompting consideration
for the potential transmission of zoonotic pathogens from animals to humans in these
settings.  Although  dogs  and  cats  may  be  commonly  encountered  in  health-care
settings,  other  animals  (e.g.,  fish,  birds,  non-human  primates,  rabbits,  rodents,  and
reptiles) also can be present as research, resident, or service animals. These animals
can serve as sources of zoonotic pathogens that could potentially infect patients and
health-care workers (Table 26).1327–1340 Animals potentially can serve as reservoirs
for  antibiotic-resistant  microorganisms,  which  can  be  introduced  to  the  health-care
setting while the animal is present. VRE have been isolated from both farm animals and
pets,1341  and  a  cat  in  a  geriatric  care  center  was  found  to  be  colonized  with
MRSA.1342  *  Material  in  this  table  is  adapted  from  reference  1331  and  used  with
permission of the publisher (Lippincott Williams and Wilkins). § Reptiles include lizards,
snakes,  and  turtles.  Rodents  include  hamsters,  mice,  and  rats.  +  Indicates  that  the
pathogen  associated  with  the  infection  has  been  isolated  from  animals  and  is
considered to pose potential risk to humans. Zoonoses can be transmitted from animals
to  humans  either  directly  or  indirectly  via  bites,  scratches,  aerosols,  ectoparasites,
accidental ingestion, or contact with contaminated soil, food, water, or unpasteurized
milk.1331,  1332,  1343–1345  Colonization  and  hand  transferral  of  pathogens  acquired
from  pets  in  health-care  workers'  homes  represent  potential  sources  and  modes  of
transmission  of  zoonotic  pathogens  in  health-care  settings.  An  outbreak  of  infections
caused by a yeast (Malassezia pachydermatis) among newborns was traced to transfer
of  the  yeast  from  the  hands  of  health-care  workers  with  pet  dogs  at  home.1346  In
addition,  an  outbreak  of  ringworm  in  a  NICU  caused  by  Microsporum  canis  was
associated with a nurse and her cat,1347 and an outbreak of Rhodococcus (Gordona)
bronchialis sternal SSIs after coronary-artery bypass surgery was traced to a colonized
nurse whose dogs were culture-positive for the organism.1348 In the latter outbreak,
whether  the  dogs  were  the  sole  source  of  the  organism  and  whether  other
environmental  reservoirs  contributed  to  the  outbreak  are  unknown.  Nonetheless,
limited data indicate that outbreaks of infectious disease have occurred as a result of
contact  with  animals  in  areas  housing  immunocompetent  patients.  However,  the  low
frequency of outbreaks may result from Formal scientific studies to evaluate potential
risks of transmission of zoonoses in health-care settings outside of the laboratory are
lacking. Animal-Assisted Activities (AAA) are those programs that enhance the patients'
quality  of  life.  These  programs  allow  patients  to  visit  animals  in  either  a  common,
central location in the facility or in individual patient rooms. A group session with the
animals  enhances  opportunities  for  ambulatory  patients  and  facility  residents  to
interact  with  caregivers,  family  members,  and  volunteers.1349–1351  Alternatively,
allowing  the  animals  access  to  individual  rooms  provides  the  same  opportunity  to
non-ambulatory  patients  and  patients  for  whom  privacy  or  dignity  issues  are  a
consideration. The decision to allow this access to patients' rooms should be made on a
case-by-case  basis,  with  the  consultation  and  consent  of  the  attending  physician  and
nursing  staff.  Animal-Assisted  Therapy  (AAT)  is  a  goal-directed  intervention  that
incorporates  an  animal  into  the  treatment  process  provided  by  a  credentialed
therapist.1330,  1331  The  concept  for  AAT  arose  from  the  observation  that  some
patients with pets at home recover from surgical and medical procedures more rapidly
than patients without pets.1352, 1353 Contact with animals is considered beneficial for
enhancing  wellness  in  certain  patient  populations  (e.g.,  children,  the  elderly,  and
extended-care  hospitalized  patients).1349,  1354–1357  However,  evidence  supporting
this benefit is largely derived from anecdotal reports and observations of patient/animal
interactions.1357–1359  Guidelines  for  establishing  AAT  programs  are  available  for
facilities considering this option.1360 The incorporation of non-human primates into an
AAA or AAT program is not encouraged because of concerns regarding potential disease
transmission  from  and  unpredictable  behavior  of  these  animals.1361,  1362  Animals
participating in either AAA or AAT sessions should be in good health and up-to-date with
recommended
 immunizations
 and
 prophylactic
 medications
 (e.g.,
 heartworm
prevention)  as  determined  by  a  licensed  veterinarian  based  on  local  needs  and
recommendations. Regular re-evaluation of the animal's health and behavior status is
essential.1360 Animals should be routinely screened for enteric parasites and/or have
evidence of a recently completed antihelminthic regimen.1363 They should also be free
of  ectoparasites  (e.g.,  fleas  and  ticks)  and  should  have  no  sutures,  open  wounds,  or
obvious  dermatologic  lesions  that  could  be  associated  with  bacterial,  fungal,  or  viral
infections  or  parasitic  infestations.  Incorporating  young  animals  (i.e.,  those  aged  <1
year) into these programs is not encouraged because of issues regarding unpredictable
behavior and elimination control. Additionally, health of these animals at risk. Animals
should be clean and well-groomed. The visits must be supervised by persons who know
the  animals  and  their  behavior.  Animal  handlers  should  be  trained  in  these  activities
and receive site-specific orientation to ensure that they work efficiently with the staff in
the  specific  health-care  environment.1360  Additionally,  animal  handlers  should  be  in
good  health.1360  The  most  important  infection-control  measure  to  prevent  potential
disease transmission is strict enforcement of hand-hygiene measures (e.g., using either
soap and water or an alcohol-based hand rub) for all patients, staff, and residents after
handling the animals.1355, 1364 Care should also be taken to avoid direct contact with
animal  urine  or  feces.  Clean-up  of  these  substances  from  environmental  surfaces
requires gloves and the use of leak-resistant plastic bags to discard absorbent material
used  in  the  process.2  The  area  must  be  cleaned  after  visits  according  to  standard
cleaning  procedures.  The  American  Academy  of  Allergy,  Asthma,  and  Immunology
estimates that dog or cat allergies occur in approximately 15% of the population.1365
Minimizing  contact  with  animal  saliva,  dander,  and/or  urine  helps  to  mitigate  allergic
responses.1365–1367 Some facilities may not allow animal visitation for patients with
Hair shedding can be minimized by processes that remove dead hair (e.g., grooming)
and that prevent the shedding of dead hair (e.g., therapy capes for dogs). Allergens can
be minimized by bathing therapy animals within 24 hours of a visit.1333, 1368 Animal
therapists  and  handlers  must  take  precautions  to  prevent  animal  bites.  Common
pathogens  associated  with  animal  bites  include  Capnocytophaga  canimorsus,
Pasteurella  spp.,  Staphylococcus  spp.,  and  Streptococcus  spp.  Selecting  well-behaved
and well-trained animals for these programs greatly decreases the incidence of bites.
Rodents, exotic species, wild/domestic animals (i.e., wolf-dog hybrids), and wild animals
whose  behavior  is  unpredictable  should  be  excluded  from  AAA  or  AAT  programs.  A
well-trained  animal  handler  should  be  able  to  recognize  stress  in  the  animal  and  to
determine when to terminate a session to minimize risk. When an animal bites a person
during AAA or AAT, the animal is to be permanently removed from the program. If a bite
does  occur,  the  wound  must  be  cleansed  immediately  and  monitored  for  subsequent
infection.  Most  infections  can  be  treated  with  antibiotics,  and  antibiotics  often  are
prescribed
 prophylactically
 in
 these
 situations.
 The
 health-care
 facility's
infection-control staff should participate actively in planning for and coordinating AAA
and  AAT  sessions.  Many  facilities  do  not  offer  AAA  or  AAT  programs  for  severely
immunocompromised  patients  (e.g.,  HSCT  patients  and  patients  on  corticosteroid
therapy).1339  The  question  of  whether  family  pets  or  companion  animals  can  visit
terminally-ill  HSCT  patients  or  other  severely  immunosuppressed  patients  is  best
handled on a case-by-case basis, although animals should not be brought into the HSCT
unit  or  any  other  unit  housing  severely  immunosuppressed  patients.  An  in-depth
discussion of this issue is presented elsewhere.1366 Immunocompromised patients who
have  been  discharged  from  a  health-care  facility  may  be  at  higher  risk  for  acquiring
some pet-related zoonoses. Although guidelines have been developed to minimize the
risk of disease transmission to HIV-infected patients,8 these recommendations may be
applicable  for  patients  with  other  immunosuppressive  disorders.  In  addition  to
handwashing  or  hand  hygiene,  these  recommendations  include  avoiding  contact  with
Pets or companion animals with diarrhea should receive veterinary care to resolve their
condition.  Many  health-care  facilities  are  adopting  more  home-like  environments  for
residential-care or extended-stay patients in acute-care settings, and resident animals
are  one  element  of  this  approach.1369  One  concept,  the  "Eden  Alternative,"
incorporates  children,  plants,  and  animals  (e.g.,  dogs,  cats,  fish,  birds,  rabbits,  and
rodents)  into  the  daily  care  setting.1370,  1371  The  concept  of  working  with  resident
animals  has  not  been  scientifically  evaluated.  Several  issues  beyond  the  benefits  of
therapy must be considered before embarking on such a program, including Few data
document a link between health-care acquired infection rates and frequency of cleaning
fish  tanks  or  rodent  cages.  Skin  infections  caused  by  Mycobacterium  marinum  have
been  described  among  persons  who  have  fish  aquariums  at  home.1374,  1375
Nevertheless, immunocompromised patients should avoid direct contact with fish tanks
and cages and the aerosols that these items produce. Further, fish tanks should be kept
clean  on  a  regular  basis  as  determined  by  facility  policy,  and  this  task  should  be
performed by gloved staff members who are not responsible for patient care. The use
of the infection-control risk assessment can help determine whether a fish tank poses a
risk for patient or resident safety and health in these situations. No evidence, however,
links  the  incidence  of  health-care  acquired  infections  among  immunocompetent
patients or residents with the presence of a properly cleaned and maintained fish tank,
even in dining areas. As a general preventive measure, resident animal programs are
advised  to  restrict  animals  from  Resident-animal  programs  in  acute-care  facilities
should not allow the animals into the isolation areas, protective environments, ORs, or
any area where immunocompromised patients are housed. Patients and staff routinely
should wash their hands or use waterless, alcohol-based hand-hygiene products after
contact with animals. Although this section provides an overview about service animals
in  health-care  settings,  it  cannot  address  every  situation  or  question  that  may  arise
(see Appendix E – Information Resources). A service animal is any animal individually
trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability.1366,
1376 A service animal is not considered a pet but rather an animal trained to provide
assistance to a person because of a disability. Title III of the "Americans with Disabilities
Act"  (ADA)  of  1990  mandates  that  persons  with  disabilities  accompanied  by  service
animals  be  allowed  access  with  their  service  animals  into  places  of  public
accommodation,  including  restaurants,  public  transportation,  schools,  and  health-care
facilities.1366,  1376  In  health-care  facilities,  a  person  with  a  disability  requiring  a
service animal may be an employee, a visitor, or a patient. An overview of the subject
of service animals and their presence in health-care facilities has been published.1366
No evidence suggests that animals pose a more significant risk of transmitting infection
than people; therefore, service animals should not be excluded from such areas, unless
an individual patient's situation or a particular animal poses greater risk that cannot be
mitigated through reasonable measures. If health-care personnel, visitors, and patients
are permitted to enter care areas (e.g., inpatient rooms, some ICUs, and public areas)
without taking additional precautions to prevent transmission of infectious agents (e.g.,
donning gloves, gowns, or masks), a clean, healthy, well-behaved service animal should
be allowed access with its handler.1366 Similarly, if immunocompromised patients are
able to receive visitors without using protective garments or equipment, an exclusion of
service animals from this area would not be justified.1366 Because health-care facilities
are  covered  by  the  ADA  or  the  Rehabilitation  Act,  a  person  with  a  disability  may  be
accompanied  by  a  service  animal  within  the  facility  unless  the  animal's  presence  or
behavior  creates  a  fundamental  alteration  in  the  nature  of  a  facility's  services  in  a
particular  area  or  a  direct  threat  to  other  persons  in  a  particular  area.1366  A  "direct
threat" is defined as a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be
mitigated  or  eliminated  by  modifying  policies,  practices,  or  procedures.1376  The
determination that a service animal poses a direct threat in any particular healthcare
setting  must  be  based  on  an  individualized  assessment  of  the  service  animal,  the
patient,  and  the  health-care  situation.  When  evaluating  risk  in  such  situations,
health-care  personnel  should  consider  the  nature  of  the  risk  (including  duration  and
severity); the probability that injury will occur; and whether reasonable modifications of
policies, practices, or procedures will mitigate the risk (J. Wodatch, U.S. Department of
Justice,  2000).  The  person  with  a  disability  should  contribute  to  the  risk-assessment
process as part of a pre-procedure health-care provider/patient conference. Excluding a
service animal from an OR or similar special care areas (e.g., burn units, some ICUs, PE
units, and any other area containing equipment critical for life support) is appropriate if
these  areas  are  considered  to  have  "restricted  access"  with  regards  to  the  general
public. General infection-control measures that dictate such limited access include No
infection-control measures regarding the use of barrier precautions could be reasonably
imposed on the service animal. Excluding a service animal that becomes threatening
because  of  a  perceived  danger  to  its  handler  during  treatment  also  is  appropriate;
however,  exclusion  of  such  an  animal  must  be  based  on  the  actual  behavior  of  the
particular  animal,  not  on  speculation  about  how  the  animal  might  behave.  Another
issue  regarding  service  animals  is  whether  to  permit  persons  with  disabilities  to  be
accompanied by their service animals during all phases of their stay in the health-care
facility.  Healthcare  personnel  should  discuss  all  aspects  of  anticipatory  care  with  the
patient  who  uses  a  service  animal.  Health-care  personnel  may  not  exclude  a  service
animal  because  health-care  staff  may  be  able  to  perform  the  same  services  that  the
service  animal  does  (e.g.,  retrieving  dropped  items  and  guiding  an  otherwise
ambulatory person to the restroom). Similarly, health-care personnel can not exclude
service  animals  because  the  health-care  staff  perceive  a  lack  of  need  for  the  service
animal during the person's stay in the health-care facility. A person with a disability is
entitled to independent access (i.e., to be accompanied by a service animal unless the
animal  poses  a  direct  threat  or  a  fundamental  alteration  in  the  nature  of  services);
"need"  for  the  animal  is  not  a  valid  factor  in  either  analysis.  For  some  forms  of  care
(e.g.,  ambulation  as  physical  therapy  following  total  hip  replacement  or  knee
replacement),  the  service  animal  should  not  be  used  in  place  of  a  credentialed
health-care worker who directly provides therapy. However, service animals need not
be  restricted  from  being  in  the  presence  of  its  handler  during  this  time;  in  addition,
rehabilitation and discharge planning should incorporate the patient's future use of the
animal. The health-care personnel and the patient with a disability should discuss both
the possible need for the service animal to be separated from its handler for a period of
time during non-emergency care and an alternate plan of care for the service animal in
the event the patient is unable or unwilling to provide that care. This plan might include
family members taking the animal out of the facility several times a day for exercise
and  elimination,  the  animal  staying  with  relatives,  or  boarding  off-site.  Care  of  the
service animal, however, remains the obligation of the person with the disability, not
the  health-care  staff.  Although  animals  potentially  carry  zoonotic  pathogens
transmissible  to  man,  the  risk  is  minimal  with  a  healthy,  clean,  vaccinated,
well-behaved, and well-trained service animal, the most common of which are dogs and
cats. No reports have been published regarding infectious disease that affects humans
originating  in  service  dogs.  Standard  cleaning  procedures  are  sufficient  following
occupation of an area by a service animal.1366 Clean-up of spills of animal urine, feces,
or other body substances can be accomplished with blood/body substance procedures
outlined  in  the  Environmental  Services  section  of  this  guideline.  No  special  bathing
procedures  are  required  prior  to  a  service  animal  accompanying  its  handler  into  a
health-care  facility.  Providing  access  to  exotic  animals  (e.g.,  reptiles  and  non-human
primates)  that  are  used  as  service  animals  is  problematic.  Concerns  about  these
animals  are  discussed  in  two  published  reviews.1331,  1366  Because  some  of  these
animals exhibit high-risk behaviors that may increase the potential for zoonotic disease
transmission  (e.g.,  herpes  B  infection),  providing  health-care  facility  access  to
nonhuman primates used as service animals is discouraged, especially if these animals
might come into contact with the general public.1361, 1362 Health-care administrators
should  consult  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  for  guidance  when  developing
policies about service animals in their facilities.1366, 1376 Requiring documentation for
access of a service animal to an area generally accessible to the public would impose a
burden on a person with a disability. When health-care workers are not certain that an
animal is a service animal, they may ask the person who has the animal if it is a service
animal  required  because  of  a  disability;  however,  no  certification  or  other
documentation of service animal status can be required.1377 The potential for direct
and indirect transmission of zoonoses must be considered when rooms and equipment
in  human  health-care  facilities  are  used  for  the  medical  or  surgical  treatment  or
diagnosis of animals.1378 Inquiries should be made to veterinary medical professionals
to determine an appropriate facility and equipment to care for an animal. The central
issue  associated  with  providing  medical  or  surgical  care  to  animals  in  human
health-care facilities is whether cross-contamination occurs between the animal patient
and the human health-care workers and/or human patients. The fundamental principles
of infection control and aseptic practice should differ only minimally, if at all, between
veterinary medicine and human medicine. Health-care– associated infections can and
have occurred in both patients and workers in veterinary medical facilities when lapses
in infection-control procedures are evident.1379–1384 Further, veterinary patients can
be  at  risk  for  acquiring  infection  from  veterinary  health-care  workers  if  proper
precautions  are  not  taken.1385  The  issue  of  providing  care  to  veterinary  patients  in
human  health-care  facilities  can  be  divided  into  the  following  three  areas  of
infection-control  concerns:  Studies  addressing  these  concerns  are  lacking.  However,
with respect to disinfection or sterilization in veterinary settings, only minimal evidence
suggests  that  zoonotic  microbial  pathogens  are  unusually  resistant  to  inactivation  by
chemical or physical agents (with the exception of prions). Ample evidence supports the
contrary observation (i.e., that pathogens from human- and animal sources are similar
in  their  relative  instrinsic  resistance  to  inactivation).1386–1391  Further,  no  evidence
suggests  that  zoonotic  pathogens  behave  differently  from  human  pathogens  with
respect to ventilation. Despite this knowledge, an aesthetic and sociologic perception
that animal care must remain separate from human care persists. Health-care facilities,
however, are increasingly faced with requests from the veterinary medical community
for access to human health-care facilities for reasons that are largely economical (e.g.,
costs  of  acquiring  sophisticated  diagnostic  technology  and  complex  medical
instruments).  If  hospital  guidelines  allow  treatment  of  animals,  alternate  veterinary
resources (including veterinary hospitals, clinics, and universities) should be exhausted
before  using  human  health-care  settings.  Additionally,  the  hospital's  public/media
relations  should  be  notified  of  the  situation.  The  goal  is  to  develop  policies  and
procedures to proactively and positively discuss and disclose this activity to the general
public. An infection-control risk assessment (ICRA) must be undertaken to evaluate the
circumstances  specific  to  providing  care  to  animals  in  a  human  health-care  facility.
Individual  hospital  policies  and  guidelines  should  be  reviewed  before  any  animal
treatment  is  considered  in  such  facilities.  Animals  treated  in  human  health-care
facilities  should  be  under  the  direct  care  and  supervision  of  a  licensed  veterinarian;
they also should be free of known infectious diseases, ectoparasites, and other external
contaminants (e.g., soil, urine, and feces). Measures should be taken to avoid treating
animals  with  a  known  or  suspected  zoonotic  disease  in  a  human  health-care  setting
(e.g., lambs being treated for Q fever). If human health-care facilities must be used for
animal  treatment  or  diagnostics,  the  following  general  infection-control  actions  are
suggested:  The  risk  of  acquiring  a  zoonotic  infection  from  research  animals  has
decreased in recent years because many small laboratory animals (e.g., mice, rats, and
rabbits)  come  from  quality  stock  and  have  defined  microbiologic  profiles.1392  Larger
animals (e.g., nonhuman primates) are still obtained frequently from the wild and may
harbor  pathogens  transmissible  to  humans.  Primates,  in  particular,  benefit  from
vaccinations to protect their health during the research period provided the vaccination
does not interfere with the study of the particular agent. Animals serving as models for
human  disease  studies  pose  some  risk  for  transmission  of  infection  to  laboratory  or
health-care  workers  from  percutaneous  or  mucosal  exposure.  Exposures  can  occur
either through Uncontained aerosols generated during laboratory procedures can also
transmit  infection.  Infection-control  measures  to  prevent  transmission  of  zoonotic
infections from research animals are largely derived from the following basic laboratory
safety principles: An excellent resource for detailed discussion of these safety measures
has been published.1013 The animal research unit within a health-care facility should
be  engineered  to  provide  To  ensure  adequate  security  and  containment,  no  through
traffic  to  other  areas  of  the  health-care  facility  should  flow  through  this  unit;  access
should  be  restricted  to  animal-care  staff,  researchers,  environmental  services,
maintenance,  and  security  personnel.  Occupational  health  programs  for  animal-care
staff,  researchers,  and  maintenance  staff  should  take  into  consideration  the  animals'
natural  pathogens  and  research  pathogens.  Components  of  such  programs  include
Work  practices,  PPE,  and  engineering  controls  specific  for  each  of  the  four  animal
biosafety  levels  have  been  published.1013,  1393  The  facility's  occupational  or
employee  health  clinic  should  be  aware  of  the  appropriate  post-exposure  procedures
involving  zoonoses  and  have  available  the  appropriate  post-exposure  biologicals  and
medications.  Animal-research-area  staff  should  also  develop  standard  operating
procedures for The federal Animal Welfare Act of 1966 and its amendments serve as
the regulatory basis for ensuring animal welfare in research.1394, 1395 CDC provides
information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections
among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/animals-in-healthcare-facilities.html
