A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  CDC  recommends  washing  hands  with
soap  and  water  whenever  possible  because  handwashing  reduces  the  amounts  of  all
types of germs and chemicals on hands. If soap and water are not available, using a
hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol can help you avoid getting sick and spreading
germs to others. The recommendations for effective hand sanitizer use in community
settings was developed based on data from a number of studies. Alcohol-based hand
sanitizers can quickly reduce the number of microbes on hands in some situations, but
sanitizers do not eliminate all types of germs.  Why? Soap and water are more effective
than  hand  sanitizers  at  removing  certain  kinds  of  germs,  like  Cryptosporidium,
norovirus,  and  Clostridium  difficile.  Although  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  can
inactivate many types of microbes very effectively when used correctly, people may not
use a large enough volume of the sanitizers or may wipe it off before it has dried. Many
studies have found that sanitizers with an alcohol concentration between 60–95% are
more  effective  at  killing  germs  than  those  with  a  lower  alcohol  concentration  or
non-alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Hand sanitizers without 60-95% alcohol 1) may not
work equally well for many types of germs; and 2) merely reduce the growth of germs
rather  than  kill  them  outright.  Ethyl  alcohol  (ethanol)-based  hand  sanitizers  are  safe
when used as directed, but they can cause alcohol poisoning if a person swallows more
than  a  couple  of  mouthfuls.   From  2011  –  2015,  U.S.  poison  control  centers  received
nearly  85,000  calls  about  hand  sanitizer  exposures  among  children.  Children  may  be
particularly  likely  to  swallow  hand  sanitizers  that  are  scented,  brightly  colored,  or
attractively  packaged.  Hand  sanitizers  should  be  stored  out  of  the  reach  of  young
children and should be used with adult supervision. Child-resistant caps could also help
reduce  hand  sanitizer-related  poisonings  among  young  children.  Older  children  and
adults might purposefully swallow hand sanitizers to become drunk. Many studies show
that hand sanitizers work well in clinical settings like hospitals, where hands come into
contact with germs but generally are not heavily soiled or greasy. Some data also show
that  hand  sanitizers  may  work  well  against  certain  types  of  germs  on  slightly  soiled
hands. However, hands may become very greasy or soiled in community settings, such
as after people handle food, play sports, work in the garden, or go camping or fishing.
When  hands  are  heavily  soiled  or  greasy,  hand  sanitizers  may  not  work  well.
Handwashing with soap and water is recommended in such circumstances. The steps
for hand sanitizer use are based on a simplified procedure recommended by CDC. When
using hand sanitizer, apply the product to the palm of one hand (read the label to learn
the correct amount) and rub the product all over the surfaces of your hands until your
hands  are  dry.   Instructing  people  to  cover  all  surfaces  of  both  hands  with  hand
sanitizer  has  been  found  to  provide  similar  disinfection  effectiveness  as  providing
detailed steps for rubbing-in hand sanitizer. Although few studies have been conducted,
hand sanitizers probably cannot remove or inactivate many types of harmful chemicals
from hands. In one study, people who reported using hand sanitizer to clean hands had
increased levels of pesticides in their bodies. If hands have touched harmful chemicals,
wash carefully with soap and water (or as directed by a poison control center). Having
clean  hands  is  one  of  the  best  ways  to  avoid  getting  sick  and  prevent  the  spread  of
germs to others. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/clean-hands/data-research/facts-stats/hand-sanitizer-facts.html
