A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Scientific studies show that you need to
scrub for 20 seconds to remove harmful germs and chemicals from your hands. If you
wash  for  a  shorter  time,  you  will  not  remove  as  many  germs.  Make  sure  to  scrub  all
areas of your hands, including your palms, backs of your hands, between your fingers,
and  under  your  fingernails.  Soap  and  water,  worked  into  a  lather,  trap  and  remove
germs and chemicals from hands. Wetting your hands with clean water before applying
soap helps you get a better lather than applying soap to dry hands. A good lather forms
pockets called micelles that trap and remove germs, harmful chemicals, and dirt from
your hands. Lathering with soap and scrubbing your hands for 20 seconds is important
to this process because these actions physically destroy germs and remove germs and
chemicals  from  your  skin.  When  you  rinse  your  hands,  you  wash  the  germs  and
chemicals down the drain. CDC recommends turning off the faucet after wetting your
hands to reduce water use. Then, turn it on again after you have washed them for 20
seconds, to rinse off the soap. If you are concerned about getting germs on your hands
after you wash them, you can use a paper towel, your elbow, or another hands-free way
to  turn  off  the  faucet.  Ensure  you  have  easily  accessible  sinks;  clean,  running  water;
soap; and a way to dry hands, such as paper towels or a hand dryer. Remind employees
to  wash  their  hands  often  with  soap  and  water  and  provide  accessible  sinks,  soap,
water,  and  a  way  to  dry  their  hands  (e.g.,  paper  towels,  hand  dryer).  Put  visual
reminders, like signs or posters, in bathrooms or kitchen areas to remind employees to
wash their hands. Provide other hygiene supplies such as tissues, no-touch/foot pedal
trash  cans,  and  hand  sanitizer  with  at  least  60%  alcohol  to  keep  your  employees
healthy. No. CDC is not a regulatory agency, and therefore does not enforce compliance
with handwashing recommendations. CDC has developed guidance on when and how to
properly  wash  hands  in  community  settings  and  when  and  how  to  clean  hands  in
healthcare  settings.   Your  state  or  local  health  department  may  have  handwashing
requirements included in their health codes. Scientists don't know if you would get a
significant  number  of  germs  on  your  hands  from  touching  a  bathroom  door  handle.
That's because it has not been specifically studied. If you're concerned about getting
germs  on  your  hands  after  you  wash  them,  you  can  use  a  paper  towel,  your  elbow,
shirt, or another hands-free way to open the door. CDC recommends always washing
your  hands  after  you  use  the  toilet,  whether  it  is  in  your  home  or  somewhere  else.
Germs in feces (poop) can make you sick. These germs can get on your hands after you
use the toilet or change a diaper. If you don't wash them off, you can pass them from
person to person and make people sick. Make a habit of washing your hands after you
use the toilet every time to reduce your chance of getting sick and spreading germs.
There is currently not enough scientific evidence to determine if using a clean towel or
an air hand dryer to dry your hands is more effective at reducing germs on your hands.
Both are effective ways to dry your hands. Germs spread more easily when hands are
wet,  so  make  sure  to  dry  your  hands  completely,  whatever  method  you  use.  CDC
recommends using a clean towel if you are using a towel to dry your hands. Reusable
towels are a practical option at home. They should be changed when visibly dirty and
before they develop mildew from remaining damp. Use plain soap and water to wash
your hands. Studies have not found any added health benefit from using antibacterial
soap,  other  than  for  professionals  in  healthcare  settings.  In  2016,  FDA  banned
over-the-counter  sale  of  antibacterial  soaps  that  contain  certain  ingredients  because
these soaps are no better than plain soap at preventing people from getting sick and
their ingredients may not be safe for long-term, daily use. Some studies have shown
that using antibacterial soap may contribute to antibiotic resistance. Both bar and liquid
soap work well to remove germs. Use plain soap in either bar or liquid form to wash
your hands. If you don't have soap and water, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60%
alcohol.  If  you  don't  have  hand  sanitizer  or  soap,  but  do  have  water,  rub  your  hands
together  under  the  water  and  dry  them  with  a  clean  towel  or  air  dry.  Rubbing  your
hands  under  water  will  rinse  some  germs  from  your  hands,  even  though  it's  not  as
effective as washing with soap. Use your preferred water temperature – cold or warm –
to  wash  your  hands.  Warm  and  cold  water  remove  the  same  number  of  germs  from
your  hands.  The  water  helps  create  soap  lather  that  removes  germs  from  your  skin
when you wash your hands. Water itself does not usually kill germs; to kill germs, water
would need to be hot enough to scald your hands. Your hands can get germs on them if
you  place  them  in  water  that  looks  dirty,  is  contaminated  (for  example,  during  an
emergency), or has germs in it from previous use, such as a basin with water used for
bathing. That's why CDC recommends using clean, running water to wash your hands. If
you don't have access to clean, running water, use hand sanitizer containing at least
60%  alcohol  to  get  rid  of  germs.  If  you  don't  have  clean,  running  water  or  hand
sanitizer, you can still remove germs from your hands by washing with clear water. You
can also make water safe to use by boiling, adding the proper amount of disinfectant
such as a mild bleach solution, or filtering it. Use the cleanest water possible to wash
your hands. Avoid using cloudy water or water that may be contaminated with harmful
chemicals  or  toxins,  such  as  toxins  made  by  harmful  algal  blooms.  If  my  utility  has
issued a Boil Water Advisory, can I still use tap water to wash my hands? In most cases,
it  is  safe  to  wash  your  hands  with  soap  and  tap  water  during  a  Boil  Water  Advisory.
Follow the guidance from your local public health officials or water utility. If soap and
water  are  not  available,  use  an  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizer  containing  at  least  60%
alcohol.  Washing  hands  with  soap  and  water  is  the  best  way  to  remove  all  types  of
germs and chemicals. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand
sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers work by killing germs
on  your  hands,  while  washing  your  hands  with  soap  and  water  removes  germs  from
your  hands.  Handwashing  will  remove  all  types  of  germs  from  your  hands,  but  hand
sanitizers  are  not  able  to  kill  all  types  of  germs  or  remove  harmful  chemicals  like
pesticides and heavy metals. Hand sanitizing wipes with at least 60% alcohol kill germs
on your hands. Baby wipes are not designed to remove germs from your hands, and
CDC does not recommend using them to clean your hands. They may make your hands
look clean, but baby wipes and similar products that do not have at least 60% alcohol
do not reliably remove germs from your hands. Disinfecting wipes are designed to kill
germs on surfaces. Do not use disinfecting wipes to clean your skin because they may
cause  irritation.  Always  read  and  follow  the  directions  on  the  label  to  use  these
products  safely.  Hand  sanitizers  with  at  least  60%  alcohol  have  been  shown  to  be
effective  against  a  wider  range  of  germs  than  hand  sanitizers  that  do  not  contain
alcohol, including those that contain active ingredients such as benzalkonium chloride
(BZK). CDC recommends the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers when soap and water
are not available for handwashing. Hand sanitizer is regulated as an over-the-counter
drug  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA).  FDA  regulates  the  production  and
manufacturing  of  hand  sanitizing  products  and  determines  which  ingredients  are
allowed to be used in them. The CDC develops recommendations about hand hygiene
to prevent the spread of diseases in both community and healthcare settings, based on
peer-reviewed  data  and  scientific  studies.  CDC  does  not  regulate  hand  sanitizer
production. However, CDC does not recommend producing, using, or selling homemade
hand sanitizer products because of concerns over the correct use of the ingredients and
the need to work under sterile conditions to make the product. Handwashing with soap
and  water  is  the  best  way  to  get  rid  of  germs  in  most  situations.  FDA  reports  that  if
made  incorrectly,  hand  sanitizer  can  be  ineffective  or  harmful.  There  have  been
accounts  of  skin  burns  from  homemade  hand  sanitizers  and  serious  health  problems
caused by hand sanitizers contaminated with methanol. To be effective at killing some
types of germs, hand sanitizers need to have a strength of at least 60% alcohol and be
used  when  hands  are  not  visibly  dirty  or  greasy.  Do  not  rely  on  "do-it-yourself"  (or
"DIY") hand sanitizer recipes based solely on essential oils or formulated without correct
compounding practices. CDC recommends the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers as
the primary method for hand hygiene in most healthcare situations. Alcohol-based hand
sanitizers  effectively  reduce  the  number  of  germs  that  may  be  on  the  hands  of
healthcare workers. Healthcare personnel often clean their hands more than 7 times in
an hour. Some germs can be difficult to remove with soap and water and scrubbing can
damage  their  skin.  Healthcare  personnel  should  wash  their  hands  for  at  least  20
seconds with soap and water when hands are visibly dirty, before eating, after using the
restroom, and after caring for people with infectious diarrhea during outbreaks.  Hand
hygiene recommendations depend on the types of germs on your hands, whether your
hands  are  visibly  dirty  or  greasy,  and  where  you  are.  For  healthcare  settings,  CDC
recommends  using  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizer  unless  hands  are  visibly  dirty.  In
community  settings,  CDC  recommends  washing  hands  with  soap  and  water  because
handwashing reduces the amounts of all types of germs and chemicals on your hands,
including  when  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or  greasy.  If  soap  and  water  are  not  readily
available, hand sanitizers with at least 60% alcohol can help protect you from getting
sick from germs. Hand hygiene helps stop the spread of germs, including ones that can
cause  antibiotic-resistant  infections.  Antibiotic  resistance  happens  when  germs  like
bacteria and fungi develop the ability to defeat the drugs designed to kill them. That
means  the  germs  are  not  killed  and  continue  to  grow.  Infections  caused  by
antibiotic-resistant  germs  are  difficult,  and  sometimes  impossible,  to  treat.  Keeping
your hands clean by washing your hands with soap and water or using alcohol-based
hand  sanitizer  is  one  of  the  best  ways  to  prevent  germs  from  spreading  and  avoid
infections. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers do not contribute to antimicrobial resistance.
Alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  kill  germs,  including  antimicrobial-resistant  germs,  by
destroying the proteins and breaking down the protective outer membrane that germs
need to survive. Plain soap (soap without antibacterial ingredients) does not contribute
to  antibiotic  resistance.  Some  studies  have  shown  that  using  antibacterial  soap  may
contribute  to  antibiotic  resistance.  In  fact,  FDA  banned  over-the-counter  sale  of
antibacterial soaps that contain certain ingredients because these soaps are no better
than plain soap at preventing people from getting sick, and their ingredients may not
be  safe  for  long-term,  daily  use.  Washing  your  hands  with  plain  soap  and  water
removes  germs,  including  antibiotic-resistant  germs.  Keeping  your  hands  clean  can
prevent  the  spread  of  germs,  reducing  the  risk  for  antimicrobial-resistant  infections.
Having clean hands is one of the best ways to avoid getting sick and prevent the spread
of germs to others. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/clean-hands/faq/index.html
