Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Outdoor workers are exposed to many types of hazards that
depend on their type of work, geographic region, season, and duration of time they are
outside.  Employers  should  train  outdoor  workers  about  their  workplace  hazards,
including  hazard  identification  and  recommendations  for  preventing  and  controlling
their  exposures.  Physical  hazards  to  outdoor  workers  may  include  extreme  heat,
extreme  cold,  noise,  and  sun  exposure.  Extreme  heat  can  cause  heat  stroke,  heat
cramps,  heat  exhaustion,  heat  rash,  and  other  problems.  Extreme  cold  can  cause
hypothermia, frostbite, and other problems. Repeated exposures to loud noise can lead
to  permanent,  incurable  hearing  loss  or  tinnitus.  Information  on  cold-related  illnesses
and injuries, first aid, and prevention Information on heat-related illnesses, first aid, and
prevention. Facts about sunburn and skin cancer, first aid, and prevention. Hearing loss
is one of the most common work-related illnesses in the U.S. Information on hazards of
exposure smoke from wildland fires for outdoor workers, including wildland firefighters
Biological  hazards  include  vector-borne  diseases,  venomous  wildlife  and  insects,  and
poisonous  plants.   Venomous  snakes,  spiders,  scorpions,  and  stinging  insects  can  be
found throughout various geographic regions, and are especially dangerous to workers
who have allergies to the animal. Poisonous plants can cause allergic reactions if their
oils come in contact with skin. These plants can also be dangerous if burned and their
toxins  are  inhaled.  Learn  about  plant  identification,  first  aid,  and  prevention.
Information on the types of spiders, spider bites, first aid, and prevention. Information
on  the  types  of  snakes,  snake  bites,  prevention,  and  first  aid.  Preventing  stings  and
bites from flying insects, fire ants, and scorpions. Vector-borne diseases may be spread
to  workers  by  insects,  such  as  mosquitoes  or  ticks.  When  a  mosquito  or  tick  bites  a
worker, it may transfer a disease-causing agent, such as a parasite, bacterium, or virus.
Answers  to  frequently  asked  questions  and  recommendations  for  workers  and
employers.  Answers  to  frequently  asked  questions  and  recommendations  for  workers
and employers. Information on symptoms, diagnosis, and recommendations for workers
and  employers.  Outdoor  workers  may  encounter  other  hazards  in  addition  to  the
physical and biological hazards described here. They may be exposed to pesticides or
other  chemical  hazards,  traumatic  injury  hazards,  or  other  safety  and  health  hazards
depending on their specific job and tasks.  Facebook  Instagram  Pinterest    Twitter 
YouTube  more sites
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/outdoor/default.html
