Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Health  Hazards  and  Protective  Measures  This  information  is
intended  to  be  used  by  employers  and  workers  who  use  cleaning  products  and
disinfectants,  specifically  those  identified  as  effective  against  viruses,  including  avian
(bird)  flu,  Ebola,  and  SARS-CoV-2  (the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19).  This  page  offers
information  about  the  health  hazards  that  could  be  caused  by  cleaning  products  and
disinfectants and the recommended barrier and respiratory protection workers can use
to protect themselves from these hazards. When using disinfectants, the proper barrier
protection  should  be  used.  This  information,  focusing  on  worker  safety,  supplements
existing Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidance for disinfection of
viruses.  Both  cleaning  and  disinfecting  are  important  for  reducing  the  spread  of  viral
illnesses. Some viruses may remain viable (living) for hours to days on surfaces made
from a variety of materials. Cleaning surfaces followed by disinfection is a best practice
for  preventing  the  spread  of  viral  illnesses  in  the  workplace.  Cleaning  refers  to  the
removal of germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces. Cleaning does not kill germs, but
by  removing  them,  it  lowers  their  numbers  and  the  risk  of  spreading  infection.
Disinfecting refers to using chemicals to kill germs on surfaces. Disinfecting does not
necessarily clean dirty surfaces or remove germs, but by killing germs that remain on a
surface  after  cleaning,  disinfecting  can  further  lower  the  risk  of  spreading  infection.
Many  chemical  disinfectants  can  be  harmful  to  workers  if  they  are  unsafely  handled
and/or  improperly  used.  Therefore,  it  is  important  that  disinfectants  are  selected  and
used  properly  to  ensure  effective  disinfection  and  avoid  harm  to  individuals  and
damage  to  surfaces.  Proper  use  of  disinfectants  should  include:  The  table  below
provides information about health hazards associated with recommended disinfectants
for  use  against  viruses  and  suggestions  for  how  individuals  can  protect  themselves
against those health hazards while using the products. The table includes the following
information:  The  GHS  pictograms  and  hazard  statements  for  each  chemical  were
obtained from the International Chemical Safety Cards (ICSCs). If the ICSC did not have
this  information  available  for  a  chemical,  the  GESTIS  database  from  the  Institute  for
Occupational Safety and Health of the German Social Accident Insurance was used to
identify this information. If neither GHS pictograms or hazard statements were available
from  these  resources,  then  data  from  the  European  Chemicals  Agency  (ECHA)
substance infocards were used to supplement the chemical information. The table does
not  include  an  exhaustive  list  of  all  barriers  for  each  chemical.  The  recommended
barriers included in the table are from the Quick Selection Guide to Chemical Protective
Clothing.[1] Glove material is often referred to by the generic materials, including butyl
rubber,  natural  rubber,  neoprene  rubber,  nitrile  rubber,  and  polyvinylchloride  (PVC).
Some barriers may offer better protection for a variety of chemicals than other barriers,
and thicknesses of the barrier materials can vary from manufacturer to manufacturer
[1].  Selection  recommendations  are  based  on  data  from  permeation  and  degradation
under  laboratory  conditions.  The  most  common  ways  chemicals  pass  through  a
protective barrier include 1) penetration, such as a tear or rip, 2) permeation, where the
chemical diffuses through the barrier, and 3) degradation, which is the break-down of
the  protective  material.   Permeation  breakthrough  time  is  the  time  that  it  takes  a
chemical  to  diffuse  through  a  barrier  at  a  specific  permeation  rate  [1].  The  barriers
included  for  each  chemical  are  categorized  by  reported  resistance  to  chemical
breakthrough  of  greater  than  four  hours  (>4  hours)  or  greater  than  eight  hours  (>8
hours)  under  conditions  of  continuous  contact  with  the  chemical.  “Greater  than  8
hours” does not mean there was not permeation; this means that permeation did not
exceed 1.0 µg/cm2/min during the 8-hour test. More information, including more glove
barrier  options,  is  available  in  the  Quick  Selection  Guide  to  Chemical  Protective
Clothing.[1]  Personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  manufacturers  may  also  provide
additional  information  regarding  PPE  products.  The  recommended  respiratory
protection for a chemical is typically listed in the manufacturer’s safety data sheet and
many  chemicals  have  respirator  recommendations  in  the  NIOSH  Pocket  Guide  to
Chemical  Hazards.  Respirators  protect  the  user  in  two  basic  ways.  The  first  is  by  the
removal  of  contaminants  from  the  air,  which  includes  particle  respirators  and  “gas
masks.”  Other  respirators,  like  airline  respirators  and  self-contained  breathing
apparatus  (SCBA),  protect  by  supplying  clean  respirable  air  from  another  source.
Respirators  should  only  be  used  when  engineering  or  administrative  control  systems
are  not  feasible  or  fully  effective.  Engineering  control  systems,  such  as  adequate
ventilation  or  scrubbing  of  contaminants,  are  the  preferred  control  methods  for
reducing worker exposures. Proper use of respiratory protection (respirators) requires a
comprehensive  written  respiratory  protection  program  by  the  employer,  and  is
described in Occupational Health and Safety Standards 29 CFR 1910.134.    * In some
cases, precautionary labels for the chemicals listed in the table may be more or less
restrictive depending on the concentration of the chemical or other inert chemicals in
the formulation of the disinfectant. Always review the label on the product before use.
For  chemicals  or  products  not  listed  in  the  table  above,  follow  manufacturers’
recommendations  in  the  product’s  safety  data  sheet.  †  The  pictograms  and  health
hazards were obtained from the International Chemical Safety Cards (ICSCs) For more
information about the pictograms please visit the OSHA website. β The pictograms and
health hazards were obtained from the Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of
the
 German
 Social
 Accident
 Insurance
 GESTIS
 database.
 §
 Glove
 barrier
recommendations  are  from  the  Quick  Selection  Guide  to  Chemical  Protective
Clothing.[1] Additional information on chemical protective clothing can be found in this
resource. Always review the label on the product before use and follow manufacturers’
recommendations  in  the  product’s  safety  data  sheet.  **  Additional  information  on
respiratory  protection  recommendations,  where  available,  can  be  found  in  the  NIOSH
Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards in the links provided in the table. †† OSHA standard
29 CFR 1910.1048 lists additional requirements for use of formaldehyde. ββ The GHS
pictograms  and   health  hazards  were  obtained  from  the  European  Chemicals  Agency
(ECHA)  substance  infocards.  §§  Selection  recommendations  from  the  Quick  Selection
Guide to Chemical Protective Clothing  [1] are based on concentrations of 30-70% (citric
acid,  formaldehyde,  glutaraldehyde,  hydrogen  peroxide,  ortho-Phthaldehyde,  sodium
hydroxide, and sodium hypochlorite), >70% (phenol), and 37% (hydrochloric acid). The
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  Hazard  Communication
Standard,  also  known  as  the  “Right  to  Know  Law”  [29  CFR  1910.1200],  requires  that
employees  are  informed  of  potential  work  hazards  and  trained  on  associated  safe
practices,  procedures,  and  protective  measures.  Employers  must  ensure  employees
have  access  to  cleaning  products’  safety  data  sheets  (SDSs)  and  are  informed  of
potential  hazards  and  trained  on  the  associated  safe  practices  per  the  information
found  in  the  SDSs.  Additionally,  the  2008  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) Guideline recommends each worker be informed of the
possible  health  effect(s)  of  exposures  to  chemicals.  This  information  should  be
consistent with SDSs, EPA regulations, and OSHA requirements and identify areas and
tasks where there is the potential for exposure. The NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical
Hazards  (NPG)  helps  workers,  employers,  and  occupational  health  professionals
recognize  and  control  workplace  chemical  hazards.  The  NIOSH  Manual  of  Analytical
Methods (NMAM) is a collection of methods for sampling and analysis of contaminants
in workplace air, and in the blood and urine of workers who are occupationally exposed.
The Health Hazard Evaluation Program (HHE) conducts onsite investigations of possible
worker  exposure  to  chemicals.  Search  the  HHE  database  for  more  information  on
chemical topics.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/disinfectant/default.html
