Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Updated September 11, 2023 Q1. Which facilities and units are
required  to  report  healthcare  personnel  (HCP)  influenza  vaccination  summary  data
through  NHSN  for  the  2023-2024  influenza  season?  CMS-certified  free-standing  acute
care  facilities,  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities  (IRFs),  critical  access  hospitals,
long-term  acute  care  facilities,  prospective  payment  system  (PPS)-exempt  cancer
hospitals,  and  skilled  nursing  facilities  (SNFs)  are  required  to  report  HCP  influenza
vaccination summary data through NHSN.  IRF units located within acute care facilities,
long-term  acute  care  facilities,  critical  access  hospitals,  and  inpatient  psychiatric
facilities are also required to report HCP influenza vaccination data through NHSN.   Q2.
Can  my  facility  still  submit  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  through  NHSN
even if we are not required to do so by CMS? Ambulatory surgery centers, free-standing
inpatient  psychiatric  facilities  (IPFs)  and  outpatient  dialysis  facilities  are  no  longer
required  to  report  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  through  NHSN  beginning
with  the  2018-2019  influenza  season.   In  August  2018,  the  Centers  for  Medicare  and
Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  eliminated  the  HCP  Influenza  Vaccination  Summary  Measure
from its quality reporting program for IPFs.  This change applies to both free-standing
IPFs  and  IPF  units  that  are  located  within  acute  care  facilities,  long-term  acute  care
facilities, critical access hospitals, and inpatient rehabilitation facilities. However, please
note that reporting these data may be required for certain facilities based on state or
other  reporting  requirements.  Facilities  not  required  by  CMS  to  submit  data  are
welcome to voluntarily report HCP influenza vaccination summary data through NHSN.  
If  these  data  are  entered  into  NHSN  by  June  30,  the  data  will  be  included  in  the
regional-level data reports produced by NHSN for that influenza season (July 1 through
June 30). Q3. Where can I find information on the CMS final rule for IRFs and IRF units
on reporting HCP influenza vaccination summary data? View CMS final rule for IRFs [PDF
– 1 MB] (47905-47906). View updated CMS final rule for IRF units outside of acute care
and  critical  access  hospitals  [PDF  –  13  MB]  Q4.  Where  can  I  find  the  operational
guidance for IRFs to report HCP influenza vaccination summary data to fulfill CMS’s IRF
Quality
 Reporting
 Program
 requirements?
 Operational
 Guidance
 for
 Inpatient
Rehabilitation  Facilities  to  Report  Healthcare  Personnel  (HCP)  Influenza  Vaccination
Data to CDC’s NHSN [PDF – 155 KB] Q5. Where can I find information on the CMS final
rule for long-term acute care facilities (LTACs) on reporting HCP influenza vaccination
summary data? View final rule [PDF – 1 MB] (50857-50858). Q6. Where can I find the
operational  guidance  for  LTACs  to  report  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  to
fulfill  CMS’s  Long-Term  Care  Hospital  Quality  Reporting  (LTCHQR)  requirements?
Operational  Guidance  for  Long  Term  Care  Hospitals*  to  Report  Healthcare  Personnel
(HCP) Influenza Vaccination Data to CDC’s NHSN [PDF – 166 KB] Q7. Where can I find
information on the CMS final rule for skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) on reporting HCP
influenza vaccination summary data? View final rule on the federal register website. Q8.
Where can I find the operational guidance for SNFs to report HCP influenza vaccination
summary  data  to  fulfill  CMS’s  SNF  Quality  Reporting  Program  (QRP)  requirements?  
Operational  Guidance  is  found  in  the  document,  Operational  Guidance  for  Skilled
Nursing Facilities to Report Annual Influenza Vaccination Data [PDF – 178KB]. Q9. Who
should  I  contact  if  I  have  questions  on  the  SNF  QRP  requirements?   For  questions
related
 to
 SNF
 QRP
 requirements,
 please
 contact
 CMS
 at
SNFQualityQuestions@cms.hhs.gov.  Q10.  I  am  reporting  HCP  influenza  vaccination
summary data for a LTAC facility with an IRF unit. Will I need to report IRF unit data
separately  in  NHSN?  Yes.  CMS  published  a  final  rule  effective  on  October  1,  2019
extending  reporting  requirements  for  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  to  IRF
units located outside of acute care and critical access hospitals. This applies to IRF units
located  within  LTACs  or  inpatient  psychiatric  facilities  (IPFs).  Beginning  with  the
2020-2021 influenza season, IRF units located within LTACHs and IPFs must submit data
for the entire influenza vaccination season (October 1 through March 31) to NHSN. Q11.
I am reporting HCP influenza vaccination summary data for a LTAC facility with an IRF
unit.  How  should  I  report  the  IRF  unit  data  in  NHSN?  Influenza  vaccination  summary
data  for  HCP  working  in  this  IRF  unit  should  be  reported  separately  from  the  LTAC
facility  summary  data.  On  the  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  entry  screen,  use
the  dropdown  box  under  the  location  field  to  select  “IRF  Unit(s)”  before  entering
data. HCP working in the IRF unit should not be counted in the summary report for the
rest  of  the  LTAC  facility  unless  they  also  work  in  other  areas  of  the  LTAC  facility
between October 1 and March 31. Q12. I report data to NHSN for my free-standing IPF.
Should  I  submit  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data?   You  are  not  required  to
report HCP influenza vaccination summary data for the free-standing IPF. However, you
should  report  these  data  for  any  CMS-certified  IRF  units  located  within  the  IPF.  Q13.
Where can I find a recorded training presentation covering new reporting requirements
for  inpatient  rehabilitation  facility  units  located  within  long-term  acute  care  facilities
and  inpatient  psychiatric  facilities?   Please  view  the  presentation  for  Influenza
Vaccination Summary Reporting for IRF Units in LTACHs and IPFs Q14. I need to report
HCP influenza vaccination summary data for an IRF unit. How do I add an IRF unit as a
location to my existing facility in NHSN?  Please use the following resource to add an
IRF  unit  as  a  location  in  your  facility.  [PDF  –  504  KB]  Q15.  Which  HCP  groups  are
required  to  be  included  in  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  reports  to  CMS?  CMS
requires  reporting  on  influenza  vaccination  for  three  categories  of  HCP:  employees,
licensed  independent  practitioners  (non-employee  physicians,  advanced  practice
nurses, and physician assistants), and adult students/trainees and volunteers aged 18
and  over.   In  other  words,  there  is  one  category  for  all  employees  and  two  separate
categories  for  non-employees.   Categories  are  mutually  exclusive.  NHSN  includes  an
option  to  enter  vaccination  data  for  other  contract  personnel  and  vendors,  but  these
data are not currently required by CMS.  Facilities wishing to track influenza vaccination
rates  among  other  contract  personnel  and  vendors  can  choose  to  use  this  optional
reporting capacity. Q16. Which data collection forms are facilities or units required to
complete  for  reporting  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  to  NHSN?  To  report
HCP influenza vaccination summary data, all facilities or units must complete the HCP
Influenza Vaccination Summary Form. In addition to this form, dialysis centers that do
not  provide  in-center  hemodialysis  are  required  to  complete  a  third  form  before  they
can  enter  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data.   This  form  is  called  the  Home
Dialysis Center Practices Survey.  The survey captures information about various topics
such as surveillance practices, vaccination, and vascular access. The Seasonal Survey
on  Influenza  Vaccination  Programs  for  HCP  is  not  required  at  this  time.  However,
facilities are encouraged to complete this short survey as the information can help CDC
examine the relationship of different vaccination program elements to facility-reported
vaccination  percentages.  Q17.  Are  the  data  reporting  timeframes  the  same  for  the
denominator and numerator of the HCP influenza vaccination measure? The timeframes
for  the  denominator  and  numerator  of  the  HCP  influenza  vaccination  measure  are
different.  The denominator includes HCP who are physically present in the healthcare
facility  for  at  least  1  working  day  from  October  1  through  March  31  (the  reporting
period). The numerator timeframe begins “as soon as vaccine is available.”  Therefore,
vaccinations  given  any  time  during  the  influenza  season  from  the  time  that  season’s
vaccine is available at a facility through March 31 should be reported in the numerator. 
For example, if a healthcare worker was vaccinated in September, but then ceased to
work at the facility before October 1, they would not be counted in the numerator or
denominator data for that season.  However, if a healthcare worker was vaccinated in
September  and  continued  to  work  at  the  facility  for  at  least  one  day  from  October  1
through March 31, they would be counted in both the numerator and denominator.  The
reason  the  numerator  and  denominator  cover  different  timeframes  is  to  account  for
potential  delays  in  vaccine  availability.  Q18.  How  can  I  report  annual  healthcare
personnel influenza vaccination summary data? Data can be reported in two ways: 1.
Entering  data  directly  into  the  NHSN  application  through  the  Healthcare  Personnel
Influenza  Vaccination  Module.  2.  Uploading  .CSV  files  into  the  Healthcare  Personnel
Influenza Vaccination Module. Instructions for uploading data, a .CSV file template, and
.CSV example file can be accessed through the following webpage: HCP Flu Vaccination
| HPS | NHSN | CDC. Q19. What is the monthly reporting plan in NHSN and how is it used
for  HCP  influenza  vaccination  reporting?  The  monthly  reporting  plan  indicates  to  the
NHSN  system  which  modules  and  protocols  a  user  intends  to  follow  for  surveillance
purposes.  As  of  the  2022-2023  influenza  season,  the  monthly  reporting  plan  is  no
longer  required  to  complete  prior  to  entering  annual  healthcare  personnel  influenza
vaccination data beginning with the 2022-2023 influenza season. Instead, upon saving
or uploading data, users will agree to the following:  1) The data reported are consistent
with definitions outlined in NHSN surveillance protocols (including tables of instructions
and  frequently  asked  questions)  and  2)  The  data  will  be  sent  to  the  Centers  for
Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  to  fulfill  CMS  quality  reporting  requirements
(when applicable).  ​ Q20. Do I need to report HCP influenza vaccination summary data
each  month?  Monthly  reporting  in  NHSN  is  not  required;  entering  a  single  influenza
vaccination summary report at the end of the reporting period for the influenza season
will meet the minimum data requirements for NHSN participation.  However, facilities
are  encouraged  to  update  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  counts  on  a  monthly
basis so the data can be used to inform influenza vaccination activities at the facility.
Q21.  How  long  are  facilities  or  units  able  to  edit  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary
data  in  NHSN?  Each  facility  or  unit’s  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  report
must be entered into NHSN by May 15 for data to be shared with CMS.  Facilities and
units can edit data any time after May 15, but these changes will not be sent to CMS.  In
addition, the influenza season is defined by NHSN as July 1 to June 30, so changes after
June 30 of an influenza season may not be used in state or regional reports created by
CDC for that influenza season. Q22. When is the deadline for submitting HCP influenza
vaccination  summary  data  to  CMS?  The  reporting  period  for  the  2023-2024  influenza
season  is  from  October  1,  2023  through  March  31,  2024.  To  meet  CMS  reporting
requirements,  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  reports  must  be  entered  into
NHSN no later than May 15, 2024 for the 2023-2024 influenza season. Facilities can edit
their  data  after  May  15,  but  the  revised  data  will  not  be  shared  with  CMS.  Q23.  I
entered my HCP influenza vaccination summary data into NHSN. How can I confirm that
my data were entered correctly and will be shared with CMS? One way to confirm data
entry is to login to the Healthcare Personnel Safety component and then choose your
facility.  Next,  go  to  Vaccination  Summary  on  the  left-hand  navigation  bar,  click  on
Annual  Vaccination  Flu  Summary,  then  Find.  For  Summary  Data  Type,  choose  the
Influenza  Vaccination  Summary,  and  in  the  Flu  Season  drop-down  box,  choose  the
influenza season you would like to verify. Facilities should also confirm that the correct
CCN is entered into NHSN. Facilities can also review step-by-step instructions on how to
confirm  their  data  submission  [PDF  –  300  KB].  Q24.  What  should  a  facility  do  if  the
NHSN Facility Administrator has left?   When the NHSN Facility Administrator role needs
to be reassigned, the current NHSN Facility Administrator must complete the following
form:  Change  NHSN  Facility  Administrator  |  NHSN  |  CDC.  Q1.  Where  can  I  find  the
operational  guidance  for  acute  care  hospitals  to  report  HCP  influenza  vaccination
summary  data  to  fulfill  CMS’s  IQR  Program  requirements?  Operational  Guidance  for
Acute Care Hospitals to Report Healthcare Personnel (HCP) Influenza Vaccination Data
to CDC’s NHSN [PDF – 184 KB] Q2. Where can I find information on the HCP influenza
vaccination summary reporting requirements for critical access hospitals (CAHs)? View
HCP influenza vaccination summary reporting requirements for CAHs  [PDF – 100 KB].
Q3.  Are  the  reporting  requirements  for  CAHs  the  same  as  acute  care  hospital
requirements? Yes, CAHs should follow the same reporting requirements that apply to
acute care hospitals reporting HCP influenza vaccination summary data to NHSN. Q4.
Are CAHs required to submit separate vaccination reports for HCP working in outpatient
units  and  inpatient  units?  No.  Like  acute  care  hospitals,  CAHs  should  submit  a  single
report  on  the  vaccination  status  of  HCP  working  in  inpatient  and  outpatient
departments of the facility that share the same CCN. Q5. Should acute care facilities
separate  HCP  working  in  the  outpatient  areas  from  those  working  in  inpatient  areas
when reporting HCP influenza vaccination summary data? CMS published a final rule in
November  2018  eliminating  the  requirement  for  hospital  outpatient  departments  to
report  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  through  NHSN  beginning  with  the
2018-2019 influenza season.  On February 7, 2019, CMS and CDC issued guidance to
clarify that this measure does not separate out HCP who only work in the inpatient or
outpatient  areas,  or  work  in  both:  “The  IQR  program  Healthcare  Personnel  Influenza
Vaccination measure is a facility-wide measure and does not separate out employees
who only work in the inpatient or outpatient areas or work in both. Due to the burden of
trying to separate out the counts for inpatient and outpatient, CMS allows facilities to
collect  and  submit  a  single  vaccination  count  to  include  all  hospital-wide  employees
who  meet  the  criteria,  regardless  of  whether  they  work  inpatient  or  outpatient.  The
hospital-wide or combined counts should be entered on one single influenza vaccination
summary  data  form  in  NHSN.  This  includes  all  units/departments,  inpatient  and
outpatient, that share the same CMS Certification Number (CCN) as the hospital and are
affiliated  with  the  acute  care  facility.”  The  CMS  Final  Rule  can  be  accessed  in  the
document, US Department of Health and Human Services.  Medicare Program: Changes
to Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment and Ambulatory Surgical Center Payment
Systems  and  Quality  Reporting  Programs.  Q6.  How  should  acute  care  facilities  report
HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data?  Facilities  should  follow  the  guidance  below
when  making  determinations  about  which  areas  of  the  acute  care  facility  to  include
when reporting HCP influenza vaccination summary data to NHSN as part of the CMS
Hospital  Inpatient  Quality  Reporting  (IQR)  Program:  Q7.  Why  are  free-standing  IPFs
required to enroll in NHSN, while IPF units having different CMS certification numbers
(CCNs) from the acute care or critical access facilities usually do not need to do so? IPF
units  do  not  need  to  enroll  or  activate  the  Healthcare  Personnel  Safety  (HPS)
Component  unless  their  affiliated  acute  care  or  critical  access  facility  is  not  already
enrolled in NHSN or the IPF unit is not physically located within the walls of the affiliated
acute care or critical  access  facility.   IPF units  located  within  hospitals  can  simply  be
mapped as locations of the already-enrolled acute care or critical access facility.  Once
the IPF unit is added as a location of the facility, the IPF unit-specific CCN is linked with
that  location.   View  more  information  about  how  to  map  an  IPF  unit  and  add  an  IPF
unit-specific  CCN   [PDF  –  200  KB].  Q8.  I  am  reporting  HCP  influenza  vaccination
summary data for an IRF unit that is physically located within our acute care facility.
The IRF unit has the same CMS Certification Number (CCN) as the hospital except for an
“R”  (or  “T”)  in  the  third  position.  How  should  I  report  the  IRF  unit  data  in  NHSN?
Influenza vaccination summary data for HCP working in this IRF unit should be reported
separately  from  the  acute  care  hospital  summary  data.  On  the  influenza  vaccination
summary  data  entry  screen,  use  the  dropdown  box  under  the  location  field  to  select
“IRF Unit(s)” before entering data.  HCP working in the IRF unit should not be counted in
the summary report for the rest of the acute care facility unless they also work in other
inpatient or outpatient units of the acute care facility between October 1 and March 31.
Q9.  Why  are  free-standing  IRFs  required  to  enroll  in  NHSN,  while  IRF  units  having
different CCNs from their acute care or critical access facilities usually do not need to
do  so?  IRF  units  do  not  need  to  enroll  or  activate  the  HPS  Component  unless  their
affiliated acute care or critical access facility is not already enrolled in NHSN or the IRF
unit  is  not  physically  located  within  the  walls  of  the  affiliated  acute  care  or  critical
access facility. IRF units located within hospitals can simply be mapped as locations of
the already-enrolled acute care or critical access facility.  Once the IRF unit is added as
a location of the facility, the IRF unit-specific CCN is linked with the facility so IRF unit
data can be sent to CMS appropriately.  View more information about CMS certified IRF
Locations [PDF – 504 KB]. Q10. If my IRF unit has the exact same CCN as my acute care
or  critical  access  facility,  do  I  need  to  report  the  IRF  unit  data  separately  from  this
facility? No.  If the IRF unit CCN is 100% identical to the CCN of its acute care or critical
access facility, then separate HCP influenza vaccination summary data reporting is not
required by CMS.  Therefore, counts of HCP working in the IRF unit can be included in
the total counts for the acute care or critical access facility. However, IRF units whose
CCNs  differ  from  the  acute  care  or  critical  access  facility  CCN  by  even  one  letter  or
number  –  for  example,  having  a  “T”  or  “R”  in  the  third  position  –  must  either  be
mapped as locations of the parent facility or enrolled as a separate NHSN facility, and
their data must be reported separately. Q11. There are multiple IRF units located within
my facility. Should I report HCP influenza vaccination summary data separately in NHSN
for  each  individual  unit?  No.   The  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  of  each
individual  IRF  unit  should  be  combined  and  submitted  to  NHSN  as  a  single  summary
data  report  combining  all  CMS  IRF  units  within  the  facility.  Q12.  My  health  system
administers influenza vaccination in an acute care hospital. Some HCP working in an IRF
unit  of  the  acute  care  facility  that  is  part  of  our  health  system  receives  influenza
vaccination in the acute care hospital. How should I categorize the vaccination status of
these  HCP?  Some  health  systems  have  a  single  group  responsible  for  providing
influenza vaccination to HCP working at several types of healthcare facilities and units
that  are  a  part  of  the  system.   If  these  HCP  receive  influenza  vaccination  that  is
administered  under  the  umbrella  of  the  health  system,  then  they  should  be
documented as “receiving influenza vaccination at the healthcare facility” (#2 on the
Healthcare Personnel Influenza Vaccination Summary report form) as part of the total
counts for the IRF unit reporting in this facility. Q13. I used to report data for my CMS
inpatient psychiatric facility (IPF) unit that is located within an acute care facility. How
should I report data for HCP working in this unit now that the CMS requirements for IPFs
have changed? HCP working only in the IPF unit should not be counted in the acute care
facility vaccination summary report.  Vaccination status of these HCP does not have to
be  reported  to  NHSN  for  CMS  purposes,  although  reporting  may  be  required  by  the
state or locality where the facility operates. However, HCP working in both the CMS IPF
unit and in other units of the acute care facility should be included in the acute care
facility vaccination summary report. Q14. I am reporting from a LTAC that is physically
within an acute care facility. How should I report the LTAC data in NHSN? CMS reporting
requirements  for  long-term  acute  care  hospitals  are  separate  from  requirements  for
short-stay  acute  care  hospitals.   Because  the  long-term  acute  care  unit  has  its  own
CCN, it should have already enrolled in NHSN as a separate HOSP-LTAC facility. To fulfill
CMS LTCHQR requirements, the LTAC must report HCP influenza vaccination summary
data  separately  through  the  enrolled  NHSN  LTAC  facility.  HCP  who  work  in  this
unit/facility would not be included in the influenza vaccination summary for the acute
care  hospital,  unless  they  also  work  in  the  short-stay  acute  care  facility.  Q1.  What
identity proofing documents are required for the Secure Access Management Services
(SAMS)  process?  Users  submit  identity  proofing  documentation  as  part  of  the  SAMS
process,  including  a  notarized  identity  verification  form  and  supporting  documents
(driver’s license, passport, etc.). View more information about the SAMS process. Q2.
What  CMS  Certification  Number  (CCN)  effective  date  should  I  list  in  NHSN  for  my
facility? The CCN effective date is the official date in which a facility first received its
CCN from CMS.  For dialysis facilities, the effective date for your CCN should be the date
of the CMS certification survey which resulted in the new CCN.  To update the CCN or
CCN effective date, use the ‘Facility > Facility Info’ option on the left-hand navigation
bar  within  NHSN.   At  the  top  of  the  Facility  Information  screen,  verify  and  update  (if
necessary) the CCN or CCN effective date in the appropriate data entry field(s). If any
changes  have  been  made,  remember  to  click  the  ‘Update’  button  at  the  bottom  of
screen.  Q3.  Which  NHSN  component  should  I  use  to  submit  annual  HCP  influenza
vaccination  summary  data  for  my  facility?  Facilities  must  activate  the  Healthcare
Personnel  Safety  Component  in  NHSN  to  report  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary
data.  Only  the  NHSN  Facility  Administrator  (FA)  can  activate  a  new  component.  All
facility and unit types should submit HCP influenza vaccination summary data to NHSN
using  this  component.  This  is  true  even  for  facilities  that  may  report  data  primarily
through  other  components,  such  as  long-term  care  facilities  and  outpatient  dialysis
facilities.  Please  note  that  reporting  weekly  influenza  vaccination  data  through  the
NHSN  Long-term  Care  Facility  (LTCF)  Component  does  not  fulfill  the  CMS  annual
healthcare personnel influenza vaccination data reporting requirement. Q4. What must I
do  to  report  to  NHSN  for  the  HCP  Influenza  Vaccination  Summary  Measure?  Facilities
and units reporting to NHSN for the HCP Influenza Vaccination Summary Measure must
follow the NHSN HPS Flu Vaccine Protocol 2022 [PDF – 300 KB]. Q5. How do I activate
the Healthcare Personnel Safety Component to report the annual healthcare personnel
influenza vaccination summary data? To report annual healthcare personnel influenza
vaccination  summary  data,  the  NHSN  Facility  Administrator  (FA)  must  activate  the
Healthcare  Personnel  Safety  (HPS)  Component.  Detailed  instructions  on  how  activate
this  component  are  outlined  here:  Enrollment  Level  3  Access  and  HPS  Component
Activation  [PDF  –  150  KB].  Q6.  Does  NHSN  require  influenza  vaccination  data  to  be
reported  for  each  individual  healthcare  worker?  No.  Facilities  are  required  to  report
summary rather than individual-level vaccination data.  Therefore, information such as
employee-level demographic data is not required. Q7. I logged into my NHSN facility,
but I do not have the option to enter HCP influenza vaccination data on the left-hand
navigation bar. How can I enter my data? This is most likely because your NHSN Facility
Administrator has not conferred the proper user rights to you.  You should contact your
Facility  Administrator  so  they  can  confer  the  proper  rights  for  you  to  view  and  enter
data in the HCP Safety Component. If you need to update your Facility Administrator,
please  use  the  Facility  Administrator  change  request  form.  Q8.  The  HCP  Influenza
Vaccination Summary Form in NHSN defines the influenza season as July 1 to June 30.
Does  this  mean  that  my  facility  is  required  to  report  on  twelve  months  of  data  even
though we do not administer influenza vaccine for all twelve months of the year? No. 
Although influenza may occur at any time of the year, you should report data for the
reporting period specified in the NHSN protocol, which is October 1 through March 31
for the denominator, including all vaccinations given during the influenza season in the
numerator.  The July 1 to June 30 time period is used by NHSN to clearly define the end
of  one  influenza  season  and  the  beginning  of  the  next  influenza  season.  Q9.  Can
facilities or units review HCP influenza vaccination summary data that are entered into
NHSN  each  month?  No.   Each  time  a  user  enters  updated  HCP  influenza  vaccination
summary  data  for  a  particular  influenza  season,  all  previously  entered  data  for  that
season will be overwritten and a new modified date will be auto-filled by the system.
Each  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  report  entered  into  NHSN  should  be
cumulative:  for  example,  summary  vaccination  data  entered  at  the  end  of  November
would  include  data  from  both  October  and  November.   Facilities  or  units  wishing  to
maintain monthly records should save their own copies of each data entry. Please note
that  monthly  reporting  in  NHSN  is  not  required  for  HCP  influenza  vaccination  data;
entering  a  single  influenza  vaccination  summary  report  covering  the  entire  influenza
season will meet the minimum data requirements for NHSN participation. Q10. How can
I modify the HCP influenza vaccination summary data that have been entered in NHSN
for my facility or unit? Go to “Flu Summary” and then “Find” on the left-hand navigation
bar to identify data for the influenza season you wish to edit.  To edit data, first click
“Edit”  at  the  bottom  of  the  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  entry  screen.  
Next, you will proceed to enter the updated data.  Once this is complete, you must save
the updated data by clicking the “Save” button at the bottom of the screen.  You should
then  see  a  message  at  the  top  of  your  screen  confirming  that  your  data  have  been
saved. Q11. Is each facility or unit required to calculate vaccination percentages when
using  the  Healthcare  Personnel  Vaccination  module?  No.   Facilities  or  units  will  only
need to enter the number of HCP that fall into each of the numerator and denominator
categories.  The NHSN system will calculate vaccination coverage percentages for you.
Q12. My facility or unit would like to track influenza vaccination for nurses. Is there a
way we can track this group separately in NHSN? Yes, you can use the Custom Field
option in NHSN to create new fields for data that you would like to collect and analyze
consistently.  Q13.  When  using  the  group  function,  why  am  I  unable  to  view  HCP
influenza vaccination summary data for all influenza seasons? You may need to change
how your user rights are defined in order to view data for all influenza seasons. Please
contact your Facility Administrator for more information about your user rights. Group
Users  can  also  define  which  influenza  season  data  are  available  in  NHSN.  On  the
“Define  Rights-Healthcare  Personnel”  page  in  NHSN  (Facility  >  Define  Rights),  group
users can select which influenza seasons will appear in the Group’s data. Q14. Who do I
contact for questions related to NHSN reporting of HCP influenza vaccination summary
data? Questions should be sent via e-mail to NHSN@cdc.gov.  Please include “HPS Flu
Summary”  in  the  subject  line  of  the  e-mail  and  specify  your  facility  type,  as  this  will
help us to better assist you.  For example, an acute care facility sending a question to
NHSN  should  include  “HPS  Flu  Summary-Acute  Care”  in  the  e-mail  subject  line.  Q1.
What types of nurses are considered licensed independent practitioners? All advanced
practice nurses should be reported in the licensed independent practitioner category.
Advanced  practice  nurses  include  nurse  practitioners,  nurse  midwives,  clinical  nurse
specialists, and nurse anesthetists. Q2. What types of HCP are included in the “other
contract personnel” category? A suggested list of other contract personnel who might
work  in  a  healthcare  facility  is  located  in  Appendix  A  of  the  NHSN  HPS  Flu  Vaccine
Protocol  2022  [PDF  –  266  KB].  Q3.  Should  employees  who  always  work  off-site  or
out-of-state,  such  as  employees  practicing  telemedicine,  be  included  in  our  HCP
summary vaccination data reports? No. Only HCP physically working at the healthcare
facility for at least 1 day from October 1 through March 31 are included. Q4. Should I
count HCP who are not working with patients, but because of staff meetings, etc. are
physically  in  the  facility?  You  should  count  HCP  who  meet  protocol  definitions  and
perform any work duty in the facility for at least 1 day from October 1 through March
31,  regardless  of  clinical  responsibility  or  patient  contact.   For  example,  you  should
count  HCP  having  official  responsibilities  in  the  facility  such  as  attending  regularly
scheduled meetings or required training.  However, you would not need to count HCP
who  are  not  officially  in  the  facility  for  work  duties  (e.g.,  coming  into  the  facility  for
lunch) during the reporting period. Q5. My healthcare system has two facilities, A and B.
If an individual works at facility A for 1 day during the influenza season and works at
facility B for 15 days during the influenza season, should I count them in the data for
both  facilities?  Yes,  all  employees,  non-employee  licensed  independent  practitioners,
and  non-employee  adult  students  and  volunteers  should  be  counted  at  each  facility
where  they  physically  work  for  at  least  one  day  from  October  1  through  March  31.  
Therefore, you would include this individual in your influenza vaccination summary data
reports  both  for  facility  A  and  for  facility  B.   These  reports  describe  influenza
vaccination rates among all HCP working at a specific facility, so all eligible HCP must
be counted at each facility where they work. Q6. There are three facilities within our
healthcare system. Can I collect and enter a single report of HCP influenza vaccination
summary  data  for  our  system  since  many  of  our  staff  members  work  at  multiple
facilities? No, each of the system’s facilities need to be enrolled as separate facilities in
NHSN  and  to  report  their  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  separately.   If  an
individual physically works in multiple facilities in the healthcare system for at least 1
day  from  October  1  through  March  31,  this  individual  should  be  counted  in  the  total
number of HCP for each facility where they work. Q7. Should I include an employee who
starts  working  at  my  facility  or  unit  after  October  1,  or  leaves  their  position  after
October  1,  in  my  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  report?  Yes.   All  employees,
non-employee  licensed  independent  practitioners,  and  non-employee  students  and
volunteers aged 18 and older who physically work at the facility or unit for at least 1
day from October 1 through March 31, regardless of exact stop or start dates, should be
included  in  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  data  reports.  Q8.  In  the  protocol  for
collecting HCP influenza vaccination summary data, licensed independent practitioners
are defined as physicians, advanced practice nurses, and physician assistants who are
affiliated  with  the  reporting  facility  or  unit  but  are  not  directly  employed  by  it.  What
does it mean for HCP to be “affiliated with” a facility or unit? HCP who are affiliated with
the healthcare facility or unit are those who perform a work duty in the facility or unit
but are not directly employed by the facility (i.e., they do not receive a paycheck from
the  facility).   This  would  include  non-employee  HCP  who  come  into  the  healthcare
facility or unit to round on patients, perform procedures, take facility-required trainings,
or  undertake  other  work  duties.  Q9.  How  is  a  facility  owner,  particularly  a  physician
owner, categorized for purposes of HCP influenza vaccination summary reporting? Any
owner, even a physician owner, is categorized as an “employee” and included in this
measure if he/she is physically working in the facility for at least 1 day from October 1
through  March  31.  Q10.  Should  physician  fellows  and  residents  be  included  in  HCP
vaccination summary reports? Yes.  Physician fellows (post-residency) are categorized
as  licensed  independent  practitioners,  unless  they  are  paid  directly  by  the  facility,  in
which case they are employees. Residents and interns not on the facility’s payroll are
categorized as adult students/trainees. Q11. When are advanced practitioners counted
as  “employees”  and  when  are  they  counted  as  “licensed  independent  practitioners”?
An  “employee”  is  anyone  on  the  payroll  of  or  receiving  a  paycheck  from  the  facility,
regardless of their job duties.  Licensed independent practitioners working at the facility
for  at  least  1  day  from  October  1  through  March  31  who  do  not  receive  a  paycheck
directly from the facility should be counted in the “non-employee, licensed independent
practitioners”  category  which  includes  physicians,  advanced  practice  nurses,  and
physician assistants.  Post-residency fellows are also included in this category, unless
they are paid directly by the facility, in which case they are employees. Q12. Should I
count a licensed independent practitioner who rarely comes into a facility or unit during
the influenza season? This person would be included in the HCP influenza vaccination
summary data report if they physically work in the facility or unit for at least 1 day from
October 1 through March 31. Q13. Should I include licensed independent practitioners
who  work  in  the  facility  or  unit  under  a  contract  in  my  HCP  influenza  vaccination
summary report? Yes. It is necessary to track contracted physicians, advanced practice
nurses,  and  physician  assistants  and  report  them  as  licensed  independent
practitioners.   Other  types  of  contract  personnel  who  do  not  meet  the  definition  of  a
licensed  independent  practitioner  can  be  reported  in  the  optional  “other  contract
personnel”  category  if  desired.  This  category  includes  licensed  or  credentialed
providers  other  than  physicians,  advanced  practice  nurses,  and  physician  assistants
who  work  under  a  contract  with  the  reporting  facility.  Q14.  Are  contractors  such  as
housekeeping staff, environmental services staff, construction workers, etc. required to
be  included  in  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  reports?  No;  reporting  influenza
vaccination  summary  data  for  these  HCP  is  not  required.   Non-licensed  contract
personnel  can  be  reported  in  the  optional  “other  contract  personnel”  category  if
desired.  Q15.  Vendors  or  sales  representatives  occasionally  come  into  my  facility  or
unit  and  may  be  present  during  surgeries  or  other  patient  care  activities.  Should  we
count  these  vendors  in  the  optional  other  contract  personnel  category?  Previously,
NHSN  instructed  facilities  not  to  include  vendors  as  healthcare  personnel.  After
receiving  stakeholder  feedback,  NHSN  updated  the  vaccination  reporting  guidance  to
include  vendors  in  the  OCP  category,  regardless  of  clinical  responsibility  or  patient
contact. Therefore, beginning with the 2022-2023 influenza season, vendors providing
care,  treatment,  or  services  should  be  included  in  the  other  OCP  category  if  they
physically work in the facility for at least one day during the reporting period (October 1
through  March  31).  Please  note  that  data  reporting  for  the  OCP  category  remains
optional at this time. Q16. Should students who work a half-day shift for one day during
the reporting period be included in HCP influenza vaccination summary data reports?
Yes.   Working  any  part  of  a  day  counts  as  working  1  day,  so  you  would  count  these
students  since  they  worked  at  least  1  day  from  October  1  through  March  31.  Q17.
Should I count instructors who accompany students to a healthcare facility or unit if the
instructors  do  not  otherwise  work  at  the  facility  or  unit?  Yes,  you  would  count  these
individuals in your HCP influenza vaccination summary data as adult students/trainees
and  volunteers  since  they  are  in  the  facility  or  unit  to  provide  instruction  to  the
students/trainees. Q18. High school students who are age 18 or older can volunteer at
our facility or unit. Should these students be counted, or do we only report vaccination
among health professional students? All students/trainees and volunteers aged 18 and
over should be counted if they are physically in the facility or unit for at least 1 day
from October 1 through March 31.  It does not matter if the student is in high school,
college,  medical  school,  etc.  Q19.  How  should  we  count  ‘shadowers’  who  visit  our
facility or unit on a short-term basis to explore a possible career in healthcare? Would
they  be  counted  as  students/trainees?  Most  of  them  are  not  enrolled  in  school  when
they visit. You would not count shadowers who are touring the facility or unit since they
are  not  in  the  facility  or  unit  for  a  work-related  or  training-related  purpose;  however,
CDC  encourages  these  individuals  to  obtain  influenza  vaccination  since  they  have
potential exposure to infectious agents including influenza while in the facility or unit. 
The  adult  students/trainees  and  volunteers  category  should  include  only  current
medical,  nursing,  or  other  health  professional  students,  interns,  medical  residents,  or
volunteers  aged  18  or  older  who  are  affiliated  with  the  facility  or  unit  for  work  or
training purposes (e.g. clinical rotations). Q20. Should clergy members be included in
our  facility  or  unit’s  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  reports?  Yes.   If  they  are
physically in the facility or unit for at least 1 day from October 1 through March 31, any
unpaid  personnel  who  are  in  the  facility  in  a  formal  capacity  (clergy  member,  board
member, auxiliary member, etc.) are considered volunteers and should be counted in
your summary vaccination report. Q21. There are some HCP who work in the facility or
unit as part-time employees during the day and work as students by night. How should I
classify  these  individuals?  The  following  hierarchy  should  be  used  to  classify  HCP  at
your facility or unit: if a healthcare worker (HCW) who works in the facility or unit is on
payroll,  they  should  be  counted  as  an  employee  (even  if  they  work  as  a  student  or
volunteer at other times). If a HCW is not on the facility payroll, you should determine
whether  they  meet  the  definition  of  a  licensed  independent  practitioner.  If  not,  you
should  finally  determine whether the HCW  is an  adult student/trainee or volunteer.  If
none  of  those  are  the  case,  then  you  do  not  need  to  count  that  HCW  in  your  HCP
influenza  vaccination  summary  report.  Q22.  My  healthcare  system  uses  multiple
payrolls. Should I count corporate employees of the facility or unit who are paid through
a  corporate  payroll  in  the  employee  category  for  HCP  influenza  vaccination  reporting
purposes? Some healthcare systems use multiple payroll systems; for example, certain
individuals within a particular facility or unit may be corporate employees paid directly
through a corporate payroll, while others at the facility or unit are facility employees
paid directly through a facility payroll.  For healthcare systems using multiple payroll
systems, a facility or unit would only count as employees those personnel who are paid
directly  through  a  facility  payroll.   Corporate  employees  who  are  not  paid  directly
through the facility payroll would not be counted in the employee category, although
they  could  be  counted  in  the  licensed  independent  practitioner  or  other  contract
personnel categories if they meet NHSN protocol definitions for either group.  However,
if a facility or unit is part of a system that has only one payroll for the entire system,
then  each  facility  or  unit  in  that  system  would  count  all  personnel  on  payroll  in  the
employee category, if they physically work in that facility or unit for at least 1 day from
October  1  through  March  31.  Q23.  What  does  it  mean  when  it  is  stated  on  the  HCP
Influenza  Vaccination  Summary  Form  that  “denominators  are  to  be  calculated
separately  for  the  three  required  categories”?  The  instruction  to  calculate  the
denominator  data  separately  means  that  a  facility  or  unit  is  required  to  count  and
report  the  number  of  employees,  licensed  independent  practitioners,  and  adult
students/trainees and volunteers separately instead of reporting a total number of HCP
working at the facility. That way, vaccination rates can be determined for each of the
three groups.  For example, to determine the vaccination rate for employees, you would
divide  the  number  of  employees  who  were  vaccinated  by  the  total  number  of
employees who worked in your facility or unit for at least 1 day from October 1 through
March 31. You would then multiply this by 100 to obtain a percentage. Q1. My acute
care  hospital  owns  several  outpatient  provider  practices  that  are  physically  separate
from the main hospital campus and have separate CCNs. Employees of these clinics are
on  the  hospital’s  payroll,  so  should  I  include  them  in  HCP  influenza  vaccination
summary report for the hospital? No. Because the practices have separate CCNs, these
employees should not be counted in HCP influenza vaccination summary reports for the
acute care facility unless they also physically work in the acute care hospital for at least
1 day from October 1 through March 31. Q2. My facility has an administrative building
that is physically connected to the acute care facility by a skywalk. This building is only
used for administrative duties and not patient care. Should I count HCP working in this
building  in  the  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  report  for  my  acute  care  facility?
Yes,  you  should  count  HCP  working  in  the  administrative  building,  as  it  is  considered
part  of  the  acute  care  facility.  Q3.  Should  HCP  who  are  employees  of  a  healthcare
system (e.g., university employees), but who are not hospital employees, be included in
the  acute  care  facility  HCP  influenza  vaccination  summary  report?  Non-hospital
employees should only be included if they physically work in the acute care facility for
at least 1 day from October 1 through March 31 and meet NHSN protocol definitions for
either the licensed independent practitioner category or the adult student/trainee and
volunteer category.  They would not be counted in the employee category since they
are not on the hospital’s payroll. Q1. If a HCW was vaccinated at their doctor’s office in
August, and worked in the facility during the influenza season, should they be counted
as vaccinated in our HCP influenza vaccination summary report? Yes.  This HCW should
be counted in the report for your facility, since influenza vaccine for a given influenza
season may be available as early as July or August.  The strict reporting period for the
measure (October 1 through March 31) applies to the denominator.  This HCW would be
required  to  provide  documentation  of  influenza  vaccination  and  would  be  counted  in
the “vaccinated outside of the healthcare facility” category.  If the HCW did not provide
acceptable  documentation,  their  vaccination  status  would  be  counted  as  “unknown.”
Q2. What is considered acceptable documentation for a HCW vaccinated outside of the
healthcare facility? Acceptable forms of documentation include a signed statement or
form,  or  an  electronic  form  or  e-mail  from  the  HCW  indicating  when  and  where  they
received the influenza vaccine.  A note, receipt, vaccination card, etc. from the outside
vaccinating entity stating that the HCW received the influenza vaccine at that location
is  also  permitted.  Verbal  statements  are  not  acceptable  to  document  vaccination
outside the facility for the purposes of NHSN HCP influenza vaccination summary data
reporting.  Q3.  If  a  HCW  can  only  be  reached  by  phone,  and  they  state  they  were
vaccinated  elsewhere,  how  is  this  reported?  Their  vaccination  status  is  reported  as
“unknown”  unless  written  documentation  is  provided.  Verbal  statements  are  not
acceptable for the purposes of this reporting measure. However, this HCW could send
an e-mail or mail a written statement attesting that they were vaccinated outside the
facility.  Q4.  My  healthcare  system  includes  numerous  healthcare  facilities.  A  HCW
received  influenza  vaccine  within  our  healthcare  system;  however,  we  are  unable  to
identify the specific facility where they were vaccinated. Should this be counted as a
vaccination received “at the facility” or “outside the facility”? If the influenza vaccine
was received at any facility within your larger healthcare system and you are unable to
determine at which facility they were vaccinated, you can count the HCW as receiving
vaccination  “at  the  facility.”   Therefore,  the  HCW  would  not  need  to  provide  written
documentation  of  this  vaccination.   This  only  applies  to  attribution  of  the  influenza
vaccine for an individual HCW; facilities are expected to report separate numerator and
denominator  counts  to  NHSN  for  each  individual  facility  in  a  healthcare  system.  Q5.
What conditions permit a HCW to be categorized as having a medical contraindication
to influenza vaccination? Only HCP who have a severe allergic reaction to eggs or other
components of the influenza vaccine or a history of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (a severe
paralytic illness, also called GBS) within 6 weeks after a previous influenza vaccination
should be counted as having a medical contraindication to vaccination for purposes of
HCP influenza vaccination reporting in NHSN. Q6. Is documentation required for medical
contraindications  or  vaccine  declinations?  No.  Documentation  is  not  required  for
reporting a medical contraindication or a declination; therefore, verbal statements are
acceptable for reporting these numerator categories.  Documentation is only required
for  HCP  vaccinated  outside  the  reporting  facility.  Q7.  How  should  I  categorize  a
volunteer who was offered influenza vaccination, but verbally refused vaccination and
stated they had an egg allergy with history of an anaphylactic reaction? The volunteer
should be categorized as having a medical contraindication. Written documentation is
not required for medical contraindications. Q8. How do I categorize HCP who report that
they  have  a  medical  contraindication  but  do  not  confirm  that  it  is  one  of  the  two
conditions  defined  as  contraindications  for  NHSN  reporting  purposes?  They  should  be
reported as “declined to receive the influenza vaccine.” Q9. My facility offers the live
attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV4) to HCP who do not want to receive an injection.
Are the acceptable medical contraindications the same for LAIV4 as for the inactivated
influenza vaccine? There are several different types of influenza vaccines available for
use in adults; each vaccine has different precautions and contraindications for use. HCP
who have a medical contraindication to LAIV4 other than a severe allergic reaction to a
vaccine  component  or  history  of  Guillain-Barré  Syndrome  within  6  weeks  after  a
previous influenza vaccination should be offered trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine
(IIV3) or quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV4) by their facility, if available. If
IIV3 or IIV4 is offered but declined because of aversion to an injection, the HCW would
be
 categorized
 as
 “declined
 to
 receive
 the
 influenza
 vaccine.”
 Therefore,
contraindications to LAIV4 that do not preclude receipt of injectable influenza vaccine
are  not  acceptable  medical  contraindications  for  this  measure.  Q10.  How  should  I
categorize  a  pregnant  HCW  who  states  that  her  healthcare  provider  recommended
against  influenza  vaccination?  A  HCW  who  does  not  receive  the  influenza  vaccine
because  of  pregnancy,  or  any  medical  reason  other  than  the  two  allowable
contraindications  defined  for  this  measure,  should  be  categorized  as  “declined  to
receive  the  influenza  vaccine.”  Q11.  How  should  I  categorize  HCP  who  decline
vaccination because they are ill at the time the influenza vaccine is initially offered and
then never have another opportunity to receive it? They are reported as “declined to
receive  the  influenza  vaccine.”  Q12.  How  do  I  categorize  a  HCW  who  was  granted  a
religious  or  personal  belief  exemption  to  influenza  vaccination  according  to  their
facility’s policy? A HCW who declines to receive vaccination for any reason other than
the two specified medical contraindications for the HCP Vaccination Module should be
categorized  as  “declined  to  receive  the  influenza  vaccine.”  This  is  true  even  if  your
facility  permits  religious  or  philosophical  exemptions  for  influenza  vaccination.  Q13.
How  should  I  categorize  a  HCW  who  received  a  medical  exemption  for  influenza
vaccination  under  his/her  facility’s  policy,  which  permits  exemptions  for  conditions
other  than  those  specified  in  the  NHSN  protocol?  A  HCW  who  declines  to  receive
vaccination  for  any  reason  other  than  the  two  specified  medical  contraindications  for
the HCP Vaccination Module should be categorized as “declined to receive the influenza
vaccine.” This is true even if your facility permits medical exemptions for reasons other
than  those  defined  in  the  NHSN  protocol.  In  some  cases,  HCP  who  are  considered
medically exempt from vaccination by the facility where they work will be counted as
declining  vaccination  for  the  purposes  of  NHSN  reporting.   Counting  only  HCP  with
specified  conditions  as  having  a  medical  contraindication  to  influenza  vaccination
ensures that HCP influenza vaccination data reported to NHSN can be compared across
different  facilities.  Q14.  How  should  I  categorize  HCP  who  never  came  to  a  clinic  or
returned  a  declination  form?  If  you  were  unable  to  confirm  a  HCW’s  influenza
vaccination status for any reason, they should be counted in the “unknown” category.
Q15.  If  I  use  a  survey  to  collect  the  numerator  information  for  my  facility’s  HCP
influenza vaccination summary report, how should persons who did not respond to the
survey be counted? If your facility decides to use a survey to collect vaccination status,
HCP who do not respond to the survey should be counted in the “unknown” category. 
The  NHSN  HCP  influenza  vaccination  measure  was  not  pilot-tested  for  use  with  a
survey, and facilities are strongly encouraged to track influenza vaccination data from
written  records  instead  of  using  a  survey.   Surveys  should  not  be  used  to  collect
denominator data. 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/vaccination/faq-influenza-vaccination-summary-reporting.html
