Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. CDC recommends a respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccine
for pregnant people to protect their babies from severe RSV disease. Pregnant people
should get a single dose of Pfizer’s bivalent RSVpreF vaccine (Abrysvo) during weeks 32
through  36  of  pregnancy  during  September  through  January.  To  prevent  severe  RSV
disease  in  infants,  either  maternal  RSV  vaccination  or  infant  immunization  with  RSV
monoclonal  antibody  is  recommended.  Most  infants  will  not  need  both.  CDC
recommends  one  dose  of  Pfizer’s  bivalent  RSVpreF  vaccine  (Abrysvo)  during  RSV
season for people who are 32 through 36 weeks pregnant. In most of the continental
United  States,  pregnant  people  should  receive  RSV  vaccine  from  September  through
January  so  that  their  babies  are  protected  against  severe  RSV  disease  at  birth.
However, RSV seasons can vary in different parts of the United States. Local, state, and
territorial  health  departments  can  determine  the  best  times  to  start  and  stop
administration  of  RSV  vaccines  in  their  jurisdictions.  This  is  especially  important  in
Alaska,  parts  of  Florida,  Hawaii,  Puerto  Rico,  U.S.  Virgin  Islands,  Guam,  and  the
U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands, where RSV seasonality can be different from most of the
continental U.S. RSVpreF (Abrysvo, Pfizer) should not be administered to a person with
a  history  of  severe  allergic  reaction,  such  as  anaphylaxis,  to  any  component  of  this
vaccine. Information about Abrysvo can be found in the manufacturer’s package insert.
Adults with a minor acute illness, such as a cold, can receive RSV vaccination. Moderate
or severe acute illness, with or without fever, is a precaution to vaccination; vaccination
should  generally  be  deferred  until  the  patient  improves.  To  learn  more,  see  ACIP
Contraindications  Guidelines  for  Immunization,  General  Best  Practice  Guidelines  for
Immunization.  RSVpreF  (Abrysvo,  Pfizer)  consists  of  a  recombinant  RSV  F  protein
antigen  (based  on  both  the  RSV-A  and  RSV-B  subtypes),  stabilized  in  the  prefusion
conformation  (preF).  The  vaccine  is  supplied  as  a  single-dose  vial  of  120  μg  of
lyophilized  preF  antigen  component  (60  μg  from  RSV-A,  60  μg  from  RSV-B)  to  be
reconstituted with the accompanying vial of sterile water diluent component. A single
dose after reconstitution is approximately 0.5 mL. Consult the package insert for proper
storage and handling details, shelf life, and reconstitution instructions: Package Insert –
ABRYSVO  (fda.gov).  Data  from  clinical  trials  show  that  the  recommended  RSVpreF
(Abrysvo) vaccine is safe and efficacious for use in pregnant people to prevent severe
RSV  disease  in  infants  from  birth  through  6  months  of  age.  Two  randomized,
double-blinded,  placebo-controlled  clinical  studies  were  conducted.  In  the  one  study,
approximately  100  pregnant  people  received  the  maternal  RSV  vaccine  and
approximately  100  pregnant  people  received  a  placebo.  In  the  second  study,
approximately  3,600  pregnant  people  received  a  single  dose  of  the  maternal  RSV
vaccine and approximately 3,600 pregnant people received a placebo. In the phase 3
clinical trial, maternal RSV vaccine reduced the risk of the baby being hospitalized for
RSV by 68% and having a healthcare visit for RSV by 57% within 3 months after birth.
In the same trial, the RSV vaccine reduced the risk of the baby being hospitalized for
RSV by 57% and having a healthcare visit for RSV by 51% within 6 months after birth.
The  maternal  RSV  vaccine  reduced  the  risk  of  severe  RSV  disease  by  82%  within  3
months and by 69% within 6 months after birth. In this trial, severe RSV disease was
defined as RSV infection that results in tachypnea, hypoxemia, use of a high-flow nasal
cannula  or  mechanical  ventilation,  admission  to  an  intensive  care  unit,  or
unresponsiveness. In clinical trials, the most-reported side effects by pregnant people
who received the RSVpreF (Abrysvo) vaccine were pain at the injection site, headache,
myalgia,  and  nausea.  Preterm  birth  People  in  the  clinical  trial  who  received  the
maternal RSV vaccine got it during weeks 24 through 36 of pregnancy. More preterm
births  were  observed  among  maternal  RSV  vaccine  recipients  than  among  placebo
recipients.  However,  this  difference  was  not  statistically  different.  Among  pregnant
people in the clinical trial who received either the maternal RSV vaccine or a placebo
during weeks 32 through 36 of pregnancy, preterm birth occurred in 4.2% of pregnant
people  who  received  the  RSV  vaccine  compared  to  3.7%  of  pregnant  people  who
received  a  placebo.  Available  data  are  insufficient  to  establish  or  exclude  a  causal
relationship between preterm birth and RSVpreF (Abrysvo). To reduce the potential risk
of preterm birth when administering maternal RSV vaccine, FDA approved the vaccine
for use during weeks 32 through 36 of pregnancy. The vaccine studies did not include
people who already had a higher risk of preterm births. Other safety outcomes Although
not  common  in  the  clinical  trials,  hypertensive  disorders  of  pregnancy  (including
pre-eclampsia)  occurred  in  1.8%  of  pregnant  people  who  received  the  RSV  vaccine
compared to 1.4% of pregnant people who received a placebo. Pre-eclampsia, low birth
weight (meaning less than 5.5 lbs), and jaundice in newborns occurred more frequently
in infants born to mothers who received the RSV vaccine compared to infants born to
mothers who received a placebo. These conditions are often associated with preterm
birth.  CDC and FDA will continue to monitor the safety and effectiveness of maternal
RSV  vaccine,  review  data  as  collected,  keep  the  public  informed  of  findings,  and  use
data  to  make  recommendations  –  consistent  with  standard  practices  for  all  vaccines.
FDA is requiring Pfizer to conduct additional studies in pregnant people. These studies
are  meant  to  look  more  closely  at  the  potential   risk  for  preterm  births  and  at
hypertensive  disorders  of  pregnancy   including  pre-eclampsia.  CDC  will  monitor  the
safety of maternal RSV vaccination using multiple systems. The Vaccine Safety Datalink
(VSD) and Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) will monitor for adverse
pregnancy outcomes, such as pre-term birth, and acute outcomes, such as reactogenic
events.  CDC’s  V-safe  will  also  be  used  to  monitor  reactions  and  health  impacts  after
maternal  RSV  vaccination.  For  more  information  on  CDC’s  vaccine  safety  monitoring
systems,  see  Vaccine  Information  and  Safety  Studies.  Adverse  events  after  maternal
RSV  vaccination  should  be  reported  to  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Event  Reporting  System
(VAERS), even if it is not clear that the vaccine caused the adverse event. Information
on how to submit a report to VAERS is available at https://vaers.hhs.gov/index.html or
by telephone at 1-800-822-7967.  Anyone can submit a report to VAERS — healthcare
professionals,  vaccine  manufacturers,  and  the  general  public.  Proper  vaccine  storage
and handling practices play an important role in protecting individuals and communities
from  vaccine-preventable  diseases.  For  general  recommendations  and  guidance,  see
Vaccine  Storage  and  Handling.  Provided  below  is  guidance  for  the  RSVpreF  vaccine.
Pfizer’s vaccine is supplied in a kit with three components: Before reconstitution: After
reconstitution:  This  page  provides  a  summary  of  guidance  for  administering  RSVpreF
vaccine (Abrysvo, Pfizer) for use in pregnant people, including route, number of doses,
and  co-administration  with  other  vaccines.  Do  not  use  RSVpreF  vaccine  (Abrysvo,
Pfizer)  beyond  the  expiration  date  printed  on  the  label.  Route  Administer  RSVpreF
vaccine  (Abrysvo,  Pfizer)  intramuscularly.  The  preferred  site  of  administration  is  the
deltoid  region  of  the  upper  arm.  Do  not  administer  RSV  vaccine  intravenously,
intradermally, or subcutaneously. Number of Doses RSVpreF vaccine (Abrysvo, Pfizer) is
currently  approved  and  recommended  for  administration  as  a  single  dose.  Sufficient
evidence  does  not  exist  at  this  time  to  determine  the  need  for  additional  doses  in
subsequent  pregnancies.  Administration  with  other  vaccines  Pregnant  people  can
receive RSV, Tdap, COVID-19, and influenza vaccines at the same clinic visit when the
vaccines
 are
 recommended.
 CDC’s
 general
 best
 practice
 guidelines
 for
immunization indicate that age-appropriate vaccinations can be given at the same visit,
unless there is a specific reason not to.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/rsv/hcp/pregnant-people.html
