Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Hospital Respiratory Protection Program Toolkit
This toolkit was developed to assist hospitals in developing and implementing effective
respiratory  protection  programs,  with  an  emphasis  on  preventing  the  transmission  of
aerosol  transmissible  diseases  (ATDs)  to  healthcare  personnel.  Healthcare  personnel
are paid and unpaid persons who provide patient care in a healthcare setting or support
the  delivery  of  healthcare  by  providing  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
security, or maintenance services. Healthcare personnel may potentially be exposed to
ATD pathogens. Aerosols are particles or droplets suspended in air. ATDs are diseases
transmitted  when  infectious  agents,  which  are  suspended  or  present  in  particles  or
droplets,  contact  the  mucous  membranes  or  are  inhaled.  Implementing  Hospital
Respiratory Protection Programs: Strategies from the Field
Protecting  workers  from  exposure  to  all  types  of  respiratory  hazards  is  an  important
issue  for  hospitals  and  other  healthcare  organizations.  In  order  to  address  this  often
overlooked  danger,  The  Joint  Commission  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH),
National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  have  collaborated  to
develop  a  new  educational  monograph  designed  to  assist  hospitals  in  implementing
their  respiratory  protection  programs  (RPPs).  Recommended  Guidance  for  Extended
Use and Limited Reuse of N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators in Healthcare
This  document  recommends  practices  for  extended  use  and  limited  reuse  of
NIOSH-certified N95 filtering facepiece respirators (commonly called “N95 respirators”).
The  recommendations  are  intended  for  use  by  professionals  who  manage  respiratory
protection  programs  in  healthcare  institutions  to  protect  health  care  workers  from
job-related risks of exposure to infectious respiratory illnesses. NIOSH Reach II Study:
Understanding and Selecting Respiratory Protection Devices (2011-2012)
Infographic  addressing  situations  that  require  respiratory  protection  and  whether  an
N95 FFR or a surgical mask should be utilized.
PDF  [445  KB],  Image  [1,940  KB]  Respirator  Use  and  Infection  Control  in  Healthcare
(2015)
Infographic  on  important  reminders  concerning  respirator  use  within  hospital
respiratory protection programs.
PDF [1,036 KB], Image [339 KB] Proper N95 Respirator Use for Respiratory Protection
Preparedness
When outbreaks of infectious disease occur, we rely on healthcare professionals to care
for  those  affected,  putting  themselves  at  increased  risk  of  exposure  to  the  pathogen
causing  the  disease.  Preparing  for  an  Influenza  Pandemic:  Personal  Protective
Equipment for Healthcare Workers
During an influenza pandemic, healthcare workers will be on the front lines delivering
care to patients and preventing further spread of the disease. Protecting the more than
13 million healthcare workers in the United States from illness or from infecting their
families or the patients in their care is critical to limiting morbidity and mortality and
preventing progression of a pandemic. As the nation prepares for pandemic influenza,
multiple avenues for protecting the health of the public are being carefully considered,
ranging from rapid development of appropriate vaccines to quarantine plans should the
need arise for their implementation. One vital aspect of pandemic influenza planning is
the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) – the respirators, gowns, gloves, face
shields, eye protection, and other equipment that will be used by healthcare workers
and  others  in  their  day-to-day  patient  care  responsibilities.  Reusability  of  Facemasks
During an Influenza Pandemic: Facing the Flu
In  the  event  of  an  influenza  pandemic,  public  health  officials  will  need  to  resort  to
multiple measures to reduce the impact. If effective vaccines and anti-viral medications
do  not  exist  or  are  not  available  in  adequate  quantities  during  a  pandemic  situation,
respirators  and  medical  masks  could  help  prevent  or  slow  influenza  transmission.
Considerations for recommending extended use and limited reuse of filtering facepiece
respirators in healthcare settings
Fisher-EM;
 Shaffer-RE,
 J
 Occup
 Environ
 Hyg
 2014
 Aug;
 11(8):D115-D128
Reaerosolization  of  MS2  bacteriophage  from  an  N95  filtering  facepiece  respirator  by
simulated coughing
Fisher-EM;  Richardson-AW;  Harpest-SD;  Hofacre-KC;  Shaffer-RE,  Ann  Occup  Hyg  2012
Apr 56(3):315-325
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/hospresptoolkit/policies.html
