Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Elastomeric Half Mask Respirator Resources
This  webpage  was  developed  to  provide  information  on  NIOSH  studies  and  resources
related to elastomeric half mask respirators (EHMRs). EHMRs are a type of air-purifying
respirator  and  are  reusable  devices  with  exchangeable  filter  elements  (cartridges  or
filters)  that  may  be  selected  to  provide  the  needed  level  of  filtration  (e.g.,  N95).
Respirator Exhalation Valve Research
This  webpage  was  developed  to  provide  information  on  the  research  NIOSH  is
conducting on respirators with exhalation valves. The research aims to determine the
potential for respirators with exhalation valves to contribute to source control (i.e., their
ability to filter respiratory secretions to prevent disease transmission to others). Better
Respiratory Equipment Using Advanced Technologies for Healthcare Employees [PDF –
517 KB]
The  Better  Respiratory  Equipment  using  Advanced  Technologies  for  Healthcare
Employees  (Project  BREATHE)  Working  Group  (WG)  is  a  U.S.  Federal  government
interagency effort, initiated by the Department of Veterans Affairs, whose purpose is to
develop  a  set  of  consensus  recommendations  that  aim  to  improve  respiratory
protective  equipment  used  by  healthcare  workers  (HCWs).  With  representatives  from
nine  (9)  Federal  departments  and  agencies,  this  multi-disciplinary  team  had  a  broad
range  of  expertise,  including  pandemic  and  emergency  preparedness,  infectious
disease  medicine  and  epidemiology,  respirator  and  personal  protective  equipment
policy  and  regulation,  occupational  and  environmental  medicine,  respirator  and
materials science, infection control, respirator physiology and physics and bio-security.
The WG was co-chaired by staff from the Veterans Administration (VA) and the Centers
for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC).  This  report  consists  of  28  consensus
recommendations
 for
 consideration
 by
 respirator
 manufacturers,
 research
organizations,  consensus  standards  development  organizations,  and  respirator  users
and their employers. Hospital Respiratory Protection Program Toolkit
This toolkit was developed to assist hospitals in developing and implementing effective
respiratory  protection  programs,  with  an  emphasis  on  preventing  the  transmission  of
aerosol  transmissible  diseases  (ATDs)  to  healthcare  personnel.  Healthcare  personnel
are paid and unpaid persons who provide patient care in a healthcare setting or support
the  delivery  of  healthcare  by  providing  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
security, or maintenance services. Healthcare personnel may potentially be exposed to
ATD pathogens. Aerosols are particles or droplets suspended in air. ATDs are diseases
transmitted  when  infectious  agents,  which  are  suspended  or  present  in  particles  or
droplets,  contact  the  mucous  membranes  or  are  inhaled.  Implementing  Hospital
Respiratory Protection Programs: Strategies from the Field
Protecting  workers  from  exposure  to  all  types  of  respiratory  hazards  is  an  important
issue  for  hospitals  and  other  healthcare  organizations.  In  order  to  address  this  often
overlooked  danger,  The  Joint  Commission  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH),
National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  have  collaborated  to
develop  a  new  educational  monograph  designed  to  assist  hospitals  in  implementing
their  respiratory  protection  programs  (RPPs).  Respirator  Awareness:  Your  Health  May
Depend on it
One of the occupational hazards in the healthcare setting is the airborne transmission
of  certain  infectious  diseases.  The  potential  of  exposure  is  not  limited  to  physicians,
nurses, and support personnel in direct patient care. It extends to those delivering food,
cleaning  patient  rooms,  and  performing  maintenance.  Anyone  working  in  areas  with
patients infected with airborne-transmissible diseases is potentially at risk. Respirator
Evaluation in Acute Care Hospitals Study (REACH) (2009 – 2010)
NIOSH  identified  and  evaluated  the  usage  of  respiratory  protection  for  influenza
exposure  among  healthcare  workers.  Guidance  for  the  Selection  and  Use  of  Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE) I Healthcare Settings
Power  Point  presentation  addressing  methods  to  improve  personnel  safety  in  the
healthcare  environment  through  appropriate  use  of  PPE.  NIOSH  Respirator  Decision
Logic
NIOSH routinely makes recommendations regarding the use of respirators for workers
exposed  to  environments  that  contain  hazardous  concentrations  of  airborne
contaminants  or  oxygen-deficient  atmospheres.  This  document  provides  industrial
hygienists  and  other  professionals  knowledgeable  in  respirator  selection  with  a
procedure  for  selecting  suitable  classes  of  respirators  for  particular  concentrations  of
specific contaminants. Control of Smoke from Laser/Electric Surgical Procedures
NIOSH research has shown airborne contaminants generated by these surgical devices
can  be  effectively  controlled.  Two  methods  of  control  are  recommended  to…  Waste
Anesthetic Gases – Occupational Hazards in Hospitals
Waste anesthetic gases are small amounts of volatile anesthetic gases that leak from
the patient’s anesthetic breathing circuit into the air of operating rooms during delivery
of  anesthesia.  These  gases  may  also  be  exhaled  by  patients  recovering  from
anesthesia.  Waste  anesthetic  gases  include  both  nitrous  oxide  and  halogenated
anesthetics  such  as  halothane,  enflurane,  isoflurane,  desflurane,  sevoflurane,  and
methoxyflurane (no longer used in the United States). The halogenated anesthetics are
often  administered  in  combination  with  nitrous  oxide.  Nitrous  oxide  and  some  of  the
halogenated anesthetics may pose a hazard to hospital workers. NIOSH Reach II Study:
Understanding and Selecting Respiratory Protection Devices (2011-2012)
Infographic  addressing  situations  that  require  respiratory  protection  and  whether  an
N95 FFR or a surgical mask should be utilized.
PDF  [445  KB],  Image  [1,940  KB]  Required  Labeling  of  NIOSH-Approved  N95  Filtering
Facepiece Respirators (2014)
Infographic  depicting  the  required  labeling  for  all  NIOSH-approved  N95  filtering
facepiece respirators.
PDF [488 KB], Image [1,968 KB] Considerations for Respirator Selection in Healthcare
(2017)
Infographic  showcasing  the  different  considerations  when  selecting  a  respirator  for
healthcare use.
PDF [90 KB], Image [517 KB] NIOSH Respirator Filter Classes (2018)
Infographic showing the classification of filtering media in respirators.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon Understanding the Difference (2018)
Infographic  breaking  down  the  differences  between  a  surgical  mask  and  a  N95
respirator.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon Understanding the Difference
(surgical masks, N95 FFRs, and Elastomerics)
Infographic  breaking  down  the  differences  between  a  surgical  mask,  N95  respirator,
and elastomeric respirator.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon What Are Atmosphere-Supplying Respirators? (2019)
Infographic describing the different types of atmosphere-supplying respirators.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon What Are Air-Purifying Respirators? (2017)
Infographic describing the different types of air-purifying respirators.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon
Español – PDF, Image Preventing Transmission of Pandemic Influenza and Other Viral
Respiratory Diseases: Personal Protective Equipment for Healthcare Personnel Update
2010
In  light  of  the  unanswered  research  questions  following  the  2009  H1N1  influenza
pandemic,  NPPTL  asked  the  IOM  to  assess  the  progress  of  personal  protective
equipment  (PPE)  research  and  to  identify  future  directions  for  PPE  for  healthcare
personnel.  While  the  IOM  finds  that  there  are  gaps  and  deficiencies  in  the  research
about  PPE  use  in  health  care,  there  is  sufficient  knowledge  to  recommend  a
four-pronged  strategy  for  effective  PPE  use.  The  Use  and  Effectiveness  of  Powered
Air-Purifying Respirators in Healthcare: Workshop Summary
Protecting 18 million United States health care workers from infectious agents—known
and  unknown—involves  a  range  of  occupational  safety  and  health  measures  that
include identifying and using appropriate protective equipment (CDC, 2014a). The 2009
H1N1 influenza pandemic and the 2014 Ebola virus outbreak in West Africa have called
attention to the importance of personal protective equipment (PPE) in different health
care  settings  and  have  raised  questions  about  how  best  to  ensure  appropriate  and
effective  use  of  different  kinds  of  PPE  (such  as  respirators),  not  only  to  promote
occupational  safety  but  also  to  reduce  disease  transmission,  in  general.  Respiratory
Protection During Outbreaks: Respirators versus Surgical Masks
Consistent  use  of  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  is  an  important  part  of  the
strategy  to  protect  healthcare  professionals  from  inhaling  infectious  particles,
preventing  the  spread  of  respiratory  infection  between  healthcare  professionals  and
patients.  Understanding  respiratory  protection  options  in  Healthcare:  The  Overlooked
Elastomeric
In the healthcare industry, the importance of respiratory protection is often overlooked.
Choosing  the  correct  respirator  for  the  exposure  level  and  work  task  is  a  critical
component of a respiratory protection program. Catching the Flu: NIOSH Research on
Airborne Influenza Transmission
As  we  enter  another  influenza  season,  one  question  continues  to  vex  medical  and
public  health  professionals:  How  do  you  stop  people  from  catching  the  flu?  N95
Respirators and Surgical Masks
With the advent of a novel H1N1 influenza outbreak in spring 2009 and the expectation
of  a  second  wave  during  the  2009–2010  flu  season,  there  has  been  considerable
interest  in  the  use  of  surgical  masks  (facemasks)  and  respirators  as  infection  control
measures.  Although  their  appearance  is  often  similar,  respirators  are  designed  and
engineered  for  distinctly  different  functions  than  surgical  masks.  Do  We  Need  to
Challenge Respirator Filters With Biological Aerosols?
The purpose of this NIOSH Science Blog is to explain what is currently known about an
important aspect of respirator filtration. For decades, respirator researchers have been
asked whether filters need to be tested with aerosols similar to those encountered in
the  environment  (Figure  1).  Respiratory  Protection  for  Workers  Handling  Engineered
Nanoparticles
When  selected,  maintained  and  used  in  the  context  of  an  Occupational  Safety  and
Health  Administration  (OSHA)-compliant  respiratory  protection  program,  in  which
personal protective technology is part of the hierarchy of controls to protect the worker,
respirator users can expect that their respirator is working and reducing the amount of
hazards  that  they  could  potentially  breathe.  However,  as  new  hazards  emerge,  the
applicability  of  the  science  that  NIOSH  uses  to  base  respirator  test  methods,
performance  requirements,  and  use  recommendations  needs  to  be  continually
reaffirmed,  updated,  and  improved  to  assure  the  expected  level  of  protection  is
provided. Heat Stress Imposed by PPE Worn in Hot and Humid Environments
Heat  stress  is  a  potential  stress  factor  that  healthcare  workers  (HCWs)  who  use
personal protective equipment (PPE) and their employers should be aware of in order to
recognize the signs and be prepared with the knowledge of how to alleviate the burden.
The  Physiological  Burden  of  Prolonged  PPE  Use  on  Healthcare  Workers  during  Long
Shifts
Particular features of PPE can impose a physiological (how the body normally functions)
burden  on  HCWs  which  can  be  exacerbated  by  long  work  hours  without  adequate
breaks for eating, hydration and self-care. A Particle is a Particle Respirators: your TB
Defense  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics  Simulation  of  Outward  Leakage  of  Exhale
Particles from PAPR Wearers in Surgical Settings
Xu SS; Lei Z; Zhuang Z; Bergman M
Proceedings of the ASME 2019 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences
and  Computers  and  Information  in  Engineering  Conference,  (IDETC/CIE  2019),  August
18-21,  2019,  Anaheim,  California.  Volume  1:  39th  Computers  and  Information  in
Engineering  Conference.  New  York:  The  American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers,
paper no. DETC2019-98041, 2019 Nov; 1:DETC2019-97826, V001T02A048 A pilot study
of minimum operational flow for loose-fitting powered air-purifying respirators used in
healthcare cleaning services
Zhu J; He X; Bergman MS; Guffey S; Nimbarte AD; Zhuang Z
J  Occup  Environ  Hyg  2019  Jul;  16(7):440-445  N95  Respirators  vs  Medical  Masks  for
Preventing Influenza Among Health Care Personnel. A Randomized Clinical Trial
Radonovich LJ Jr.; Simberkoff MS; Bessesen MT; Brown AC; Cummings DAT; Gaydos CA;
Los JG; Krosche AE; Gibert CL; Gorse GJ; Nyquist A-C; Reich NG; Rodriguez-Barradas MC;
Savor Price C; Perl TM
JAMA J Am Med Assoc 2019 Sep; 322(9):824-833 Evaluation of rigidity of surgical N95
respirators using a manikin-system: A pilot study
Rengasamy S; Niezgoda G
J  Int  Soc  Respir  Prot  2019  Oct;  36(1):18-27  Clearing  the  air:  surgical  smoke  and
workplace safety practices
Harkavy-LM;  Novak-DA,  OR  Nurse.  8(6):1-7,  November  30,  2014  Understanding  and
controlling the hazards of surgical smoke
Novak-DA; Benson-SM, Prev Infect Ambul Care 2010 Dec; :1, 3-5 Selecting models for a
respiratory protection program: what can we learn from the scientific literature?
Shaffer-RE;  Janssen-LL,  Am  J  Infect  Control  2015  Feb;  43(2):127-132  Resistance  to
synthetic  blood  penetration  of  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and
Health-approved N95 filtering facepiece respirators and surgical N95 respirators
Rengasamy-S;  Sbarra-D;  Nwoko-J;  Shaffer-R,  Am  J  Infect  Control  2015  Nov;
43(11):1190-1196  The  use  of  respirators  to  reduce  inhalation  of  airborne  biological
agents
Janssen-L; Ettinger-H; Graham-S; Shaffer-R; Zhuang-Z, J Occup Environ Hyg 2013 Aug:
10(8):D97-D103  Capture  of  0.1-um  aerosol  particles  containing  viable  H1N1  influenza
virus by N95 filtering facepiece respirators
Harnish-DA; Heimbuch-BK; Balzli-C; Choe-M; Lumley-AE; Shaffer-RE; Wander-JD, J Occup
Environ Hyg 2016 Mar; 13(3):D46-D49 Challenge of N95 filtering facepiece respirators
with viable H1N1 influenza aerosols
Harnish-DA;  Heimbuch-BK;  Husband-M;  Lumley-AE;  Kinney-K;  Shaffer-RE;  Wander-JD,
Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol  2013  May;  34(5):494-499  Physiological  evaluation  of
air-fed ensembles
Turner-NL;  Powell-JB;  Sinkule-EJ;  Novak-DA,  Ann  Occup  Hyg  2014  Mar;  58(2):241-250
Are exhalation valves on N95 filtering facepiece respirators beneficial at low-moderate
work rates: an overview
Roberge-RJ, J Occup Environ Hyg 2012 Nov; 9(11):617-623
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/hospresptoolkit/hazardeval.html
