A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 HICPAC provides advice and guidance to DHHS and CDC on infection control practices
and  strategies  for  the  surveillance,  prevention,  and  control  of  healthcare-associated
infections  (HAIs),  antimicrobial  resistance,  and  adverse  events  in  United  States
healthcare  settings.  HICPAC  consists  of  14  voting  members  who  are  not  federal
employees.  These  experts  are  appointed  by  the  Secretary  of  HHS  following  an
application and nomination process. HICPAC voting members bring expertise including,
but  not  limited  to,  infectious  diseases,  infection  prevention  and  control,  healthcare
epidemiology,  nursing,  clinical  and  environmental  microbiology,  surgery,  hospital
medicine,  internal  medicine,  epidemiology,  health  policy,  health  services  research,
public health, and related medical fields. HICPAC also includes six ex officio members
who represent federal agencies within HHS, as well as liaison representatives that bring
related  patient  safety  expertise  from  health-related  associations,  consumer  groups,
public
 organizations,
 and
 partners.
 These
 ex
 officio
 members
 and
 liaison
representatives  are  included  on  the  HICPAC  charter,  which  is  renewed  biennially  by
HHS. Ex officio and liaison representatives are non-voting members of HICPAC. HICPAC
meets up to 8 times a year at CDC in Atlanta, Georgia. Meetings are open to the public
and time for public comments is allotted on the agenda. The next HICPAC meeting is
scheduled  for  August  22-23,  2024   This  meeting  will  be  virtual.  Registration  is  not
required to watch HICPAC Meeting webcasts. The link to the meeting webcast will be
posted  on  the  upcoming  meeting  page  shortly  before  the  meeting.   A  workgroup  is
formed and meets for an extended period (e.g., months or years) to gather, examine,
and interpret data.
 The  workgroup  presents  data  and  expert  opinion  to  the  full  HICPAC  membership  for
review and discussion. The full committee (not the workgroup) is charged with making
recommendations to CDC.
 The first draft of new or revised guidelines is presented and discussed. If ready, the
HICPAC  members  will  vote  on  if  the  draft  guidelines  are  ready  for  CDC  review  and
public comment. Members weigh public discussion and the presented data.
  If voting members approve, the guidelines are reviewed by CDC and then posted to
the Federal Register for public comment, including industry input.
 CDC  and  HICPAC  review  and  respond  to  the  public  comments.  The  guidelines  are
revised to reflect public input. CDC reviews again.
 The  workgroup  presents  the  revised  and  pre-final  draft  for  HICPAC  approval.  The
members  vote  on  the  guideline  and,  if  approved,  recommend  the  final  draft  to  CDC.
Once  guidelines  are  approved  by  HICPAC  and  complete  a  final  CDC  review,  the  CDC
infection control website and related materials are updated. The committee is governed
by the provisions of Public Law 92-463, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), which sets forth
standards for the formation and use of advisory committees. Use this form for questions
about: Please enter your email address. Either complete the form and click submit or
mail your question to: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  HICPAC Committee
Management  MS  –  H16-31600  Clifton  Road  Atlanta,  GA  30329-4027  For  information
about  the  recommendations  or  scientific  content:  HICPAC  provides  infection  control,
surveillance, prevention and healthcare-associated infection (HAI) guidance and advice.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/php/about/index.html
