Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Hospital Respiratory Protection Program Toolkit
This toolkit was developed to assist hospitals in developing and implementing effective
respiratory  protection  programs,  with  an  emphasis  on  preventing  the  transmission  of
aerosol  transmissible  diseases  (ATDs)  to  healthcare  personnel.  Healthcare  personnel
are paid and unpaid persons who provide patient care in a healthcare setting or support
the  delivery  of  healthcare  by  providing  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
security, or maintenance services. Healthcare personnel may potentially be exposed to
ATD pathogens. Aerosols are particles or droplets suspended in air. ATDs are diseases
transmitted  when  infectious  agents,  which  are  suspended  or  present  in  particles  or
droplets,  contact  the  mucous  membranes  or  are  inhaled.  Implementing  Hospital
Respiratory Protection Programs: Strategies from the Field
Protecting  workers  from  exposure  to  all  types  of  respiratory  hazards  is  an  important
issue  for  hospitals  and  other  healthcare  organizations.  In  order  to  address  this  often
overlooked  danger,  The  Joint  Commission  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH),
National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  have  collaborated  to
develop  a  new  educational  monograph  designed  to  assist  hospitals  in  implementing
their  respiratory  protection  programs  (RPPs).  Respirator  Awareness:  Your  Health  May
Depend on it
One of the occupational hazards in the healthcare setting is the airborne transmission
of  certain  infectious  diseases.  The  potential  of  exposure  is  not  limited  to  physicians,
nurses, and support personnel in direct patient care. It extends to those delivering food,
cleaning  patient  rooms,  and  performing  maintenance.  Anyone  working  in  areas  with
patients
 infected
 with
 airborne-transmissible
 diseases
 is
 potentially
 at
 risk.
Preparedness through Daily Practice: The Myths of Respiratory Protection in Healthcare
Evidence  from  surveillance  studies  indicates  gaps  in  hospitals’  respiratory  protection
programmatic  operations  and  healthcare  workers’  (HCWs)  marginal  compliance  with
respiratory protection recommended practices. Improper use of respiratory protective
devices (RPDs) may expose HCWs to infectious respiratory illnesses. In this document,
NIOSH  addresses  common  myths  related  to  respiratory  protection  and  provides
information  to  reinforce  respiratory  protection  program  administrator  responsibilities
and HCW knowledge concerning the proper use of these devices so that they can be
prepared  for  the  next  public  health  emergency  and  best  protect  themselves  in  daily
practice. TB Respiratory Protection Program in Healthcare Facilities
This manual is designed to serve as a practical guide for those individuals responsible
for initiating and running a TB respiratory protection program in health care facilities.
The information in this manual remains current and viable in 2012. California Toolkit:
Respirator Use in Healthcare Workplaces
Evaluations  of  respirator  use  in  California  hospitals  conducted  during  the  2009  H1N1
pandemic and the 2010-11 influenza season showed that some hospitals could use help
to improve the effectiveness of their respirator programs. The Toolkit was developed to
provide useful tools and resources for California hospitals to reinforce and strengthen
the  respiratory  protection  programs.  The  guide  covers  key  requirements  of  the
Cal/OSHA  Respiratory  Protection  and  Aerosol  Transmissible  Diseases  standards,
guidance  on  developing  and  evaluating  a  respiratory  protection  program,  and
information  on  the  selection  and  use  of  respirators.  The  tools  and  resources  are  now
available through links within the electronic version of the guide itself. While directed
toward  California,  the  tools  provide  a  useful  resource  for  the  nation  as  NIOSH  NPPTL
continues  to  work  toward  developing  more  generalized  tools.  NIOSH  Reach  II  Study:
Understanding and Selecting Respiratory Protection Devices (2011-2012)
Infographic  addressing  situations  that  require  respiratory  protection  and  whether  an
N95 FFR or a surgical mask should be utilized.
PDF  [445  KB],  Image  [1,940  KB]  Required  Labeling  of  NIOSH-Approved  N95  Filtering
Facepiece Respirators (2014)
Infographic  depicting  the  required  labeling  for  all  NIOSH-approved  N95  filtering
facepiece respirators.
PDF [488 KB], Image [1,968 KB] Summary of Respiration Fit Test Requirements (2015)
Infographic  explaining  who  needs  to  get  fit  tested,  how  to  get  fit  tested,  and  the
required  follow  up.  PDF  [1,123  KB],  Image  [962  KB]  Important  Steps  for  Using
NIOSH-Approved N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators (2014)
Infographic listing five important steps for those who rely on a N95 for protection.
PDF [711 KB], Image [4,807 KB] It’s Not What You Think! N95 Myth v/s Fact (2103)
Infographic breaking down three myths about N95 respirators.
PDF [551 KB], Image [3,271 KB] Sequence for Putting on Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE)
Infographic detailing the proper sequence for donning PPE.
PDF [3 KB], Image, Page 1 [131 KB], Image, Page 2 [277 KB], Image, Page 3 [265 KB]
Three Key Factors Required for a Respirator to be Effective (2018)
Infographic  explaining  how  a  respirator  should  be  worn  and  the  filtration  efficiency
needed for it to be effective.
PDF  [1,853  KB],  Image  [160  KB]  You’ve  just  completed  your  Annual  RESPIRATOR
TRAINING… (2016)
Infographic identifying questions employees should be able to answer upon completing
their annual respirator training.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon
Español – PDFpdf icon, imagenimage icon Understanding the Difference (2018)
Infographic  breaking  down  the  differences  between  a  surgical  mask  and  a  N95
respirator.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon Understanding the Difference
(surgical masks, N95 FFRs, and Elastomerics)
Infographic  breaking  down  the  differences  between  a  surgical  mask,  N95  respirator,
and elastomeric respirator.
PDFpdf  icon,  Imageimage  icon  Filtering  Out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions
about Respiratory Protection, Respirator Reuse and Extended Use (2018)
PDF,  Image  Filtering  Out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions  about  Respiratory
Protection, Fit Testing (2018)
PDF,  Image  Filtering  Out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions  about  Respiratory
Protection, User Seal Check (2018)
PDF, Image Proper N95 Respirator Use for Respiratory Protection Preparedness
When outbreaks of infectious disease occur, we rely on healthcare professionals to care
for  those  affected,  putting  themselves  at  increased  risk  of  exposure  to  the  pathogen
causing  the  disease.  AAOHN  Healthcare  Workers’  Respiratory  Protection  Training
AAOHN  Respiratory  Protection  Education  &  Resources  Webkit  Occupational  Health
Nurses  (OHNs)  and  Respiratory  Protection:  Improving  Education  and  Training  –  Letter
Report
At the request of NPPTL, the IOM Committee on the Respiratory Protection Curriculum
for  Occupational  Health  Nursing  Programs  examined  existing  respiratory  protection
curricula  in  occupational  health  nursing  programs  and  made  recommendations  to
improve the education and training of OHNs. The IOM identified essential content that
should  be  included  in  education  and  training  programs  for  OHNs  and  the  best
approaches  to  teaching  that  content.  Respirator  Safety:  Donning  (Putting  on)  and
Doffing (Taking off)
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/hospresptoolkit/training.html
