Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / March 25, 2022 / 71(12);453–458 Mary E. Cogswell,
DrPH1; Eric Coil, MPH1,2; Lin H. Tian, MD1; Sarah C. Tinker, PhD1; A. Blythe Ryerson,
PhD1;  Matthew  J.  Maenner,  PhD1;  Catherine  E.  Rice,  PhD1;  Georgina  Peacock,  MD1
(View  author  affiliations)  What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?  Developmental
delays,  disorders,  and  disabilities  (DDs)  are  common  among  U.S.  children  and
adolescents.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Approximately  one  in  six  (17.3%)  U.S.
children and adolescents aged 3–17 years had DDs during 2014–2018. Compared with
children and adolescents without DDs, those with DDs were two to seven times as likely
to  take  prescription  medication  and  receive  mental  health  or  specialized  health  care
provider  services  and  18  times  as  likely  to  receive  special  education  or  early
intervention services. What are the implications for public health practice? Policies and
programs  that  promote  early  identification  of  children  and  adolescents  with  DDs  and
increase access to intervention services could improve health and reduce the need for
services  later  in  life.  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads  Table  1  Table  2
Developmental delays, disorders, or disabilities (DDs) manifest in infancy and childhood
and can limit a person’s function throughout life* (1–3). To guide strategies to optimize
health for U.S. children with DDs, CDC analyzed data from 44,299 participants in the
2014–2018  National  Health  Interview  Survey  (NHIS).  Parents  reported  on  10  DDs,†
functional abilities, health needs, and use of services. Among the approximately one in
six (17.3%) U.S. children and adolescents aged 3–17 years (hereafter children) with one
or more DDs, 5.7% had limited ability to move or play, 4.7% needed help with personal
care, 4.6% needed special equipment, and 2.4% received home health care, compared
with ≤1% for each of these measures among children without DDs. Children with DDs
were  two  to  seven  times  as  likely  as  those  without  DDs  to  have  taken  prescription
medication  for  ≥3  months  (41.6%  versus  8.4%),  seen  a  mental  health  professional
(30.6% versus 4.5%), a medical specialist (26.0% versus 12.4%), or a special therapist,
such as a physical, occupational, or speech therapist, (25.0% versus 4.5%) during the
past  year,  and  18  times  as  likely  to  have  received  special  education  or  early
intervention services (EIS) (41.9% versus 2.4%). These percentages varied by type of
disability and by sociodemographic subgroup. DDs are common, and children with DDs
often  need  substantial  health  care  and  services.  Policies  and  programs  that  promote
early  identification  of  children  with  developmental  delays  and  facilitate  increased
access  to  intervention  services  can  improve  health  and  reduce  the  need  for  services
later  in  life.§  Sociodemographic  inequities  merit  further  investigation  to  guide  public
health action and ensure early and equitable access to needed care and services. The
study included data from the 2014–2018 NHIS, an annual, multistage probability sample
survey  of  the  noninstitutionalized  U.S.  civilian  population.¶  In-person  interviews  were
conducted to obtain information on household members. Among families with children,
a  child  questionnaire  was  administered  to  a  knowledgeable  adult  (usually,  and
hereafter  parent)  about  a  randomly  selected  child  (aged  0–17  years).  During
2014–2018, the response rate for the child questionnaire was 59.2%–66.6%. Parents of
children aged ≥3 years were asked about their child’s functional abilities, health needs,
and  use  of  services  (Supplementary  Box  1,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/115478)
(2–5), as well as whether their child had any of 10 specific types of DDs (Supplementary
Box 2, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/115479). Children could be included in multiple
diagnostic  types  of  DDs;  however,  children  with  co-occurring  learning  disabilities  and
intellectual  disabilities  were  excluded  from  the  learning  disability  category.  Weighted
prevalence estimates of DDs and 95% CIs were calculated. The weighted percentages
of children with each measure of reported functional ability, health needs, and use of
specialty  health  care  providers  or  education  services  were  estimated  overall,  by
selected  sociodemographic  characteristics,  number  of  DDs,  and  each  type  of  DD.
Differences  in  percentages  were  evaluated  using  Rao-Scott  chi-square  tests  with
p<0.05 considered statistically significant. To reflect the complex sampling design and
generate  nationally  representative  estimates,  all  analyses  accounted  for  clustering,
stratification,  and  weights,  using  SAS  software  (version  9.4;  SAS  Institute)  and  were
verified using SUDAAN (version 11.0.1; RTI International). Of the 44,866 children aged
3–17  years  included  in  the  2014–2018  NHIS,  567  were  excluded  because  of  missing
information on any question related to DDs or abilities, health needs, or use of services,
resulting  in  a  total  of  44,299.  The  estimated  prevalence  of  DDs  among  U.S.  children
aged
 3–17
 years
 was
 17.3%,
 ranging
 from
 0.2%
 (blindness)
 to
 9.4%
(attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder)  (Table  1);  6.7%  of  U.S.  children  had  two  or
more DDs. Among children with DDs, 5.7% had limited movement or play abilities, 4.7%
needed  help  with  personal  care,  4.6%  needed  special  equipment,  and  2.4%  received
home health care, compared with ≤1% of children without DDs. Children with DDs were
two to seven times as likely as those without DDs to have taken prescription medication
for  ≥3  months  (41.6%  versus  8.4%),  have  seen  a  mental  health  professional  (30.6%
versus 4.5%), a medical specialist (26.0% versus 12.4%), or a therapist (25.0% versus
4.5%) during the past year (Table 1). Children with DDs were more likely to participate
in special education or EIS (41.9% versus 2.4%). The percentage of children with limited
abilities,  special  health  needs,  or  who  used  specialty  services  was  higher  among
children with two or more DDs than among those with one DD or none. Children with
each type of DD were more likely than were those without DDs to have limited abilities
or  special  health  needs,  or  to  use  specialty  services.  Among  children  with  DDs,  the
percentage  with  limited  abilities  and  special  health  needs,  and  who  used  specialty
services  varied  across  sociodemographic  subgroups  (Table  2).  Compared  with
non-Hispanic  White  children  with  DDs,  a  lower  percentage  of  non-Hispanic  Black,
non-Hispanic  other,  and  Hispanic  children  with  DDs  took  prescription  medication.
Compared with non-Hispanic White children with DDs, Hispanic children with DDs were
less  likely  to  have  seen  a  mental  health  professional,  and  non-Hispanic  Black  and
Hispanic children with DDs were less likely to have seen a medical specialist. Compared
with children aged 3–8 years who had DDs, a lower percentage of children aged 9–17
years with DDs needed special equipment or help with personal care, received home
health  care,  or  saw  a  therapist,  whereas  a  higher  percentage  took  prescription
medications  or  saw  a  mental  health  professional.  Among  children  with  DDs,  those
whose  mother  had  less  than  a  high  school  education  were  less  likely  to  take
prescription medication or to see specialty health care professionals, but more likely to
receive  special  education  or  EIS.  Compared  with  children  living  above  the  federal
poverty level, those living at or below the federal poverty level were less likely to see a
medical specialist and more likely to receive special education or EIS. The percentage
of children with DDs who needed help with personal care or received home health care
and  used  services  was  higher  in  the  Northeast  and  West  than  in  the  South;  a  higher
percentage in the Midwest saw a mental health professional or therapist, and a lower
percentage in the West took prescription medications for ≥3 months. The percentage of
children  with  DDs  who  took  prescription  medication  for  ≥3  months,  saw  medical
specialists,  or  received  special  education  or  EIS  services  was  lower  among  those
without  health  insurance.  Top  During  2014–2018,  approximately  one  in  six  (17.3%)
children had a DD, and one in 15 (6.7%) had two or more DDs. Children with DDs have
a  higher  prevalence  of  limited  ability  to  move  or  play,  health  needs,  and  specialized
service use compared to those without DDs. The prevalences of DDs during 2014–2018,
overall  and  by  type,  are  consistent  with  2015–2017  (1).  Although  differing  DD
definitions and study methods used in previous years present challenges to comparing
the findings in this report with data from 1997–2005 and 2006–2010, the percentage of
U.S.  children  with  any  DD  who  had  limitations  in  movement  or  play  appeared  to  be
slightly  lower  during  2014–2018  overall,  but  not  for  children  with  blindness,  cerebral
palsy,  or  hearing  loss  (2,3).  In  contrast,  the  percentage  of  U.S.  children  with  special
health needs or who took prescription medications, saw specialty health care providers,
or received education services appeared to be similar or higher during 2014–2018 than
1997–2005,  with  the  exception  of  children  with  autism  spectrum  disorder  (2,3).  One
explanation  for  potential  decreases  in  health  needs  and  service  use  over  time  is  the
inclusion  of  children  with  less  significant  support  needs  associated  with  autism
spectrum disorder.** This study provides new data on sociodemographic differences in
the health needs and use of special services among children with DDs. The observed
differences could be associated with differential access to care resulting from a variety
of  factors,  including  health  insurance  coverage,  specialist  proximity,  language  or
cultural  barriers,  and  variability  in  practices  and  policies  (4,6–8).  A  2018  study
examining  health  care  coverage  and  access  among  children,  adolescents,  and  young
adults  during  2010–2016  suggests  that  significant  improvements  in  health  care
coverage  occurred  with  the  implementation  of  the  Affordable  Care  Act  in  2010,  yet
gaps  remain,  particularly  among  adolescents  as  they  transition  to  adult  care  (7).
Eligibility criteria, service availability, long waiting times, cost, and lack of information
are reported barriers to receipt of services for children with DDs (8). Referral practices
and  coordination  across  early  childhood  service  providers  and  systems  also  affect
access to early intervention for young children (4,6). Lower service use associated with
poverty  is  of  concern  given  the  impact  of  poverty  on  child  development  (4,7–9).
Although implementation of programs in low-income settings might help increase early
identification  of  DDs  among  children  living  in  poverty,  one  study  of  treatment  for
children with autism spectrum disorder suggests that differential service by geographic
region might not be explained by child and family characteristics (10). In addition, lower
service  use  associated  with  race  or  ethnic  identification  is  of  concern  given  the
pervasive  impact  of  racism  on  child  development  (4,7–9).  More  work  is  needed  to
ensure  that  children  with  identified  delays  receive  a  diagnosis  and  services  through
enhanced  access,  coordination  of  care  across  systems  (e.g.,  school,  health  care,  and
community),  and  increased  workforce  capacity  (7–9).  Strategies  and  programs  that
support
 families,
 health
 care,
 education,
 and
 social
 service
 providers
 with
evidence-based interventions and tools to promote early identification and coordinated
care across systems for children with DDs could potentially improve access to needed
health  care  and  services.††  The  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  four
limitations. First, information is reported by the parent and has not been independently
verified;  therefore,  it  might  be  subject  to  recall  bias  or  variation  in  interpretation.
Second,  the  reported  DDs  in  this  analysis  are  a  heterogeneous  grouping  that  vary
materially  in  severity,  prevalence,  and  persistence  over  time.  Third,  children’s
symptoms  and  abilities  relevant  to  diagnosis  or  their  eligibility  for  services  might
change with intervention or age. Finally, estimates are unadjusted for demographic or
other characteristics; thus, observed differences across groups might be attributable to
other  factors,  such  as  other  medical  conditions  or  contextual  factors.  These  data
confirm  that  DDs  are  common  and  often  co-occur,  and  that  children  with  DDs  have
more  health-related  needs  and  service  use  than  do  children  without  DDs.  Strategies
that  promote  early  identification  and  coordination  of  services  for  children  with  DDs
could improve health and reduce the need for services later in life. Inequities in use and
receipt  of  medications  and  services  by  sociodemographic  subgroups  deserve  further
investigation to guide development and implementation of strategies to promote health
equity and ensure that all children with DDs have access to needed care and services to
enable  them  to  thrive.  Top  Benjamin  Zablotsky,  National  Center  for  Health  Statistics,
CDC;  Lauren  Ramos,  Health  Resources  Services  Administration;  Julia  Abercrombie,
National  Center  on  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental  Disabilities,  CDC;  Ana
Penman-Aguilar, Office of Minority Health and Health Equity, CDC. Top Corresponding
author: Mary E. Cogswell, mcogswell@cdc.gov, 770-488-8053. Top 1Division of Human
Development  and  Disability,  National  Center  on  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental
Disabilities,  CDC;  2Georgia  State  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Top  Catherine  E.  Rice
reports compensation for professional training workshops on the diagnostic assessment
of  autism;  uncompensated  educational  and  clinical  work  related  to  licensure  as  a
psychologist in Georgia; and uncompensated service on advisory boards for the Atlanta
Autism Consortium, New Jersey State Scientific Advisory Panel for Autism, and HANDS
in  Autism  Program  during  the  last  36  months.  No  other  potential  conflicts  of  interest
were
 disclosed.
 Top
 *
https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/about-acl/2016-12/dd_act_2000.pdf
 †
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder,  autism  spectrum  disorder,  blindness,  cerebral
palsy,  moderate-to-profound  hearing  loss,  learning  disability,  intellectual  disability,
seizures in the past 12 months, stutter or stammering in the past 12 months, or any
other
 developmental
 delay.
 §
https://sites.ed.gov/idea/statute-chapter-33/subchapter-iii/1431
 ¶
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/index.htm
 **
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26632847/  ††  CDC’s  Learn  the  Signs.  Act  Early.
(https://www.cdc.gov/ActEarly);  CDC-funded  Association  of  University  Centers  on
Disabilities
 Children’s
 Mental
 Health
 Champions
(https://nationalcenterdph.org/our-focus-areas/wellness-and-mental-health/mental-healt
h-champions/); CDC-funded programs through the National Resource Center on ADHD
resources  (https://www.cdc.gov/ADHD)  and  the  Tourette  Association  of  America
(https://www.cdc.gov/Tourette);
 CDC’s
 epilepsy
 program
(https://www.cdc.gov/epilepsy/groups/parents.htm); Department of Education, Office of
Special Education Program’s Parent Centers (https://www.parentcenterhub.org) and the
Health  Resources  Services  Administration,  Maternal  and  Child  Health  Bureau’s  Early
Childhood
 Comprehensive
 Systems
(https://mchb.hrsa.gov/earlychildhoodcomprehensivesystems);
 Healthy
 Start
(https://mchb.hrsa.gov/maternal-child-health-initiatives/healthy-start);
 Home
 Visiting
(https://mchb.hrsa.gov/maternal-child-health-initiatives/home-visiting-overview);
Leadership  Education  in  Neurodevelopmental  and  Other  Related  Disabilities  (LEND)
program  (https://mchb.hrsa.gov/training/projects.asp?program);  and  Got  Transition
(https://www.hrsa.gov/library/got-transition).
 Top
 Top
 Abbreviations:
ADHD  =  attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder;  DDs  =  developmental  delays,
disorders, or disabilities; EIS = early intervention services.
* Weighted estimates and 95% CIs account for the complex survey design.
†  Unweighted  number  of  children;  children  might  have  more  than  one  DD,  except  as
indicated.
§  A  physical  therapist,  speech  therapist,  respiratory  therapist,  audiologist,  or
occupational therapist.
¶ Children whose parents answered affirmatively to questions for one or more of the 10
conditions listed in the table, regardless of the number of conditions reported.
** Does not sum to percentage of children with any DD because of rounding.
†† Potentially unreliable estimates based on a relative standard error ≥30% and <50%.
§§ Children with both intellectual disability and learning disability were not included in
the
 estimate
 of
 children
 with
 learning
 disability.
 Top
 Abbreviations:
DDs  =  developmental  delays,  disorders,  or  disabilities;  EIS  =  early  intervention
services;  FPL  =  federal  poverty  level;  GED  =  general  educational  development
certificate; HS = high school; NA = not applicable.
*  Children  whose  parents  answered  affirmatively  to  questions  for  one  or  more  of  10
selected conditions (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder,
blindness,  cerebral  palsy,  moderate  to  profound  hearing  loss,  learning  disability,
intellectual disability, seizures, stuttering, or other DD), irrespective of the number of
conditions reported (7,717).
† Weighted estimates and 95% CIs account for the complex survey design.
§ The unweighted number of children with any DD in the specified demographic group.
¶  A  physical  therapist,  speech  therapist,  respiratory  therapist,  audiologist,  or
occupational therapist.
** p–value for Rao-Scott chi-square test for difference in percentages among subgroups.
†† Potentially unreliable estimates based on a relative standard error ≥30% and <50%,
or comparison based on a group with an unreliable estimate.
§§  Significantly  different  from  non-Hispanic  White  children  (p<0.05;  Rao-Scott
chi-square test).
¶¶  Significantly  different  from  children  aged  3–8  years  (p<0.05;  Rao-Scott  chi-square
test).
*** Ratio of family income to FPL.
†††  Midwest:  Kansas,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Michigan,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  Nebraska,
North  Dakota,  Ohio,  South  Dakota,  and  Wisconsin;  Northeast:  Connecticut,  Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and
Vermont;  South:  Alabama,  Arkansas,  Delaware,  District  of  Columbia,  Florida,  Georgia,
Kentucky,  Louisiana,  Maryland,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  Oklahoma,  South  Carolina,
Tennessee,  Texas,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia;  and  West:  Alaska,  Arizona,  California,
Colorado,  Hawaii,  Idaho,  Montana,  Nevada,  New  Mexico,  Oregon,  Utah,  Washington,
and Wyoming.
§§§  Significantly  different  from  children  living  in  the  South  (p<0.05;  Rao-Scott
chi-square test).
¶¶¶  Any  health  insurance  coverage  at  the  time  of  the  interview  under  private  health
insurance.  Medicare,  Medicaid,  State  Children’s  Health  Insurance  Program,  a
state-sponsored  health  plan,  other  government  programs,  or  military  health  plan
(includes  TRICARE,  Veterans  Affairs,  and  Civilian  Health  and  Medical  Program  of  the
Department of Veterans Affairs).
**** Unreliable estimate based on a relative standard error ≥50% or comparison based
on a group with an unreliable estimate are not shown. Top Suggested citation for this
article: Cogswell ME, Coil E, Tian LH, et al. Health Needs and Use of Services Among
Children  with  Developmental  Disabilities  —  United  States,  2014–2018.  MMWR  Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:453–458. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7112a3. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7112a3.htm
