A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 The  investigative  steps  described  on  this  page  aren't  linear.  Public  health  personnel
may  have  already  performed  several  steps  during  their  routine  evaluation  of
Legionnaires’  disease  case  reports.  Many  steps  will  occur  simultaneously  or  in  a
sequence that varies during the course of an investigation. Every outbreak investigation
is unique. Each requires careful planning and periodic reassessments to determine the
most  appropriate  response.  Give  consideration  to  personnel,  resources,  or  other
competing priorities within the state, territorial, or local health department.  The CDC
Legionella  team  is  available  for  consultation  and  assistance,  either  remotely  or  in
person. In general, state, territorial, and local health departments are best positioned to
provide oversight for each step of the investigation process. This oversight helps ensure
adherence  to  public  health  recommendations.   However,  health  departments  without
the necessary resources to conduct every step may defer certain responsibilities to the
building owner/manager. For example, the health department may not have personnel
with  environmental  expertise  specific  to  Legionella  or  particular  equipment.  In  some
situations, hiring professionals with specific expertise in managing Legionella may also
be  helpful  for  building  owners.  See  these  factors  to  consider  when  working  with
Legionella  consultants.  The  first  step  is  to  determine  if  a  full  investigation  is  needed.
The  terms  "outbreak  investigation"  and  "full  investigation"  are  used  interchangeably.
The steps of an outbreak investigation are the same for a full investigation in response
to  a  single,  presumptive  healthcare-associated  case.  The  setting  can  impact  this
decision. See the following pages for considerations specific to outbreaks: Once public
health personnel determine a full investigation is needed, a series of steps should take
place.  Perform  a  retrospective  review  of  cases  in  the  health  department  surveillance
database.  Identify  earlier  cases  with  possible  exposures  to  the  same  setting  or
geographic  area.  Develop  a  line  list  of  cases  associated  with  the  common  exposure
setting or geographic area. Download CDC's line list templates.  Work with appropriate
parties to identify additional prior cases. Perform a retrospective review of medical or
laboratory records. Conduct active case surveillance to identify new cases as quickly as
possible.  Learn  why  it's  also  important  for  healthcare  facilities.  Facilitate  testing  for
Legionella  using  preferred  diagnostic  tests.  Obtain  and  test  post-mortem  specimens,
when  applicable.  Consider  recommendations  for  restricting  water  exposures  or  other
immediate  control  measures.  Communicate  with  stakeholders  as  appropriate  and
develop  a  risk  communications  plan  if  necessary.  Work  with  appropriate  parties  to
develop  or  review  and  possibly  revise  the  water  management  program.  Facilitate  an
environmental  assessment  to  evaluate  possible  environmental  exposures.   Facilitate
environmental  sampling,  as  indicated  by  the  environmental  assessment.  Make
recommendations  for  remediation  of  possible  environmental  source(s),  if  indicated.
Subtype and compare clinical and environmental isolates, if available.  Determine how
long  heightened  disease  surveillance  and  environmental  sampling  should  continue  to
ensure  the  outbreak  is  over.  Conduct  a  follow-up  assessment  and  environmental
sampling to validate the effectiveness of implemented control measures. Epidemiology,
environmental  health,  laboratory  science,  and  health  communication  all  play  critical
roles  in  Legionnaires'  disease  investigations.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/investigate-legionella/php/public-health-strategy/investigations.html
