A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Poor diets lead to chronic diseases. Making healthy food available and affordable in key
settings allows people to make healthier food choices. States, communities, early care
and  education  programs,  and  schools  can  each  create  healthy  food  environments.   
Chronic diseases account for 70% of all U.S. deaths every year. Poor diets contribute to
chronic diseases such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and obesity. People in minority
communities and those with lower incomes are more likely to lack convenient places
that  offer  affordable,  healthier  foods.  Providing  healthy  and  affordable  food  in  key
settings allows people to make healthier choices. When healthy foods are unavailable,
people may settle for foods that are higher in calories and lower in nutritional value.
Many  strategies  can  help  create  and  support  healthy  food  environments.  Examples
include:  Food  retail  venues  are  where  people  buy  food  to  prepare  and  eat  at  home.
Examples  include  supermarkets  and  corner  stores.   Food  service  venues  are  where
people eat prepared or packaged food away from home. Examples include cafeterias,
snack  bars,  and  vending  machine.  Food  distribution  centers  are  where  food  is  given
away.  Examples  include  food  banks  and  pantries.  State  and  local  health  department
staff and local organizations can support healthier food and beverage access in several
ways.  Two  strategies  are  highlighted  here:  Public  health  practitioners  can  work  with
partners  to  implement  food  service  and  nutrition  guidelines  and  fruit  and  vegetable
programs.
 Common
 topics
 of
 interest
 include
 health
 equity,
 environmental
sustainability, waste reduction, economic development, and cultural food preferences. 
State and local health departments can promote healthier foods and beverages using
the  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities  in  facilities  that  are  state  or  locally
owned or operated.  They can also: For organizations that distribute food, such as food
banks or pantries, the Healthy Eating Research Nutrition Guidelines for the Charitable
Food  System  is  recommended  for  use.  Strategies  for  Food  Service  and  Nutrition
GuidelinesIncludes  background,  potential  state  and  local  activities,  examples  of  what
others  are  doing,  and   resources.  Food  Service  Guidelines  for  Federal  FacilitiesHelps
increase  healthy  food  and  beverage  choices  and  sustainable  practices  in  federal
worksites.  Can  be  used  for  cafeterias,  concession  stands,  snack  bars,  and  vending
machines.  Food  Service  Guidelines  Implementation  ToolkitDescribes  how  to  build  a
foundation,  strategize  and  act,  monitor  and  evaluate,  and  expand  food  service
guidelines  initiatives.  Tips  for  Offering  Healthier  Options  and  Physical  Activity  at
Workplace  Meetings  and  EventsIncludes  physical  activity  opportunities  for  employees
throughout  the  workday.  States  can  support  this  strategy  in  many  ways,  such  as:
Health  department  staff  and  local  organizations  can  help  local  programs  identify
funding  sources  for:  Fruit  and  Vegetable  Voucher  Incentive  Programs  and  Produce
Prescription ProgramsBackground, potential state and local activities, examples of what
others are doing, and  resources. 
Nutrition  Incentive  HubResources  to  support  nutrition  incentive  and  produce
prescription  projects.  Provides  information  about  training,  technical  assistance,
reporting, evaluation, and marketing and communications. 
Supporting  Food  and  Nutrition  Security  Through  HealthcareInformation  to  help  health
care  systems  and  their  public  health  partners  increase  access  to  nutritious  food  for
patients at high risk of food insecurity. Early care and education (ECE) programs can
use  science-based  best  practices  to  increase  consumption  of  healthy  food  and
beverages and support breastfeeding families. The federal Child and Adult Care Food
Program  reimburses  ECE  programs  for  supporting  breastfeeding  parents  and  serving
healthy  meals  and  snacks.  This  program  also  offers  free  resources  and  training.
Strategies for Early Care and EducationBackground, potential state and local activities,
examples  of  what  others  are  doing,  and   resources.  Early  Care  and  Education
ResourcesResources  that  states,  communities,  or  ECE  providers  can  use  to  create
healthy eating environments in ECE settings.  School leadership and staff can follow the
nutrition standards for school meals, including the National School Lunch Program and
the  School  Breakfast  Program.  Smart  Snacks  in  School  standards  also  provide
nutritional  guidance  for  foods  sold  in  vending  machines,  school  stores,  or  other  a  la
carte venues outside of federal meal programs.   School leadership and parent-teacher
organizations  can  work  together  to  buy  salad  bars  to  increase  access  to  fruits  and
vegetables.  Teachers and other staff can also encourage their students to drink water
instead  of  sugary  drinks.  Schools  can  ensure  access  to  free  drinking  water  before,
during,  and  after  school  as  an  alternative  to  drinking  sugary  beverages.     School
NutritionCovers the components of the school nutrition environment and services. 
Water Access in SchoolsDescribes the requirements for having access to drinking water,
provides  short  video  training  modules,  and  includes  a  toolkit  for  increasing  access  to
drinking water in schools. 
Collection
 of
 Evidence-Based
 Strategies
 for
 School
 Nutrition
 and
 Physical
ActivityIncludes  peer-reviewed  articles.  CDC  works  to  improve  healthy  food  access  in
food  service,  food  distribution  centers,  and  food  retail  environments  by:  Advancing
implementation of food service guidelines. CDC helps states and communities use food
service and nutrition guidelines by providing funding and technical assistance. 
Coordinating  programs  for  fruit  and  vegetable  voucher  incentives  and  produce
prescriptions.  CDC  helps  states  and  communities  implement  and  expand  these
programs  by  providing  funding  and  technical  assistance.  Improving  the  supply  of
healthy foods. CDC works with states and communities to leverage efforts with partners
and industry to increase access to healthy foods. Driving consumer demand for healthy
foods.  CDC  encourages  using  behavioral  design  practices,  which  can  include
preparation, presentation, placement, pricing, and promotion. 
Providing funding and technical assistance to support early child nutrition. CDC works
with states and communities to apply nutrition policies and activities in ECE settings.
Good  nutrition  is  essential  for  health  across  the  lifespan.  See  strategies,  data,  and
resources  to  improve  nutrition  in  states  and  communities.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/php/healthy-food-environments/index.html
