Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Hospital Respiratory Protection Program Toolkit (2015)
This toolkit was developed to assist hospitals in developing and implementing effective
respiratory  protection  programs,  with  an  emphasis  on  preventing  the  transmission  of
aerosol  transmissible  diseases  (ATDs)  to  healthcare  personnel.  Healthcare  personnel
are paid and unpaid persons who provide patient care in a healthcare setting or support
the  delivery  of  healthcare  by  providing  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
security, or maintenance services. Healthcare personnel may potentially be exposed to
ATD pathogens. Aerosols are particles or droplets suspended in air. ATDs are diseases
transmitted  when  infectious  agents,  which  are  suspended  or  present  in  particles  or
droplets,  contact  the  mucous  membranes  or  are  inhaled.  Implementing  Hospital
Respiratory Protection Programs: Strategies from the Field (2015)
Protecting  workers  from  exposure  to  all  types  of  respiratory  hazards  is  an  important
issue  for  hospitals  and  other  healthcare  organizations.  In  order  to  address  this  often
overlooked  danger,  The  Joint  Commission  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH),
National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  have  collaborated  to
develop  a  new  educational  monograph  designed  to  assist  hospitals  in  implementing
their respiratory protection programs (RPPs). NIOSH Reach II Study: Understanding and
Selecting Respiratory Protection Devices (2011-2012)
Infographic  addressing  situations  that  require  respiratory  protection  and  whether  an
N95 FFR or a surgical mask should be utilized.
PDF [445 KB], Image [1,940 KB] Summary of Respiration Fit Test Requirements (2015)
Infographic  explaining  who  needs  to  get  fit  tested,  how  to  get  fit  tested,  and  the
required  follow  up.  PDF  [1,123  KB],  Image  [962  KB]  Facial  Hairstyles  and  Filtering
Facepiece Respirators (2017)
Infographic  showcasing  acceptable  facial  hairstyles  for  workers  who  wear  tight-fitting
respirators.
PDF [PDF 664 KB], Image [186 KB] Why are annual Fit Tests required? (2016)
Infographic explaining the importance of annual fit testing.
PDFpdf icon, Imageimage icon
Español  –  PDFpdf  icon,  imagenimage  icon  Filtering  Out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked
Questions about Respiratory Protection, Fit Testing (2018)
PDF, Image Proper N95 Respirator Use for Respiratory Protection Preparedness
When outbreaks of infectious disease occur, we rely on healthcare professionals to care
for  those  affected,  putting  themselves  at  increased  risk  of  exposure  to  the  pathogen
causing the disease. To Beard or not to Beard? That’s a good Question! (2017)
Ensuring the respirator seal is a vital part of respiratory protection practices. Facial hair
that  lies  along  the  sealing  area  of  a  respirator,  such  as  beards,  sideburns,  or  some
mustaches, will interfere with respirators that rely on a tight facepiece seal to achieve
maximum  protection.  New  NIOSH  Study  Supports  the  OSHA  Annual  Fit  Testing
Requirements for Filtering Facepiece Respirators (2016)
Results  of  a  recently  completed  NIOSH  study  confirm  the  necessity  of  the  current
Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health
 Administration
 (OSHA)
 respirator
 fit
 testing
requirement,  both  annually  and  when  physical  changes  have  occurred.  Skin  Irritation
from Prolonged Use of Tight-Fitting Respirators
Respiratory protection program managers, healthcare providers, and end users should
understand  how  proper  respirator  fit  and  use  can  decrease  skin  irritation,  as  well  as
how to treat potential skin irritation caused by extended respirator use. Respiratory Fit
Testing (2012) Temporal changes in filtering facepiece respirator Fit
Zhuang, Z., M. Bergman, E. Brochu, A. Palmiero, G. Niezgoda, X. He, R. Roberge, and
R.E. Shaffer
J  Occup  Environ  Hyg  2016  Apr;  13(4):269-278  Correlation  between  respirator  fit  and
respirator fit test panel cells by respirator size
Zhuang-ZQ;  Groce-D;  Ahlers-HW;  Iskander-W;  Landsittel-D;  Guffey-S;  Benson-S;
Viscusi-D; Shaffer-RE
J  Occup  Environ  Hyg  2008  Oct;  5(10):617-628  New  respirator  fit  test  panels
representing the current US civilian work force
Zhuang, Z.Q., B. Bradtmiller, and R.E. Shaffer
J. Occup. Environ. Hyg. 4(9): 647-659 (2007) Simulated workplace protection factors for
half-facepiece respiratory protective devices
Duling-MG; Lawrence-RB; Slaven-JE; Coffey-CC
J  Occup  Environ  Hyg  2007  Jun;  4(6):420-431  Evaluation  of  sampling  probes  for  fit
testing N95 filtering facepiece respirators
Bergman-MS; Viscusi-DJ; Zhuang-Z; Newcomb-WE
Ann  Occup  Hyg  2013  May;  57(4):507-518  Differences  in  Hospital  Managers’,  Unit
Managers’, and Health Care Workers’ Perceptions of the Safety Climate for Respiratory
Protection.
Peterson K, Roger B, Brosseau L ,Payne J, Cooney J, Joe L, & Novak D. (2016).
Workplace Health and Safety 64 (7), 326-336. Hospital respiratory protection practices
in 6 U.S. states: A public health evaluation study.
Peterson K, Novak D, Stradtman L, Wilson D, & Couzens L (2015).
AJIC  43(1),63-71.  Evaluation  of  Minnesota  and  Illinois  hospital  respiratory  protection
programs and health care worker respirator use.
Brosseau LM, Conroy LM, Sietsema M, Cline K, & Durski K. (2015).
JOEH  12(1),  1-15.  Comparing  Written  Programs  and  Self-Reported  Respiratory
Protection Practices in Acute Care Hospitals.
Sietsema M, Conroy LM, & Brosseau LM. (2015).
JOEH  12(3),189-198.  Respiratory  protection  policies  and  practices  among  the  health
care  workforce  exposed  to  influenza  in  New  York  State:  Evaluating  emergency
preparedness for the next pandemic.
Hines L, Rees E, & Pavlechak N (2014).
AJIC 42(3), 240-45.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/hospresptoolkit/fittesting.html
