Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Hospital Respiratory Protection Program Toolkit
This toolkit was developed to assist hospitals in developing and implementing effective
respiratory  protection  programs,  with  an  emphasis  on  preventing  the  transmission  of
aerosol  transmissible  diseases  (ATDs)  to  healthcare  personnel.  Healthcare  personnel
are paid and unpaid persons who provide patient care in a healthcare setting or support
the  delivery  of  healthcare  by  providing  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  engineering,
security, or maintenance services. Healthcare personnel may potentially be exposed to
ATD pathogens. Aerosols are particles or droplets suspended in air. ATDs are diseases
transmitted  when  infectious  agents,  which  are  suspended  or  present  in  particles  or
droplets,  contact  the  mucous  membranes  or  are  inhaled.  Implementing  Hospital
Respiratory Protection Programs: Strategies from the Field
Protecting  workers  from  exposure  to  all  types  of  respiratory  hazards  is  an  important
issue  for  hospitals  and  other  healthcare  organizations.  In  order  to  address  this  often
overlooked  danger,  The  Joint  Commission  and  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH),
National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  have  collaborated  to
develop  a  new  educational  monograph  designed  to  assist  hospitals  in  implementing
their respiratory protection programs (RPPs). What’s Special about Chemical, Biological,
Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN) Powered Air-Purifying Respirators (PAPR)?
This  guidance  will  help  respiratory  protection  program  administrators,  managers,  and
powered  air-purifying  respirator  (PAPR)  wearers  understand  the  special  features  of  a
NIOSH-approved  chemical,  biological,  radiological,  and  nuclear  (CBRN)  PAPR.  These
respirators  have  unique  performance,  use  limitations,  and  storage  requirements
compared  to  NIOSH-approved  industrial  PAPR.  The  respiratory  protection  program
administrator should assure that PAPR manufacturer recommendations are addressed.
This information may also be used by managers and PAPR wearers to optimize personal
protection. TB Respiratory Protection Program in Health Care Facilities
This manual is designed to serve as a practical guide for those individuals responsible
for  initiating  and  running  a  TB  respiratory  protection  program  in  healthcare  facilities.
The information in this manual remains current and viable in 2012. Filtering Facepiece
Respirators with an Exhalation Valve: Measurements of Filtration Efficiency to Evaluate
Their Potential for Source Control
This  technical  report  summarizes  research  undertaken  by  the  National  Personal
Protective  Technology  Laboratory  (NPPTL)  to  provide  improved  science-based
recommendations on the use of filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs) with an exhalation
valve. Respirator Use and Infection Control in Healthcare (2015)
Infographic  on  important  reminders  concerning  respirator  use  within  hospital
respiratory protection programs.
PDF  [1,036  KB],  Image  [339  KB]  NIOSH  Reach  II  Study:  Understanding  and  Selecting
Respiratory Protection Devices (2011-2012)
Infographic  addressing  situations  that  require  respiratory  protection  and  whether  an
N95 FFR or a surgical mask should be utilized.
PDF  [445  KB],  Image  [1,940  KB]  Important  Steps  for  Using  NIOSH-Approved  N95
Filtering Facepiece Respirators (2014)
Infographic listing five important steps for those who rely on a N95 for protection.
PDF [711 KB], Image [4,807 KB] Sequence for Putting on Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE)
Infographic detailing the proper sequence for donning PPE.
PDF [1.6 MB] Facial Hairstyles and Filtering Facepiece Respirators (2017)
Infographic  showcasing  acceptable  facial  hairstyles  for  workers  who  wear  tight-fitting
respirators.
PDF [PDF 664 KB], Image [186 KB] Three Key Factors Required for a Respirator to be
Effective (2018)
Infographic  explaining  how  a  respirator  should  be  worn  and  the  filtration  efficiency
needed for it to be effective.
PDF  [1,853  KB],  Image  [160  KB]  Filtering  Out  Confusion:  Frequently  Asked  Questions
about Respiratory Protection, User Seal Check (2018)
PDF, Image Preventing Transmission of Pandemic Influenza and Other Viral Respiratory
Diseases: Personal Protective Equipment for Healthcare Personnel Update 2010
In  light  of  the  unanswered  research  questions  following  the  2009  H1N1  influenza
pandemic, NPPTL asked the IOM to assess the progress of PPE research and to identify
future  directions  for  PPE  for  healthcare  personnel.  While  the  IOM  finds  that  there  are
gaps and deficiencies in the research about PPE use in health care, there is sufficient
knowledge  to  recommend  a  four-pronged  strategy  for  effective  PPE  use:  Proper  N95
Respirator Use for Respiratory Protection Preparedness
When outbreaks of infectious disease occur, we rely on healthcare professionals to care
for  those  affected,  putting  themselves  at  increased  risk  of  exposure  to  the  pathogen
causing the disease. Skin Irritation from Prolonged Use of Tight-Fitting Respirators
Respiratory protection program managers, healthcare providers, and end users should
understand  how  proper  respirator  fit  and  use  can  decrease  skin  irritation,  as  well  as
how  to  treat  potential  skin  irritation  caused  by  extended  respirator  use.  Respirator
Safety: Donning (Putting on) and Doffing (Taking off) Debunking the Myths Regarding
N95 Respirator Use
When  it  comes  to  N95s,  workers  may  be  confused  about  the  purpose  of  these
respirators, how to properly wear them, how to know if they are NIOSH-approved, and
so much more. Proper use of surgical N95 respirators and surgical masks in the OR
Benson-SM; Novak-DA; Ogg-MJ
AORN  J  2013  Apr;  97(4):457-470  Occupational  health  nurses’  achievement  of
competence  and  comfort  in  respiratory  protection  and  preferred  learning  methods:
results of a nationwide survey
Burgel-BJ; Novak-DA; Carpenter-HE; Gruden-M; Lachat-AM; Taormina-D
Workplace  Health  Saf  2014  Feb;  62(2):56-68  Perceived  competence  and  comfort  in
respiratory protection: results of a nationwide survey of occupational health nurses
Burgel-BJ; Novak-D; Burns-CM; Byrd-A; Carpenter-H; Gruden-M; Lachat-A; Taormina-D
Workplace  Health  Saf  2013  Mar;  61(3):103-115  Understanding  and  controlling  the
hazards of surgical smoke
Novak-DA; Benson-SM
Prev  Infect  Ambul  Care  2010  Dec;  :1,  3-5  Emerging  infectious  threats:  respiratory
protection for personal safety
Messinger Harkavy-L; Santo-Novak-DA
Am Nurse Today 2009 Jun; 4(6):32 Evaluation of the benefit of the user seal check on
N95 filtering facepiece respirator fit
Viscusi-DJ; Bergman-MS; Zhuang-Z; Shaffer-RE
J Occup Environ Hyg 2012 Jun; 9(6):408-416
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/hospresptoolkit/properusestorage.html
