A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
  C. diff Infection – Am I at Risk? C. diff Infection – Is Your Patient at Risk? Progression of
a C. diff infection C. diff fact sheet for healthcare professionals  Isolation Precautions
Guideline  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  Guideline  Environmental  Infection  Control
Guidelines  Guideline  for  Hand  Hygiene  in  Healthcare  Settings  (2002)  Targeted
Assessment  for  Prevention  (TAP)  Strategy  Toolkit  Antibiotic  Prescribing  and  Use  Be
Antibiotics  Aware  Partner  Toolkit  Core  Elements  of  Hospital  Antibiotic  Stewardship
Programs Core Elements of Antibiotic Stewardship for Nursing Homes Long-term Care
Facilities  (LTCF)  Component  NCBI  selected  C.  diff  publications  CDC.  Antibiotic
Resistance Threats in the United States, 2019. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, CDC; 2019.  Strategies to Prevent Clostridium difficile Infections in
Acute Care Hospitals: 2022 Update Clinical Practice Guideline by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA):
2021 Focused Update Guidelines on Management of Clostridioides difficile Infection in
Adults  |  Clinical  Infectious  Diseases  |  Oxford  Academic  (oup.com)  Clinical  Practice
Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults and Children: 2017 Update by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology
of  America  (SHEA)  Duration  of  Contact  Precautions  for  Acute-Care  Settings  (SHEA)
Rationale  for  Hand  Hygiene  Recommendations  after  Caring  for  a  Patient  with
Clostridium  difficile  Infection  Guide  to  Preventing  Clostridium  difficile  Infections  CDI
Guide  to  Patient  Safety  Tool  (STRIVE)   Medscape  Commentary:  Core  Elements  of
Antibiotic Stewardship for Nursing Homes Podcast: Annals On Call – C. difficile: The Most
Common  Health  Care–Associated  Infection  in  the  United  States  Blog:  Seeing  The
Potential Harm of Antibiotic Overuse Clearly Blog: C. diff survivor and advocate shares
her story C. diff is a germ that causes diarrhea and colitis (inflammation of the colon). It
can  be  life-threatening.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/c-diff/hcp/resources/index.html
