Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. If you would like more information on topics related to feeding
your  baby  or  toddler,  here  are  some  resources:  CDC’s  Infant  and  Toddler  Nutrition
microsite syndication
CDC offers a free Web Content Syndication service that gives public health partners the
opportunity to syndicate CDC content directly to their sites without having to monitor or
copy  updates.  To  search  the  CDC  infant  and  toddler  nutrition  website  available  for
syndication as well as other resources you can share, visit the CDC Public Health Media
Library  and  browse  or  search  for  “infant  and  toddler  nutrition”.  Learn  more  about
content syndication and how to add CDC syndicated content on your site. CDC’s Child
and Teen Resources
This collection of resources provides parents and caregivers, health care providers, and
partners  with  tools  and  information  to  help  children  and  teens  maintain  a  healthy
weight and prevent obesity. CDC’s Child Development Positive Parenting Tips (Infants)
This CDC website provides information about infants’ development, as well as tips for
positive  parenting  and  promoting  the  safety  and  health  of  infants.  CDC’s  Learn  the
Signs. Act Early.
This website includes tools to track children’s milestones and resources about children’s
development. CDC’s  Parent Information
This  CDC  website  provides  resources  and  information  on  pregnancy,  infants  and
toddlers,  children,  and  teens.  Learn  how  to  handle  common  parenting  challenges
through  interactive  activities,  videos,  and  more.  Healthcare  professionals  and
researchers can also find information on children’s health and safety. CDC’s Division of
Oral Health
Tooth decay (cavities) is one of the most common chronic diseases of childhood in the
United States. Untreated tooth decay can cause pain and infections that may lead to
problems  with  eating,  speaking,  playing,  and  learning.  CDC’s  Division  of  Oral  Health
provides information on what parents and caregivers can do to ensure good oral health
for your child. Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020–2025 [PDF-30.6MB]
These guidelines provide science-based advice for Americans on what to eat and drink
to  promote  health,  reduce  chronic  disease,  and  meet  nutrient  needs.  The  2020–2025
edition  provides  recommendations  for  all  life  stages,  including  infants  and  toddlers.
Feeding Guidelines for Infants and Young Toddlers: A Responsive Parenting Approach
This  report  presents  recommendations  for  promoting  healthy  nutrition  and  feeding
patterns for infants and toddlers from birth to 24 months, with an emphasis on dietary
quality, portion sizes, and mealtime environment. Healthy Children
This  website  was  developed  by  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  for  parents.  It
features thousands of articles in English and Spanish on children’s health and safety, as
well as interactive tools. United States Department of Agriculture Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
The  WIC  Program  provides  support  to  low-income  pregnant,  postpartum,  and
breastfeeding women, babies, and children up to age 5. WIC provides nutritious foods,
information  on  healthy  eating,  breastfeeding  promotion  and  support,  and  referrals  to
health care. United States Department of Agriculture Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP)
SNAP provides benefits to low-income individuals and families and provides economic
benefits to communities. Feeding and Beverage Recommendations
Healthy Eating Research, a national program of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,
offers  science-based  recommendations  for  parents  and  caregivers.  Tips  are  available
for feeding children from birth through 24 months and beverages for children from birth
through  5  years.  Tips  for  older  children  are  also  available.  U.S.  Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA) and Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Advice About Eating
Fish
The U.S. FDA and EPA provide advice regarding eating fish. This advice can help people
make informed choices when it comes to the types of fish that are nutritious and safe to
eat. It is especially important for those who might become pregnant, who are pregnant,
or  who  are  breastfeeding,  as  well  as  for  parents  and  caregivers  who  are  feeding
children.  This  advice  supports  the  recommendations  of  the  Dietary  Guidelines  for
Americans. CDC’s Breastfeeding Information
CDC’s  Division  of  Nutrition,  Physical  Activity,  and  Obesity  (DNPAO)  is  committed  to
increasing breastfeeding rates throughout the United States. CDC provides information
for public health professionals and others to help support breastfeeding mothers, such
as managing breastfeeding during various maternal and infant illnesses and conditions,
any  precautions  for  vaccines  during  breastfeeding,  and  recommendations  for  proper
storage  and  handling  of  expressed  human  milk.  International  Lactation  Consultant
Association (ILCA)
ILCA is the member association for professionals who care for breastfeeding families.
ILCA’s “Find a Lactation Consultant Directory” can help you find a lactation consultant
to  get  the  breastfeeding  support  you  need.  United  States  Lactation  Consultant
Association (USLCA)
USLCA  is  a  professional  association  for  International  Board  Certified  Lactation
Consultants  (IBCLCs)  and  other  health  care  professionals  who  care  for  breastfeeding
families. USLCA’s “Find an IBCLC” can help you find a lactation consultant to get the
breastfeeding support you need. WIC, the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants, and Children—Breastfeeding Support 
The  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture  Special  Supplemental  Nutrition  Program
for  Women,  Infants,  and  Children  (WIC)  Breastfeeding  Support  website  includes
resources for expectant and current mothers about breastfeeding, overcoming common
challenges, and thriving to make breastfeeding work for their families. La Leche League
USA
La Leche League USA helps mothers to breastfeed through mother-to-mother support,
encouragement,  information,  and  education  and  promotes  a  better  understanding  of
breastfeeding  as  an  important  element  in  the  healthy  development  of  the  baby  and
mother. Office on Women’s Health
The Office on Women’s Health’s vision is for all women and girls to achieve the best
possible  health  outcomes.  They  provide  information  on  breastfeeding  to  help  women
make infant feeding decisions and to guide mothers through the breastfeeding process.
 Questions & Answers for Consumers Concerning Infant Formula
The U.S. Food & Drug Administration regulates infant formula and has a list of questions
and answers about infant formula. Infant Formula Do’s and Don’ts
The  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  provides  information  on  infant  formula
preparation and storage, as well as other tips on how to keep infant formula safe. Food
Safety Concerns for Children Under Five
Food  safety  is  particularly  important  for  young  children.  Foodsafety.gov  provides
information on safely preparing food for your child.
 Fruits & Veggies—Have a Plant Movement
A resource designed to help spread the word about the health benefits of adding more
fruits and veggies to your diet. USDA MyPlate Kitchen
This online tool features a large collection of recipes and resources to support building
healthy  and  budget-friendly  meals.  Site  features  include:  Video  Series  on  How  to
Introduce Solid Foods
1,000  Days  has  developed  helpful  videos  about  introducing  solid  foods  to  your  baby.
Topics include: Vitamin and Mineral Fact Sheets
The  National  Institutes  of  Health’s  Office  of  Dietary  Supplements  has  fact  sheets  for
consumers and health professionals about vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements.
This  icon  means  you  are  leaving  CDC  and  entering  another  website.  View  full
disclaimer. To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/infantandtoddlernutrition/resources.html
