Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Mothers with Hepatitis B or C infections can breastfeed their
infants. Hepatitis B is a liver infection caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV), which is
transmitted by blood, semen or other body fluid from an infected person. A woman with
hepatitis  B  can  infect  her  infant  with  the  virus  during  childbirth.  All  pregnant  women
[PDF-864KB] are given a blood test for hepatitis B as part of their prenatal care or when
they arrive at the hospital to give birth. CDC recommends that babies get the first dose
of the hepatitis B vaccine before leaving the hospital or within the first 24 hours. Babies
are usually given the second dose of the vaccine 1-2 months after the first dose, and
the third dose by the time they are 18 months old. Yes. All infants born to HBV-infected
mothers  should  receive  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin  (HBIG)  and  the  first  dose  of
hepatitis B vaccine within 12 hours of birth. The second dose of vaccine should be given
at age 1–2 months, and the third dose at age 6 months. The infant should be tested
after  completion  of  the  vaccine  series,  at  age  9–12  months  (generally  at  the  next
well-child visit), to determine if the vaccine worked and that the infant is not infected
with HBV through exposure to the mother’s blood during the birth process. However,
there is no need to delay breastfeeding until the infant is fully immunized. The risk of
HBV mother-to-child transmission through breastfeeding is negligible if infants born to
HBV-positive  mothers  receive  the  HBIG/HBV  vaccine  at  birth.  Learn  more  about  HBV
infection.  Data  are  insufficient  to  say  yes  or  no.  However,  HBV  is  spread  by  infected
blood.  Therefore,  if  the  HBV-positive  mother’s  nipples  and/or  surrounding  areola  are
cracked and bleeding, she should stop nursing temporarily. To maintain her milk supply
while not breastfeeding, she can express and discard her breast milk until her nipples
are  healed.  Once  her  nipples  are  no  longer  cracked  or  bleeding,  the  HBV-positive
mother  may  fully  resume  breastfeeding.  Providers  may  need  to  refer  mothers  for
lactation support to learn how to maintain milk production and how to supplement with
pasteurized donor human milk or formula while temporarily not breastfeeding. Hepatitis
C  is  a  liver  infection  caused  by  the  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV),  which  is  transmitted  by
blood  from  an  infected  person.  There  is  no  vaccine  for  hepatitis  C.  The  best  way  to
prevent  hepatitis  C  is  by  avoiding  behaviors  that  can  spread  the  disease,  especially
injecting drugs. Yes. There is no documented evidence that breastfeeding spreads HCV.
Therefore,  having  HCV-infection  is  not  a  contraindication  to  breastfeed.  Data  are
insufficient to say yes or no. However, HCV is spread by infected blood. Therefore, if the
HCV-positive mother’s nipples and/or surrounding areola are cracked and bleeding, she
should stop nursing temporarily. To maintain her milk supply while not breastfeeding,
she  can  express  and  discard  her  breast  milk  until  her  nipples  are  healed.  Once  her
nipples are no longer cracked or bleeding, the HCV-positive mother may fully resume
breastfeeding. Providers may need to refer mothers for lactation support to learn how
to maintain milk production and how to supplement with donor human milk or formula
while  temporarily  not  breastfeeding.  Visit  CDC’s  Viral  Hepatitis  C  Frequently  Asked
Questions for additional information on HCV infection and pregnancy. To receive email
updates about this topic, enter your email address. 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/breastfeeding-special-circumstances/maternal-or-infant-illnesses/hepa
titis.html
