Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Perinatal transmission is one of
the most efficient modes of
spread of hepatitis B virus (HBV). Infants born to mothers who
are positive for both hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and
hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) have a 70%-90% risk for HBV
infection; 85%-90% of infected infants will remain chronically
infected (1). For infants born to HBsAg-positive, HBeAg-negative
mothers, the risk for chronic infection is as great as 31% (2-5).
Children born to HBsAg-positive mothers not infected at birth
have a 30%-60% risk for acquiring infection during the first 5
years of life (depending on the HBeAg status of the mother)
(3,6). In 1988, the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) recommended HBsAg screening of all pregnant women during
an early prenatal visit and treatment of infants born to
HBsAg-positive mothers with hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) at
birth and hepatitis B vaccine at birth, 1 month, and 6 months of
age (7). To assess the implementation of these recommendations,
records of treatment and follow-up of infants born to
HBV-carrier* mothers were reviewed at a hospital in Atlanta.  The hospital is an 864-bed
public urban hospital mainly
serving the greater metropolitan Atlanta area; approximately
10,000 women are seen each year at the hospital's prenatal
clinics. In July 1988, universal hepatitis screening of pregnant
women was begun at the prenatal clinics. From July 1, 1988,
through June 30, 1989, 85 HBsAg-positive women were identified
through prenatal hepatitis screening at the hospital. This report
presents findings for the 43 women who were HBsAg-positive,
delivered their infants at the hospital, and resided in either
Fulton or DeKalb counties.  At delivery, HBIG and the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine
were administered to 42 and 41 of the 43 infants, respectively.
One infant received the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine at 1
month of age; records and treatment information for one infant
were unavailable. The 41 infants who received hepatitis B
prophylaxis in the hospital were scheduled for vaccination
follow-up  by  their  respective  county  clinic.   The  second  dose  of  vaccine  was
administered to 39 of the
infants, 33 of whom received their second dose before 2 months of
age. Twenty-four of the 32 infants who were at least 6 months old
as of March 15, 1990, received their third dose of vaccine; 18 of
the 24 received the third dose within 1 month of their vaccine
due date. The hepatitis B vaccination completion rate was
comparable to the 73% completion rate for the third dose of
diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine in the same
infants. None of the infants in this study has been tested for
anti-HBs.  In DeKalb County, a computer-based system is used to track
childhood vaccination records, and hepatitis B vaccine is
available at all the local health centers; 11 (92%) of 12 infants
identified in that county completed the vaccine series. In
contrast, 13 (65%) of 20 infants completed the vaccination series
in Fulton County, which uses a manual "tickler file" and makes
hepatitis  B  vaccine  available  at  one  vaccination  clinic.   HBsAg  tests  were  repeated
during the prenatal period for 35
women who were identified as HBsAg-positive. Of these, 10 (29%)
seroconverted to HBsAg-negative before delivery; five of the 10
women developed antibody to HBsAg or had liver enzyme elevations
that resolved by the time of seroconversion, suggesting recent
acute HBV infection.
Reported by: B Sweeney, B Stoll, MD, D Vroon, MD, Grady Memorial
Hospital, Atlanta; AM Mullen, DeKalb County Board of Health; J
Sarver, Fulton County Board of Health; R Keith Sikes, DVM, State
Epidemiologist, Georgia Dept of Human Resources. Hepatitis Br,
Div of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, Center for Infectious
Diseases, CDC.  Editorial Note: In the United States, an estimated 18,775 infants
are born to HBsAg-positive women each year. Without adequate
hepatitis B prophylaxis at delivery, an estimated 4000 of these
infants can become chronically infected with HBV (CDC,
unpublished data, 1989). More than 90% of such perinatally
acquired HBV infections can be prevented through administration
of HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after birth,
followed by completion of the hepatitis B vaccine series at 1 and
6 months of age (7). Testing infants for HBsAg and anti-HBs is
also recommended at 12-15 months of age to monitor the
effectiveness of therapy (7). With implementation of the ACIP
recommendation that all pregnant women be screened for HBsAg,
state vaccination programs must ensure that infants born to
HBV-carrier mothers receive complete hepatitis B prophylaxis as a
part  of  their  routine  childhood  vaccination  program.   Hepatitis  B  screening  and
vaccination programs for infants
of carrier mothers must address specific operational issues. For
example, before infants can receive their second and third doses
of vaccine, information about the need for hepatitis B vaccine
must be conveyed from the newborn nurseries to the infants'
pediatric-care providers. For those infants who receive primary
and/or preventive health services in the public sector,
information is usually transmitted from the hospital where the
infant was born to the county health department and/or the local
health-care center. These programs may then be responsible for
tracking HBV-carrier mothers and ensuring that infants receive
three doses of vaccine.  Health education efforts must be directed at HBsAg-positive
mothers to emphasize the importance of hepatitis B prevention;
for example, vaccination reminders may be provided to
HBsAg-positive mothers when they are discharged from the
hospital. Local health centers and county health departments
should incorporate hepatitis B vaccination into the tracking
systems used to follow infants for routine childhood vaccinations
to assure a high rate of follow-up. In addition, personnel in
pediatric well-baby and vaccination clinics should identify
infants for whom hepatitis B vaccine is indicated and ensure
these infants complete the vaccine series. Centralized
immunization files can be used to follow contacts of HBV-carrier
women identified by prenatal screening (i.e., household members
and sex partners), for whom HB vaccine is also recommended (1).  References  
    ACIP. Protection against viral hepatitis: recommendations of
    the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR
    1990;39(no. RR-2).  
    Stevens CE, Neurath RA, Beasley RP, et al. HBeAg and anti-HBe
    detection by radioimmunoassay: correlation with vertical
    transmission of hepatitis B virus in Taiwan. J Med Virol
    1979;3:237-41.  
    Beasley RP, Trepo C, Stevens CE, et al. The e antigen and
    vertical transmission of hepatitis B surface antigen. Am J
    Epidemiol 1977;105:94-8.  
    Shiraki K, Yoshihara N, Sakurai M, et al. Acute hepatitis B in
    infants born to carrier mothers with antibody to hepatitis B e
    antigen. J Pediatr 1980;97:768-70.  
    Tong MJ, Sinatra FR, Thomas DW, et al. Need for
    immunoprophylaxis in infants born to HBsAg-positive carrier
    mothers who are HBeAg negative. J Pediatr 1984;105:945-7.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang LY. Postnatal infectivity of hepatitis B
    surface antigen-carrier mothers. J Infect Dis 1983;147:185-90.  
    ACIP. Prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B
    virus: prenatal screening of all pregnant women for hepatitis B
    surface antigen. MMWR 1988;37:341-6,351.
    *A person who is either HBsAg-positive on at least two occasions
    (at least 6 months apart) or who is HBsAg-positive and IgM
    anti-HBc-negative when a single specimen is tested.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001647.htm
