Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Updated December 19, 2023 As of 2023, 34 states have laws
that criminalize HIV exposure. CDC researched and analyzed the relevant laws for the
50  states,  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  Puerto  Rico  then  categorized  them  into  four
categories.  General  criminal  statutes,  such  as  reckless  endangerment  and  attempted
murder, can be used to criminalize behaviors that can potentially expose another to HIV
and or an STD. Many states have laws that fall into more than one of the categories
listed above. For this analysis, only HIV-specific laws are captured for states with both
HIV-specific  laws  and  STD/communicable/infectious  disease  laws.  Only  HIV  or
STD/communicable/infectious  disease  laws  are  captured  for  states  with  both  HIV  or
STD/communicable/infectious disease laws and sentence enhancement statutes. During
the  early  years  of  the  HIV  epidemic,  many  states  implemented  HIV-specific  criminal
exposure laws to discourage behavior that might lead to transmission, promote safer
sex practices, and, in some cases, receive funds to support HIV prevention activities.
These laws were passed at a time when very little was known about HIV including how
HIV  was  transmitted  and  how  best  to  treat  the  virus.  Many  of  these  state  laws
criminalize behaviors that cannot transmit HIV – such as biting or spitting – and apply
regardless  of  actual  transmission,  or  intent.  After  over  30  years  of  HIV  research  and
significant biomedical advancements to treat and prevent HIV transmission, many state
laws  are  now  outdated  and  do  not  reflect  our  current  understanding  of  HIV.  In  many
cases, this same standard is not applied to other treatable diseases. Further, these laws
have been shown to increase stigma, exacerbate disparities, and may discourage HIV
testing.  Criminalize  or  Control  Actions  Through  HIV-Specific  Statutes  and  Regulations
(n=21)  Criminalize  or  Control  Actions  Through  STD/Communicable/Infectious  Diseases
Specific Statutes (n=13) Sentence Enhancement Statutes (n=5) None/General Criminal
Statutes  (n=13)  Criminalization  of  potential  HIV  exposure  is  largely  a  matter  of  state
law, with some Federal legislation addressing criminalization in discrete areas, such as
blood donation and prostitution. These laws vary as to what behaviors are criminalized
or what behaviors result in additional penalties. Several states criminalize one or more
behaviors  that  pose  a  low  or  negligible  risk  for  HIV  transmission.  In  13  states,  laws
require  people  with  HIV  who  are  aware  of  their  status  to  disclose  their  status  to  sex
partners,  and  4  states  require  disclosure  to  needle-sharing  partners.  The  maximum
sentence length for violating an HIV-specific statute is also a matter of state law. Some
states  have  a  maximum  sentence  length  up  to  life  in  prison,  while  others  have
maximum sentence lengths that are less than 10 years. However, only 10 states have
laws  that  account  for  HIV  prevention  measures,  such  as  condom  use,  antiretroviral
therapy (ART), and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) use. Since 2014, at least thirteen
states  have  modernized  or  repealed  their  HIV  criminal  laws:  California,  Colorado,
Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan, Missouri, Nevada, New Jersey, North Carolina, Virginia,
and Washington. Changes include moving HIV prevention issues from the criminal code
to disease control regulations, requiring intent to transmit, actual HIV transmission, or
providing  defenses  for  taking  measures  to  prevent  transmission,  including  viral
suppression  or  being  noninfectious,  condom  use,  and  partner  PrEP  use.  CDC  in
collaboration with ChangeLab Solutions developed a HIV criminalization legal and policy
assessment tool to assist jurisdictions in evaluating their laws to ensure they align with
current  scientific  and  medical  evidence.  This  tool  aims  to  help  public  health
professionals,  policymakers,  legal  counsel,  and  partners  understand  how  HIV
criminalization  laws  intersect  with  data  privacy  laws  in  their  jurisdictions  and  to
facilitate  conversations  among  partners.  CDC  is  also  collaborating  with  ChangeLab
Solutions to establish a learning lab to help states apply the HIV criminalization legal
and policy assessment tool. The following resources from the Center for HIV Law and
Policy provide a broad overview of HIV criminalization in the United States. Specifically,
these  resources  address  the  science  of  HIV,  provide  background  literature  on  the
history and practices of HIV criminalization, and the current status of HIV criminalization
laws and statutes in the United States. The following case studies provide an in-depth
analysis  of  the  HIV  criminalization  laws,  practices,  convictions,  and  sentencing
outcomes in a variety of states. The Williams Institute: State Case Studies: The current
federal guidance from the U.S. Department of Justice on HIV criminalization practices
and  reform  is  provided  below.  The  following  resources  represent  a  sample  of  articles
from  the  legal  and  scientific  research  communities.  The  information  presented  here
does not constitute legal advice and does not represent the legal views of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention or the Department of Health and Human Services,
nor  is  it  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  all  legal  provisions  relevant  to  HIV.  This
information  is  subject  to  change  and  does  not  contain  measures  implemented  by
counties, cities, or other localities. Use of any provision herein should be contemplated
only in conjunction with advice from legal counsel.    
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/exposure.html
