A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. The domestic medical screening guidance
is  for  state  public  health  departments  and  healthcare  providers  in  the  United  States
who conduct the initial medical screening for refugees. These screenings usually occur
30-90  days  after  the  refugee  arrives  in  the  United  States.  This  guidance  aims  to
promote and improve refugee health, prevent disease, and familiarize refugees with the
U.S. healthcare system.  The HIV/AIDS pandemic remains one of the most serious global
health challenges today23. More than 30 million people were living with HIV at the end
of 2007, with approximately 2.1 million deaths annually due to AIDS2. In addition, an
estimated  2.7  million  new  HIV  infections  occurred  in  20072.  While  HIV/AIDS  affects
individuals  throughout  the  world,  certain  regions,  such  as  sub-Saharan  Africa,  have
disproportionally high prevalence rates (exceeding 20% in some countries). In addition,
HIV/AIDS disproportionately affects certain vulnerable population groups, such as young
adults, women, and children. The increasing global rates of new HIV infections, despite
efforts  in  prevention,  coupled  with  the  increasing  mobility  of  populations,  make
HIV/AIDS  an  important  issue  in  every  country.  Although  the  link  between  HIV  and
migration is complex and nonlinear, multiple factors heighten the HIV risk for refugees.
Economic  distress,  conflict,  sexual  abuse  and  violence,  oppression,  discrimination,
exploitation, gender bias, and sociopolitical marginalization contribute to conditions in
which  transmission  of  HIV  may  be  enhanced45.  However,  few  studies  have  been
performed  that  document  actual  increased  risk  behaviors  in  specific  refugee
populations5.  In  addition,  refugees  are  frequently  excluded  from  the  national  health
care  systems  of  host  countries  where  they  reside,  and,  until  recently,  voluntary
counseling  and  testing  (VCT)  was  not  provided  in  many  camp  settings  or  to  urban
refugee  populations67.  Even  when  VCT  is  available,  many  barriers  may  exist  for
refugee  populations  that  make  testing  less  accessible  (e.g.,  mistrust  in  how  asylum
countries  may  use  information,  difficulty  in  maintaining  confidentiality  in  refugee
settings)8.  Approximately  14%  of  the  incoming  refugees  to  the  United  States  arrive
from  countries  with  HIV  prevalence  >5%91011.  These  figures  are  based  on
country-specific HIV prevalence data from the end of 2006 and may underestimate true
infection rates because of underreporting or lack of surveillance data. In addition, prior
to resettlement, refugees may have traveled to or lived in other countries with high HIV
prevalence rates. Refugees may also have been victims of physical and sexual violence
and may be at risk of HIV acquisition through rape, blood product transfusions, or other
medical  procedures  leading  to  infection,  or  through  drug  use121314.  Disclosure  of
these  exposures  may  not  be  forthcoming  during  initial  intake  assessments.  It  is
imperative that a scientific and rational approach to the screening, diagnosis, support
and care of these individuals be developed and implemented. Prior to departure to the
United  States,  all  refugees  undergo  a  pre-departure  medical  screening  process.  This
process  generally  includes  screening  for  inadmissible  medical  conditions  (e.g.,  active
tuberculosis), as well as presumptive pre-departure treatment for malaria and intestinal
parasites,  when  appropriate.  HIV  has  been  removed  from  the  list  of  inadmissible
conditions, and refugees are no longer routinely tested for HIV prior to departure to the
United States. Identifying HIV infection has implications for the individual refugee, the
clinical provider, and the public health system. Early entry into care and treatment for
HIV  has  been  associated  with  improved  survival15.  The  use  of  highly  active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has led to substantial declines in morbidity and mortality
experienced  by  HIV-infected  persons.  In  addition,  knowing  one's  HIV  status  has
important implications for the prevention of transmission to others. Studies specifically
examining  the  cost-effectiveness  of  screening  refugees  in  the  era  of  HAART  in  the
United  States  are  currently  lacking.  However,  the  cost-effectiveness  of  routine  HIV
screening in health-care settings is comparable with that of other commonly accepted
screening  interventions,  even  in  populations  with  relatively  low  seroprevalence1617.
The  current  guidance  from  CDC  recommends  testing  for  HIV  as  a  routine  part  of
medical  care  and  stresses  an  "opt  out"  approach  in  which  a  patient  is  notified  that
testing will be performed unless the patient declines1. The current CDC guidelines are
available  online.  Testing  for  HIV  infection  has  historically  been  complicated  by  the
diversity of the HIV genome and the inability of various assays to detect all types and
subtypes  of  HIV.  Currently,  available  assays  are  largely  able  to  overcome  these
limitations, although an understanding of both population differences and variability in
assay performance is important. Two types of HIV are known to infect humans: HIV-1
and  HIV-2.  HIV-1  is  the  cause  of  the  majority  of  HIV  infections  globally18.  HIV-2
accounts  for  less  than  1%  of  HIV  infections  worldwide  and  is  found  mostly  in  West
Africa,  although  cases  have  been  reported  from  India,  Europe,  Brazil,  and  the  United
States19. While most available tests in use in the United States screen for both HIV-1
and HIV-2, specific testing for HIV-2 infection should be performed in individuals from
areas where HIV-2 is common, if their HIV screening test is reactive. HIV-1 is divided
into  three  groups:  Group  M  (major),  Group  N  (nonmajor),  and  Group  O  (outlier)2021.
Group  O  is  found  in  West  and  Central  Africa  and  is  of  particular  importance  to  HIV
screening, as some assays fail to detect Group O infections. Group M constitutes 90% of
current  HIV  infections  and  is  further  divided  into  phylogenetically  distinct  subtypes
(A1-4,  B,  C,  D,  F1-2,  G,  H,  J  and  K)22.  Subtype  B,  found  predominantly  in  the  United
States and Europe, has been the most studied subtype, although it represents less than
12% of worldwide infections. Globally, the most prevalent subtype is C, constituting half
of all known infections. See below for a table of geographic distribution of subtypes22.
Subtype Location Proportion of known infections A East and Central Africa, central Asia,
eastern  Europe  (including  Russia)  12.3%  B  Americas,  Western  Europe,  East  Asia,
Oceania (including Japan) 10.2% C India, Nepal, Eastern and Southern Africa 49.9% D
East and Central Africa 2.5% G West Africa, East Africa, Central Europe 6.3% F, H, J, K
Various  locations  <1%  each  Circulating  recombinant  forms  (CRFs)  Various  locations
remainder EIA test results are classified as reactive or nonreactive. Specimens with a
nonreactive result from the initial EIA are considered HIV-negative. Specimens with a
reactive  EIA  result  are  retested  in  duplicate.  If  the  result  of  either  duplicate  test  is
reactive, the specimen is reported as repeatedly reactive and undergoes confirmatory
testing
 with
 a
 more
 specific
 supplemental
 test
 such
 as
 Western
 blot,
immunofluorescence  assay  (IFA),  or  RNA  testing23.  Some  laboratories  report  only  a
final result (not an initial reactive EIA result that is not confirmed). This reporting may
have implications, particularly for individuals with very recent infections or for Group O
infections. The HIV-1 Western blot is a solid-phase EIA with immobilized viral antigens
to  detect  IgG  antibodies  to  specific  HIV  proteins.  A  Western  blot  is  interpreted  as
positive if bands appear at the site of two or more of the following HIV antigens: p24,
gp41, or gp120/160. Specimens that are repeatedly reactive by EIA and Western blot
are considered HIV-positive. The Western blot is considered indeterminate if bands are
present,  but  fewer  than  two  of  the  latter  bands  are  present.  Specimens  that  are
repeatedly EIA-reactive occasionally provide an indeterminate Western blot result, due
either to an incomplete antibody response to HIV in an infected person or to nonspecific
reactions in an uninfected person24. The Western blot is interpreted as negative only if
no bands are present. Repeat Western blot or RNA testing, performed on a subsequent
blood specimen, will distinguish persons with early infections from uninfected persons
with persistent indeterminate results. Current HIV EIAs are >99% sensitive and specific
for  HIV  infection  and  are  able  to  detect  nearly  all  non-B  subtypes  and  most  group  O
infections25.  However,  Western  blot  may  fail  to  detect  group  O  in  10%-20%  of
specimens26.  Individuals  from  areas  with  high  rates  of  group  O  infection  (e.g.,
Cameroon)  with  reactive  EIAs  but  a  negative  Western  blot  should  undergo  further
testing with assays known to detect group O (RNA testing). Diagnostic testing for HIV
also  includes  rapid  antibody  assays,  whose  sensitivity  and  specificity  are  high
(>99%)2728. Rapid tests may be particularly useful for screening individuals who may
not  return  for  the  results  of  conventional  screening  tests.  A  rapid  antibody  test
produces  results  in  20  minutes  or  less.  Six  FDA-approved  rapid  tests  detect  the
presence of antibodies to HIV in blood, serum, or oral fluid specimens29. As with the
conventional  EIA,  a  reactive  rapid  HIV  test  result  must  be  confirmed  with  a  follow-up
supplemental test (e.g., Western blot or RNA) before a final diagnosis of HIV infection
can  be  made29.  If  confirmatory  testing  yields  negative  or  indeterminate  results,
follow-up testing should be performed on a blood specimen collected 4 weeks after the
initial reactive rapid HIV test result. Most rapid HIV-1 tests are capable of detecting all
major subtypes of group M, although not all rapid HIV screening assays detect Group O.
Four rapid tests are FDA-approved for detection of both HIV-1 and HIV-2, one of which
can differentiate HIV-1 from HIV-2.30 A qualitative RNA test has been FDA-approved for
diagnosis  of  acute  HIV  infection  in  antibody-negative  persons.  This  test  may  also  be
used to confirm a reactive antibody screening test. Quantitative tests for HIV RNA are
available, but are not FDA-approved for diagnosis. These RNA tests are routinely used
to quantify viral load for monitoring progression of HIV disease29. HIV-1 RNA tests do
not detect HIV-2, and the FDA has not approved an HIV-2 RNA or DNA test30. Plasma
viral load is characteristically low in HIV-2 infection and RNA testing is unreliable for the
detection of HIV-2. DNA testing for HIV-2 can be performed to confirm HIV-2 infection.
HIV disproportionately affects children of foreign-born mothers31. A 2002-2003 report
of the Ministerial Council on HIV/AIDS in Canada estimated that 70% of all maternal HIV
transmission  to  children  in  Canada  occurred  among  women  of  African  and  Caribbean
origin31.  Despite  HIV  disease  progression  being  more  rapid  in  children  and  data
suggesting  that  infected  children  have  significantly  improved  survival  when
antiretroviral therapy is initiated early, HIV screening in children <15 years of age has
often been restricted to those with identifiable risk factors (receipt of blood products,
HIV-infected mother, or other risk factors identified by provider). The diagnosis of HIV in
children  is  complicated  by  the  presence  of  passively  acquired  maternal  anti-HIV
immunoglobulin (IgG) in children born to HIV-infected mothers. Maternal antibody has
been demonstrated in children up to 18 months of age, complicating interpretation of
positive antibody test results32. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that
infants born to HIV-positive mothers undergo DNA or RNA testing at day 14, again at
1-2 months of age, and then at 3-6 months of age. A positive RNA or DNA result at any
age is a presumptive indicator of HIV infection but must be confirmed. The diagnosis of
a HIV-infection is made if two DNA or RNA tests are positive. CDC guidelines state that
HIV  is  definitively  excluded  by  two  negative  RNA  or  DNA  tests  (at  1  month  and  >4
months) or two negative antibody tests from separate specimens obtained at age >6
months. Given that HIV can be transmitted from mother to child through breastfeeding,
many clinicians confirm the absence of HIV-1 with a negative HIV-1 antibody assay at
12-18 months of age or after the child is no longer breastfeeding32. Refugees represent
a population vulnerable to HIV infection and disease. Given the known benefits of early
detection,
 counseling,
 provision
 of
 antiretroviral
 therapy,
 and
 prevention
 of
mother-to-child transmission, HIV screening should be offered to all refugees resettling
in  the  United  States.  CDC  works  to  promote  and  improve  the  health  of  immigrants,
refugees, and migrants globally. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/immigrant-refugee-health/hcp/domestic-guidance/hiv-infection.html
