Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Pre-exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) delivery in the United States
includes  a  system  of  prevention  and  support  services,  a  PrEP  care  system,  that
contributes  to  making  PrEP  available,  accessible,  and  acceptable.  To  request  that  a
classroom training be scheduled, please submit a training request through the Capacity
Building Assistance (CBA) Tracking System (CTS). To register for scheduled classroom
sessions or access eLearning modules, please visit CDC TRAIN and access the HIV CBA
Learning Group and Training Plan. PrEP is a medication that users take daily to lower
their  chances  of  getting  HIV.  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)
recommends PrEP as an HIV prevention strategy. Taking PrEP medication as prescribed
reduces the risk of getting HIV via sexual contact by about 99% and reduces the risk of
getting  HIV  by  at  least  74%  among  persons  who  inject  drugs.  Two  oral  medications,
emtricitabine  and  tenofovir  disoproxil  fumarate  (Truvada®)  and  emtricitabine  and
tenofovir alafenamide or (Descovy®) are currently approved for daily use as HIV PrEP.
Multiple  generic  formulations  of  tenofovir  disoproxil  fumarate/emtricitabine—the
equivalent of Truvada—are now available in the United States for HIV prevention with
PrEP. In addition to the oral medications already approved, in December 2021, the FDA
approved  APRETUDE  (cabotegravir  extended-release  injectable  suspension),  for
intramuscular  use  as  HIV  PrEP.  Health  departments,  community-based  organizations
(CBOs), and clinics can form partnerships as part of a comprehensive PrEP Care System
to make PrEP available, accessible, and acceptable. A continuum of PrEP care, like the
one  below*,  provides  a  framework  for  the  steps  needed  for  population  health  and
prevention  with  PrEP.  ⇓ Click  image  to  enlarge  ⇓  The  following  graphic  shows  the
essential elements and the basic flow of PrEP care in a clinic. PrEP clinical care includes
identifying and engaging patients in need of PrEP, conducting necessary exams and lab
tests and prescribing PrEP for the patients, as well as ongoing patient monitoring with
follow-up  visits  and  prescriptions—for  as  long  as  the  patient  needs  PrEP.  Health
departments  fund,  guide,  and  lead  collaborative  planning  and  delivery  of  health
protective measures—like PrEP. A public health model for prevention with PrEP includes
national, state, and local levels of public health collaborating with and supporting clinics
and  nonclinical  CBOs  to  ensure  that  PrEP  is  available,  accessible,  and  acceptable.
Community-wide  education  on  PrEP  happens  in  a  variety  of  complementary  ways,
including:  Some  examples  include:  There  are  several  community-level  interventions
that  use  effective  strategies  for  promoting  PrEP.  Enhance  Provider  Knowledge  and
Support of PrEP Health departments can develop their own PrEP educational materials
and provide training for clinicians. Identification, Recruitment and Navigation of People
in  Need  of  PrEP  Persons  at  risk  for  HIV  can  be  identified  in  clinics,  through  outreach,
community  testing,  and  other  community  program  services  and  interventions.
Integrating  PrEP  education  and  referrals  into  program  services  is  an  effective  way  to
promote PrEP to likely candidates. Testing and risk assessment resources Linkage and
Navigation  Those  at  risk  of  HIV  often  encounter  barriers,  such  as  stigma,  medical
mistrust,  and  perceived  payment  barriers,  that  prevent  them  from  receiving  health
services.  PrEP  navigation  includes  identifying  and  linking  persons  in  need  of
PrEP-to-PrEP care, assisting with health insurance, identifying and reducing barriers to
care, and tailoring education to the client to influence his or her health-related attitudes
and behaviors. This may also include retention—supporting the person to stay on PrEP.
CBOs that do not provide clinical services may develop working relationships with PrEP
clinicians  to  facilitate  linkage  of  community  members  to  PrEP  services.  Clinical
programs may also involve staff from CBOs to help to support PrEP patients. Working
relationships  with  behavioral  health  clinics,  substance  abuse  treatment  clinics,  and
other  clinical  service  providers  may  be  beneficial  for  providing  services  to  persons  in
need of PrEP. Clinical/Prescribing PrEP Financing PrEP Jurisdictions may have local funds
and leverage existing patient assistance program resources to establish their own PrEP
patient  assistance  program.  Providers  may  be  able  to  leverage  other  public  health
resources  such  as:  PrEP  candidates  may  need  assistance  with  transportation,
communication  with  clinicians,  and  other  services,  such  as  navigating  payment
coverage. Here are some resources to help with the cost of PrEP: Continuing Education
(CE)  elearning  modules  on  CDC  TRAIN  Classroom  (or  virtual,  synchronous  learning)
on CDC TRAIN PrEP users should be provided all the information and support needed to
ensure  they  take  PrEP  daily  as  directed.  Health  departments  can  support  clinics  and
CBOs with adherence-related activities by providing PrEP education to clinical providers
and providing resources for patients. Compendium of Evidence-Based Interventions and
Best  Practices  for  HIV  Prevention-  PrEP  Chapter  Continuing  Education  (CE)  eLearning
modules  on  CDC  TRAIN  Training  and  Continuing  Education  Online  (TCEO)  A
comprehensive  directory  of  HIV  and  other  health  services  should  support  navigation
and guidance of clients. The health department, local CBOs, or jurisdictional planning
groups may have created such a directory. If none are available in your jurisdiction, you
may  want  to  create  one  that  includes  online  resources,  programs,  and  services.
Compiling,  using,  and  maintaining  a  directory  for  PrEP  providers  and  PrEP-related
services is a great way to provide information to the community and collaborate with
others on prevention with PrEP. To view and register for scheduled virtual, instructor-led
trainings:  To  access  eLearning  modules,  including  training  prerequisite  courses:  To
request  technical  assistance  or  that  a  training  session  be  scheduled:  If  you  have
questions or need additional assistance, please contact HIVCBA@cdc.gov.    
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/effective-interventions/prevent/prep/index.html
