Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.   Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing is essential for
improving the health of people living with HIV and reducing new HIV infections: once
diagnosed,  persons  with  HIV  can  be  linked  to  care  and  learn  how  to  prevent
transmission to others.  Testing that occurs as part of an individual’s routine healthcare
visit is especially important because it creates the opportunity to diagnose infections in
people  who  may  not  consider  themselves  at  risk  for  HIV.   Data  indicate  that,  of  the
estimated 1.1 million adults and adolescents living with HIV in the United States at the
end of 2009, 18% were unaware of their infection.1  State laws that facilitate routine
testing  are  vital  to  efforts  to  ensure  all  Americans  know  their  status.   In  2006,  CDC
published  its  Revised  Recommendations  for  HIV  Testing  of  Adults,  Adolescents,  and
Pregnant  Women  in  Health-Care  Settings.   These  recommendations  support  routine
testing  and  differ  from  previous  recommendations  in  ways  that  impacted  state  laws
addressing  HIV  testing  procedures  in  regards  to  informed  consent  and  pre-test
counseling.    Specifically,  these  recommendations  stated  that:  Currently,  all  but  two
states,  Nebraska  and  New  York,  have  laws  that  are  consistent  with  CDC
recommendations   (click  here  to  find  out  about  specific  states).  1CDC.  Monitoring
selected  national  HIV  prevention  and  care  objectives  by  using  HIV  surveillance
data—United States and 6 U.S. dependent areas—2010. HIV Surveillance Supplemental
Report  2012;17  (No.  3,  part  A).  Published  June  2012  [p6]  The  information  presented
here  does  not  constitute  legal  advice  and  does  not  represent  the  legal  views  of  the
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  or  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services, nor is it a comprehensive analysis of all legal provisions relevant to HIV. This
information  is  subject  to  change  and  does  not  contain  measures  implemented  by
counties, cities, or other localities. Use of any provision herein should be contemplated
only in conjunction with advice from legal counsel.    
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/testing.html
