A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Zika  virus  can  be  spread  through  mosquito  bites,  from  a  person  who  is  pregnant  to
their  fetus,  and  through  sex.  More  rarely,  Zika  virus  can  be  transmitted  through
infected blood or tissues and in the laboratory. Zika virus can be passed from a person
before their symptoms start, while they have symptoms, and after their symptoms end.
Zika  virus  is  primarily  transmitted  to  people  through  the  bite  of  an  infected  Aedes
species  mosquito  (Aedes  aegypti  and  Aedes  albopictus).  These  mosquitoes  are  the
same  mosquitoes  that  spread  dengue  and  chikungunya  viruses.  These  mosquitoes
typically  lay  eggs  in  standing  water  in  containers  like  buckets,  bowls,  animal  dishes,
flowerpots, and vases. They like to bite people and live both indoors and outdoors. They
bite both during the day and night.  A mosquito gets infected with Zika virus when it
bites an infected person during the period of time when the virus can be found in the
person's blood, typically only through the first week of infection. Infected mosquitoes
can  then  spread  the  virus  to  other  people  through  bites.  Zika  virus  can  be  passed
through sex from a person who has Zika to their partners, even if the infected person
does not have symptoms at the time. This includes vaginal, anal, and oral sex and the
sharing of sex toys. The timeframes that men and women can pass Zika virus through
sex are different because Zika virus can stay in semen longer than in other body fluids. 
Zika virus can also be spread from a person who is pregnant to their child. A person
who  is  pregnant  and  infected  with  Zika  virus  can  pass  the  virus  to  their  fetus  during
pregnancy  or  around  the  time  of  birth  even  if  they  do  not  have  symptoms.  Zika
infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects and is associated with other
pregnancy  problems.  Among  people  with  confirmed  or  possible  Zika  infection  during
pregnancy in U.S. states and territories, Zika-associated birth defects occurred in about
5% of babies. Zika virus has been found in breast milk. Possible Zika virus infections
have been identified in breastfeeding babies, but spreading Zika virus through breast
milk has not been confirmed. Because current evidence suggests that the benefits of
breastfeeding  outweigh  the  risk  of  Zika  virus  spreading  through  breast  milk,  CDC
encourages people to breastfeed, even if they were infected or lived in or traveled to an
area  with  risk  of  Zika.   There  are  a  few  reports  of  laboratory-acquired  Zika  virus
infections, although the route of transmission was not clearly established in all cases.
However,  no  cases  of  Zika  virus  transmission  in  healthcare  settings  have  been
identified  in  the  United  States.   To  date,  there  have  not  been  any  confirmed  blood
transfusion  transmission  cases  in  the  United  States.  However,  Brazil  has  reported
transmission  through  platelet  transfusions.  Certain  human  cell  and  tissue-based
products,  such  as  umbilical  cord  blood,  gestational  tissues,  and  reproductive  tissues,
can  harbor  Zika  virus  even  months  after  the  initial  infection.  A  person  may  need  to
delay  blood  and  tissue  donations  following  Zika.  Zika  virus  is  primarily  spread  by
mosquitoes and can cause serious birth defects. Learn about areas at risk, the illness it
causes, and ways to prevent it. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/zika/causes/index.html
