A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Infant  feeding  items  include  bottles  and
the nipples, rings, and caps that go with them. Certain bottles also may include valves
or  membranes.  Some  infants  may  be  fed  with  a  syringe,  medicine  cup,  spoon,  or
supplemental  nursing  system.  The  safest  method  of  mixing  formula  is  by  shaking  or
swirling  the  formula  and  water  inside  the  feeding  bottle.  Blenders  can  be  difficult  to
clean, and blenders used to prepare infant formula have been linked to illnesses among
babies. Whisks and spoons are easier to clean, but they still may increase the risk of
getting germs into your baby's milk. Bottles should be cleaned after every feeding. If
your baby does not finish drinking a bottle within 2 hours, throw away the unfinished
formula. Germs can grow quickly if breast milk or formula is added to a partially used
bottle, or if a used bottle is only rinsed, rather than cleaned. 1. Take apart. Separate all
bottle  parts  (for  example,  bottles,  nipples,  caps,  rings,  valves).  2.  Rinse.  Rinse  bottle
parts and any other feeding items by holding them under running water. The water can
be warm or cold. 3. Wash. Place bottle parts and other feeding items in the dishwasher.
(Be sure to place small items inside a closed-top basket or mesh laundry bag so they
don't end up in the dishwasher filter.) If possible, run the dishwasher using hot water
and  a  heated  drying  cycle  (or  sanitizing  setting);  this  can  help  kill  more  germs.  4.
Remove from dishwasher. Wash your hands with soap and water before removing and
storing cleaned items. If items are not completely dry, place them on a clean, unused
dish towel or paper towel to air-dry thoroughly before storing in an area free of dust or
dirt.  Do  not  use  a  dish  towel  to  rub  or  pat  items  dry  because  doing  so  may  transfer
germs  to  the  items.  You  can  clean  brushes  and  basins  in  a  dishwasher  if  they  are
dishwasher-safe, or wash them by hand with soap and hot water. They can be sanitized
with  one  of  the  following  methods:  boil,  steam,  or  soak  in  bleach  solution  if
recommended  by  the  item's  manufacturer.  If  you  steam  an  item,  be  sure  the  entire
item  fits  in  the  steamer.  No  studies  have  shown  that  babies  have  become  sick  from
contamination  on  the  outside  of  an  infant  formula  container.  Also,  powdered  infant
formula is less likely to become contaminated if it stays dry. Avoid using liquid cleaners
on  infant  formula  containers  to  help  prevent  contaminating  powdered  formula  inside
the  container.  If  you  want  to  clean  the  formula  container,  use  a  disinfectant  wipe  or
paper  towel  sprayed  with  disinfectant  to  clean  the  outside  of  the  container  and  lid
before it is opened for the first time. Do not submerge the container or place it under
running water. Wait until the surfaces are completely dry before opening the container.
Do not clean the inside of the infant formula container. When powdered formula stays
dry,  it's  less  likely  to  get  contaminated.  To  keep  liquids  away  from  the  powdered
formula, don't clean the formula scoop unless it gets dirty. If the scoop was dropped on
the floor or otherwise soiled, clean it as carefully as you would your baby's bottles and
allow it to air-dry completely before placing it in the formula container. If your baby is
less than 2 months old, was born prematurely, or has a weakened immune system due
to  illness  (such  as  HIV)  or  medical  treatment  (such  as  chemotherapy  for  cancer),
sanitizing feeding items daily (or more often) is particularly important. Daily sanitizing
of  feeding  items  may  not  be  necessary  for  older,  healthy  babies,  if  those  items  are
cleaned  carefully  after  each  use.  Allow  the  clean  feeding  items,  bottle  brushes,  and
wash basins to air-dry thoroughly before storing to help prevent germs and mold from
growing. Once the items are completely dry, put them back together and store them in
a clean, protected area to prevent contamination. 1. Wash hands. Wash hands well with
soap and water. 2. Put back together. Put together the clean, dry bottle parts. 3. Store
safely. Place reassembled bottles and other feeding items, wash basin, and dry bottle
brush  in  a  clean,  protected  area  such  as  inside  a  closed  kitchen  cabinet  that  is  used
only to store clean dishes. Air-drying infant feeding items on a clean dish towel or paper
towel  is  probably  more  hygienic  than  using  a  drying  rack.  Drying  racks  may  trap
moisture, allow mold and germs to grow, and be difficult to clean. If you prefer to use a
drying rack, use it to dry only your infant's feeding items. Every few days (or at least
daily if your baby is less than 2 months old, was born prematurely, or has a weakened
immune system), be sure to wash it, sanitize it, and allow it to dry thoroughly to reduce
contamination. Many diseases and conditions can be prevented or controlled through
appropriate  personal  hygiene  and  by  regularly  cleaning  and  disinfecting  high-touch
surfaces. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hygiene/faq/index.html
