A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Food  goes  through  several  steps  from
where it is grown or made to the dining table. We call these steps the food production
chain.  Contamination  can  occur  at  any  point  along  the  chain—during  production,
processing, distribution, or preparation. Production means raising the animals we use
for food or growing the plants we harvest. Most food comes from domesticated animals
and plants and is produced on farms or ranches. Some foods are caught or harvested
from the wild, such as some fish, game, and mushrooms.  Healthy animals can have
germs  on  or  in  their  bodies.  These  germs  can  contaminate  meat  or  poultry  during
slaughter  and  processing.  Germs  can  also  get  on  plants  during  the  growing  or
harvesting  process.  Processing  means  changing  animals  or  plants  into  the  form  we
know and buy as food. Processing involves different steps for different kinds of foods.
Milk is usually processed by pasteurization, and sometimes it is made into cheese or
other products. For fruits and vegetables, processing can be as simple as washing and
sorting, or it can involve trimming, slicing, or shredding. Nuts may be roasted, chopped,
or  ground  (such  as  with  peanut  butter).   For  animals,  the  first  step  of  processing  is
slaughter. Meat and poultry may then be cut into pieces or ground. They may also be
smoked, cooked, or frozen and may be combined with other ingredients to make foods
like sausage or deli salads. Distribution means getting food from the farm or processing
plant to the consumer or a food service facility like a restaurant, cafeteria, or hospital
kitchen. This step might involve transporting foods just once, such as trucking produce
from a farm to the local farmers' market. Or it might involve many stages. For instance,
frozen  hamburger  patties  might  be  trucked  from  a  meat  processing  plant  to  a  large
supplier,  stored  for  a  few  days  in  the  supplier's  warehouse,  trucked  again  to  a  local
distribution  facility  for  a  restaurant  chain,  and  finally  delivered  to  an  individual
restaurant. Preparation means getting the food ready to eat. This step may occur in the
kitchen of a home, restaurant, or institution. It may involve following a complex recipe
with many ingredients, simply heating and serving food on a plate, or just opening a
package and eating the food. Everyone has a role to play in keeping food safe Although
contamination  can  occur  at  any  point  during  the  food  production  chain,  the  people
involved  at  each  point  work  to  reduce  this  risk.  People  can  take  actions  like  cooking
food thoroughly, inspecting food at several points in the production chain, storing food
at safe temperatures, washing hands, and keeping food preparation areas clean. Learn
how  CDC  works  with  partners  to  investigate,  respond  to,  and  prevent  foodborne
outbreaks. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/foodborne-outbreaks/foodproductionchain/index.html
