Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  COVID-19  spreads  when  an  infected  person  breathes  out
droplets  and  very  small  particles  that  contain  the  virus.  These  droplets  and  particles
can  be  breathed  in  by  other  people  or  land  on  their  eyes,  noses,  or  mouth.  In  some
circumstances, they may contaminate surfaces they touch. Many viruses are constantly
changing, including the virus that causes COVID-19. These changes occur over time and
can  lead  to  the  emergence  of  variants  that  may  have  new  characteristics,  including
different ways of spreading. Anyone infected with COVID-19 can spread it, even if they
do  NOT  have  symptoms.  Learn  more  about  what  you  can  do  to  protect  yourself  and
others. COVID-19 can spread from people to animals in some situations. Pet cats and
dogs can sometimes become infected by people with COVID-19. Learn what you should
do if you have pets. There is no evidence to suggest that handling food or consuming
food  can spread COVID-19. Follow food safety guidelines when handling and cleaning
fresh produce. Do not wash produce with soap, bleach, sanitizer, alcohol, disinfectant,
or any other chemical. There is also no current evidence that people can get COVID-19
by drinking water. The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been detected in drinking
water. Conventional water treatment methods that use filtration and disinfection, such
as those in most municipal drinking water systems, should remove or kill the virus that
causes  COVID-19.​  There  are  no  scientific  reports  of  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19
spreading to people through the water in lakes, oceans, rivers, or other natural bodies
of  water.  Genetic  material  from  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19  has  been  found
in untreated wastewater (also referred to as “sewage”). There is no information to date
that anyone has become sick with COVID-19 because of direct exposure to treated or
untreated  wastewater.  Wastewater  treatment  plants  use  chemical  and  other
disinfection  processes  to  remove  and  degrade  many  viruses  and  bacteria.  The  virus
that
 causes
 COVID-19
 is
 inactivated
 by
 the
 disinfection
 methods
 used
 in
wastewater treatment.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/how-covid-spreads.html
