Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. N95 respirators must form a seal to the face to work properly.
This is especially important for people at increased risk for severe disease. Wearing an
N95 respirator can make it harder to breathe. If you have heart or lung problems, talk
to your doctor before using an N95 respirator. Some N95 respirators may contain latex
in the straps. If you have natural rubber latex allergies, see the manufacturers’ website
for information about your specific model. Your N95 respirator may look different than
the one in these pictures. As long as your N95 respirator has two head straps (not ear
loops),  these  basic  instructions  apply.   It  is  best  to  put  on  your  N95  respirator  with
clean, dry hands.
  Always inspect the N95 respirator for damage before use. If it appears damaged,
dirty, or damp, do not use it.
  Hold the N95 respirator in your hand with the nose piece bar (or foam) at your
fingertips. If yours does not have a nose piece, use the text written on it to be sure the
top end is at your fingertips.  Place the N95 respirator under your chin with the nose
piece  bar  at  the  top.     Pull  the  top  strap  over  your  head,  placing  it  near  the  crown.
Then, pull the bottom strap over and place it at the back of your neck, below your ears.
Do not crisscross the straps. Make sure the straps lay flat and are not twisted.  Place
your fingertips from both hands at the top of the nose piece. Press down on both sides
of the nose piece to mold it to the shape of your nose.
  To check for gaps, gently place your hands on the N95 respirator, covering as
much of it as possible, then breathe out. If you feel air leaking out from the edges of the
N95 respirator, or if you are wearing glasses and they fog up, it is not snug. Adjust the
N95 respirator and try again.  If you cannot get a tight seal, try a different size or style.
Even  if  you  cannot  get  the  N95  respirator  sealed  against  your  face,  it  will  provide
protection that is likely better than a cloth mask. Check for gaps every time you put on
your N95 respirator.
   After  you  remove  your  N95,  wash  your  hands  with  soap  and  water,  or  hand
sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol if soap is not available.
 Do  not  wash  your  N95  respirator  or  put  it  in  the  oven  or  microwave  to  try  to
sterilize  it.  Replace  the  N95  respirator  when  the  straps  are  stretched  out  and  it  no
longer fits snugly against your face or when it becomes wet, dirty, or damaged. Throw it
in the trash. N95 is a certification mark of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) registered in the United States and several international jurisdictions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/publicppe/use.html
