Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Note: Guidance for cleaning and disinfecting schools may have
been updated for the COVID-19 pandemic. Refer to the COVID-19 website for updated
guidance  on  this  topic.  Cleaning  and  disinfecting  are  part  of  a  broad  approach  to
preventing infectious diseases in schools. To help slow the spread of influenza (flu), the
first line of defense is getting vaccinated. Other measures include staying home when
sick, covering coughs and sneezes, and washing hands often. Below are tips on how to
slow the spread of flu specifically through cleaning and disinfecting. Cleaning removes
germs, dirt, and impurities from surfaces or objects. Cleaning works by using soap (or
detergent) and water to physically remove germs from surfaces. This process does not
necessarily kill germs, but by removing them, it lowers their numbers and the risk of
spreading infection. Disinfecting kills germs on surfaces or objects. Disinfecting works
by  using  chemicals  to  kill  germs  on  surfaces  or  objects.  This  process  does  not
necessarily  clean  dirty  surfaces  or  remove  germs,  but  by  killing  germs  on  a  surface
after cleaning, it can further lower the risk of spreading infection. Sanitizing lowers the
number  of  germs  on  surfaces  or  objects  to  a  safe  level,  as  judged  by  public  health
standards  or  requirements.  This  process  works  by  either  cleaning  or  disinfecting
surfaces  or  objects  to  lower  the  risk  of  spreading  infection.  Follow  your  school’s
standard  procedures  for  routine  cleaning  and  disinfecting.  Typically,  this  means  daily
sanitizing  surfaces  and  objects  that  are  touched  often,  such  as  desks,  countertops,
doorknobs, computer keyboards, hands-on learning items, faucet handles, phones, and
toys.  Some  schools  may  also  require  daily  disinfecting  these  items.  Standard
procedures  often  call  for  disinfecting  specific  areas  of  the  school,  like  bathrooms.
Immediately clean surfaces and objects that are visibly soiled. If surfaces or objects are
soiled  with  body  fluids  or  blood,  use  gloves  and  other  standard  precautions  to  avoid
coming into contact with the fluid. Remove the spill, and then clean and disinfect the
surface.  Top of Page It is important to match your cleaning and disinfecting activities to
the types of germs you want to remove or kill. Most studies have shown that the flu
virus can live and potentially infect a person for up to 48 hours after being deposited on
a  surface.  However,  it  is  not  necessary  to  close  schools  to  clean  or  disinfect  every
surface in the building to slow the spread of flu. Also, if students and staff are dismissed
because  the  school  cannot  function  normally  (e.g.,  high  absenteeism  during  a  flu
outbreak),  it  is  not  necessary  to  do  extra  cleaning  and  disinfecting.  Flu  viruses  are
relatively  fragile,  so  standard  cleaning  and  disinfecting  practices  are  sufficient  to
remove or kill them. Special cleaning and disinfecting processes, including wiping down
walls  and  ceilings,  frequently  using  room  air  deodorizers,  and  fumigating,  are  not
necessary or recommended. These processes can irritate eyes, noses, throats, and skin;
aggravate asthma; and cause other serious side effects. Always follow label directions
on cleaning products and disinfectants. Wash surfaces with a general household cleaner
to remove germs. Rinse with water, and follow with an EPA-registered disinfectant to kill
germs.  Read  the  label  to  make  sure  it  states  that  EPA  has  approved  the  product  for
effectiveness against influenza A virus. If a surface is not visibly dirty, you can clean it
with an EPA-registered product that both cleans (removes germs) and disinfects (kills
germs)  instead.  Be  sure  to  read  the  label  directions  carefully,  as  there  may  be  a
separate procedure for using the product as a cleaner or as a disinfectant. Disinfection
usually requires the product to remain on the surface for a certain period of time (e.g.,
letting it stand for 3 to 5 minutes). Use disinfecting wipes on electronic items that are
touched often, such as phones and computers. Pay close attention to the directions for
using disinfecting wipes. It may be necessary to use more than one wipe to keep the
surface wet for the stated length of contact time. Make sure that the electronics can
withstand  the  use  of  liquids  for  cleaning  and  disinfecting.   Top  of  Page  Pay  close
attention to hazard warnings and directions on product labels. Cleaning products and
disinfectants  often  call  for  the  use  of  gloves  or  eye  protection.  For  example,  gloves
should always be worn to protect your hands when working with bleach solutions. Do
not  mix  cleaners  and  disinfectants  unless  the  labels  indicate  it  is  safe  to  do  so.
Combining certain products (such as chlorine bleach and ammonia cleaners) can result
in  serious  injury  or  death.  Ensure  that  custodial  staff,  teachers,  and  others  who  use
cleaners  and  disinfectants  read  and  understand  all  instruction  labels  and  understand
safe and appropriate use. This might require that instructional materials and training be
provided  in  other  languages.  Follow  your  school’s  standard  procedures  for  handling
waste, which may include wearing gloves. Place no-touch waste baskets where they are
easy  to  use.  Throw  disposable  items  used  to  clean  surfaces  and  items  in  the  trash
immediately  after  use.  Avoid  touching  used  tissues  and  other  waste  when  emptying
waste  baskets.  Wash  your  hands  with  soap  and  water  after  emptying  waste  baskets
and  touching  used  tissues  and  similar  waste.   Top  of  Page  To  receive  weekly  email
updates about Seasonal Flu, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/school/cleaning.htm
