A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Consider  the  type  of  surface  and  how
often it is touched. Generally, high-touch surfaces (for example, tabletops, doorknobs
and handles, toys) are more likely to have germs on them. If the area is used often, you
may choose to clean it more often or disinfect it in addition to cleaning. It's important to
follow standard cleaning procedures. To clean surfaces, use a product that is suitable
for  each  surface  and  follow  the  instructions  on  the  product  label.  Clean  visibly  dirty
surfaces, including lunch tables or craft areas. Clean daily, after a meal or activity. For
hard surfaces, such as certain toys, high-chair trays, and floors: For soft surfaces such
as  clothing,  cloth  toys,  and  rugs:  When  to  sanitize  You  may  need  to  sanitize  some
surfaces and objects after each use. How to sanitize safely You may not need to sanitize
surfaces and objects daily if they are cleaned carefully after use. To sanitize a surface
or  object,  use  a  weakened  bleach  solution,  an  EPA-registered  sanitizing  spray,  or  a
dishwasher. For cloth materials, such as bibs, placemats, napkins, and tablecloths: For
nonporous objects, such as certain toys and infant feeding items: Get more information
on  how  to  sanitize  infant  feeding  items.  For  hard  surfaces,  such  as  highchair  trays,
plates, and food preparation areas: Get more information on food safety. A weakened
bleach solution is bleach diluted in water. If you cannot boil or steam items to sanitize
them,  consider  using  a  weakened  bleach  solution.   -  Prepare  a  bleach  solution  of  1
tablespoon of unscented bleach per gallon (16 cups) of water in a clean wash basin.  -
Put  items  completely  underwater.  Make  sure  the  solution  touches  all  parts  and  there
are no air bubbles.   - Soak items for at least 2 minutes.  - Remove with clean hands or
tongs.  Do  not  rinse  because  germs  could  get  back  onto  the  sanitized  items.  Any
remaining  bleach  will  break  down  quickly  as  it  dries  and  will  not  hurt  children.    Get
more  information  on  sanitizing  with  bleach.  Some  areas  in  early  care  and  education
settings,  such  as  bathrooms  and  diaper  changing  tables,  should  be  regularly
disinfected. Immediately clean surfaces and objects that are visibly soiled. If surfaces or
objects are soiled with body fluids or blood, use gloves and other standard precautions
to  avoid  coming  into  contact  with  the  fluid.  Remove  the  fluid  and  then  clean  and
disinfect the surface. Use disinfecting wipes on electronic items that are touched often,
such  as  phones  and  computers.  Pay  close  attention  to  the  directions  for  using
disinfecting wipes. You may need to use more than one wipe to keep the surface wet
for  the  stated  length  of  contact  time.  Follow  manufacturer's  instructions  and
recommendations  for  cleaning  electronics.  Use  disinfectant  products  safely.  To
disinfect,  clean  the  surface  with  soap  and  water  first.  Then  use  an  EPA-registered
disinfecting  product  or  a  diluted  bleach  solution.  Follow  these  important  safety
guidelines  when  using  chemical  disinfectants:  Many  diseases  and  conditions  can  be
prevented or controlled through appropriate personal hygiene and by regularly cleaning
and  disinfecting  high-touch  surfaces.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/hygiene/about/how-to-clean-and-disinfect-early-care-and-education-settings.html
