A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Implementation  and  Audit  from  the
Guideline  for  the  Prevention  and  Control  of  Norovirus  Gastroenteritis  Outbreaks  in
Healthcare  Settings  (2011).  Category  I  recommendations  in  this  guideline  are  all
considered strong recommendations and should be implemented. If it is not feasible to
implement  all  of  these  recommendations  concurrently,  e.g.,  due  to  differences  in
facility characteristics such as nursing homes and other non-hospital settings, priority
should  be  given  to  the  recommendations  below.  A  limited  number  of  Category  II
recommendations are included, and while these currently are limited by the strength of
the  available  evidence,  they  are  considered  key  activities  in  preventing  further
transmission  of  norovirus  in  healthcare  settings.  1.  Avoid  exposure  to  vomitus  or
diarrhea.  Place  patients  on  Contact  Precautions  in  a  single  occupancy  room  if  they
present  with  symptoms  consistent  with  norovirus  gastroenteritis.  (Category  IB)  (Key
Question  1.A.1)  8.  During  outbreaks,  use  soap  and  water  for  hand  hygiene  after
providing care or having contact with patients suspected or confirmed with norovirus
gastroenteritis. (Category IB) (Key Question 3.C.1.b) 11. Consider limiting transfers to
those for which the receiving facility is able to maintain Contact Precautions; otherwise,
it  may  be  prudent  to  postpone  transfers  until  patients  no  longer  require  Contact
Precautions. During outbreaks, medically suitable individuals recovering from norovirus
gastroenteritis  can  be  discharged  to  their  place  of  residence.  (Category  II)  (Key
Question 3.C.11) 17. In the absence of clinical laboratory diagnostics or in the case of
delay in obtaining laboratory results, use Kaplan's clinical and epidemiologic criteria to
identify  a  norovirus  gastroenteritis  outbreak.  (Category  IA)  (Key  Question  2.A.1)  28.
Increase the frequency of cleaning and disinfection of patient care areas and frequently
touched surfaces during outbreaks of norovirus gastroenteritis (e.g., consider increasing
ward/unit level cleaning to twice daily to maintain cleanliness, with frequently touched
surfaces  cleaned  and  disinfected  three  times  daily  using  EPA-approved  products  for
healthcare settings). (Category IB) (Key Question 3.C.12.b.1) 42. Develop and adhere to
sick  leave  policies  for  healthcare  personnel  who  have  symptoms  consistent  with
norovirus  infection.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3.C.3)  a.  Exclude  ill  personnel  from
work  for  a  minimum  of  48  hours  after  the  resolution  of  symptoms.  Once  personnel
return  to  work,  the  importance  of  performing  frequent  hand  hygiene  should  be
reinforced,  especially  before  and  after  each  patient  contact.  (Category  IB)  (Key
Question 3.C.3.a) 43. Establish protocols for staff cohorting in the event of an outbreak
of norovirus gastroenteritis. Ensure staff care for one patient cohort on their ward and
do not move between patient cohorts (e.g., patient cohorts may include symptomatic,
asymptomatic  exposed,  or  asymptomatic  unexposed  patient  groups).   (Category
IB)(Key Question 3.C.5.a) 51. As with all outbreaks, notify appropriate local and state
health  departments,  as  required  by  state  and  local  public  health  regulations,  if  an
outbreak of norovirus gastroenteritis is suspected. (Category IC) (Key Question 3.C.9.b)
Use of performance measures may assist individual healthcare facilities, as well as local
and state health departments to recognize increasing and peak activities of norovirus
infection,  and  may  allow  for  prevention  and  awareness  efforts  to  be  implemented
rapidly  or  as  disease  incidence  escalates.  Evaluate  fluctuations  in  the  incidence  of
norovirus in healthcare settings using the National Outbreak Reporting System (NORS)
[Current version of this document may differ from original.]. This system monitors the
reporting
 of
 waterborne,
 foodborne,
 enteric
 person-to-person,
 and
 animal
contact-associated  disease  outbreaks  to  CDC  by  state  and  territorial  public  health
agencies. This surveillance program was previously used only for reporting foodborne
disease outbreaks, but it has now expanded to include all enteric outbreaks, regardless
of  mode  of  transmission.  Additionally,  CDC  is  currently  implementing  a  national
surveillance system (CaliciNet) for genetic sequences of noroviruses; this system may
also  be  used  to  measure  changes  in  the  epidemiology  of  healthcare-associated
norovirus infections. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to
help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/norovirus-guidelines/implmentation-audit.html
