A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Precautions  to  prevent  transmission  of
infectious agents from the Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission
of  Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare  Settings  (2007).   See  also  Interim  Infection
Prevention and Control Recommendations for Measles in Healthcare Settings. There are
two  tiers  of  HICPAC/CDC  precautions  to  prevent  transmission  of  infectious  agents,
Standard  Precautions  and  Transmission-Based  Precautions.  Standard  Precautions  are
intended to be applied to the care of all patients in all healthcare settings, regardless of
the  suspected  or  confirmed  presence  of  an  infectious  agent.  Implementation  of
Standard  Precautions  constitutes  the  primary  strategy  for  the  prevention  of
healthcare-associated transmission of infectious agents among patients and healthcare
personnel.  Transmission-Based  Precautions  are  for  patients  who  are  known  or
suspected  to  be  infected  or  colonized  with  infectious  agents,  including  certain
epidemiologically  important  pathogens,  which  require  additional  control  measures  to
effectively  prevent  transmission.  Since  the  infecting  agent  often  is  not  known  at  the
time  of  admission  to  a  healthcare  facility,  Transmission-Based  Precautions  are  used
empirically,  according  to  the  clinical  syndrome  and  the  likely  etiologic  agents  at  the
time, and then modified when the pathogen is identified or a transmissible infectious
etiology  is  ruled  out.  Examples  of  this  syndromic  approach  are  presented  in  Table  2.
The  HICPAC/CDC  Guidelines  also  include  recommendations  for  creating  a  Protective
Environment  for  allogeneic  HSCT  patients.  The  specific  elements  of  Standard  and
Transmission-Based Precautions are discussed in Part II of this guideline. In Part III, the
circumstances  in  which  Standard  Precautions,  Transmission-Based  Precautions,  and  a
Protective Environment are applied are discussed. See Tables 4 and 5 for summaries of
the key elements of these sets of precautions. Standard Precautions combine the major
features of Universal Precautions (UP) 780, 896 and Body Substance Isolation (BSI) 640
and are based on the principle that all blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions except
sweat,  nonintact  skin,  and  mucous  membranes  may  contain  transmissible  infectious
agents.  Standard  Precautions  include  a  group  of  infection  prevention  practices  that
apply  to  all  patients,  regardless  of  suspected  or  confirmed  infection  status,  in  any
setting in which healthcare is delivered (Table 4). These include: hand hygiene; use of
gloves,  gown,  mask,  eye  protection,  or  face  shield,  depending  on  the  anticipated
exposure;  and  safe  injection  practices.  Also,  equipment  or  items  in  the  patient
environment  likely  to  have  been  contaminated  with  infectious  body  fluids  must  be
handled in a manner to prevent transmission of infectious agents (e.g., wear gloves for
direct contact, contain heavily soiled equipment, properly clean and disinfect or sterilize
reusable  equipment  before  use  on  another  patient).  The  application  of  Standard
Precautions  during  patient  care  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  HCW-patient
interaction and the extent of anticipated blood, body fluid, or pathogen exposure. For
some interactions (e.g., performing venipuncture), only gloves may be needed; during
other interactions (e.g., intubation), use of gloves, gown, and face shield or mask and
goggles  is  necessary.  Education  and  training  on  the  principles  and  rationale  for
recommended  practices  are  critical  elements  of  Standard  Precautions  because  they
facilitate  appropriate  decision-making  and  promote  adherence  when  HCWs  are  faced
with  new  circumstances.655,  681-686  An  example  of  the  importance  of  the  use  of
Standard  Precautions  is  intubation,  especially  under  emergency  circumstances  when
infectious  agents  may  not  be  suspected,  but  later  are  identified  (e.g.,  SARS-CoV,  N.
meningitides).  The  application  of  Standard  Precautions  is  described  below  and
summarized in Table 4. Guidance on donning and removing gloves, gowns and other
PPE  is  presented  in  the  Figure.  Standard  Precautions  are  also  intended  to  protect
patients  by  ensuring  that  healthcare  personnel  do  not  carry  infectious  agents  to
patients  on  their  hands  or  via  equipment  used  during  patient  care.  Infection  control
problems that are identified in the course of outbreak investigations often indicate the
need  for  new  recommendations  or  reinforcement  of  existing  infection  control
recommendations to protect patients. Because such recommendations are considered a
standard of care and may not be included in other guidelines, they are added here to
Standard  Precautions.  Three  such  areas  of  practice  that  have  been  added  are:
Respiratory  Hygiene/Cough  Etiquette,  safe  injection  practices,  and  use  of  masks  for
insertion of catheters or injection of material into spinal or epidural spaces via lumbar
puncture  procedures  (e.g.,  myelogram,  spinal  or  epidural  anesthesia).  While  most
elements  of  Standard  Precautions  evolved  from  Universal  Precautions  that  were
developed  for  protection  of  healthcare  personnel,  these  new  elements  of  Standard
Precautions  focus  on  protection  of  patients.  The  transmission  of  SARS-CoV  in
emergency departments by patients and their family members during the widespread
SARS outbreaks in 2003 highlighted the need for vigilance and prompt implementation
of infection control measures at the first point of encounter within a healthcare setting
(e.g.,  reception  and  triage  areas  in  emergency  departments,  outpatient  clinics,  and
physician  offices).21,  254,  897  The  strategy  proposed  has  been  termed  Respiratory
Hygiene/Cough  Etiquette  9,  828  and  is  intended  to  be  incorporated  into  infection
control practices as a new component of Standard Precautions. The strategy is targeted
at  patients  and  accompanying  family  members  and  friends  with  undiagnosed
transmissible  respiratory  infections,  and  applies  to  any  person  with  signs  of  illness
including  cough,  congestion,  rhinorrhea,  or  increased  production  of  respiratory
secretions when entering a healthcare facility.40, 41, 43 The term cough etiquette is
derived  from  recommended  source  control  measures  for  M.  tuberculosis.12,  126  The
elements of Respiratory Hygiene/Cough Etiquette include Covering sneezes and coughs
and placing masks on coughing patients are proven means of source containment that
prevent  infected  persons  from  dispersing  respiratory  secretions  into  the  air.107,  145,
898, 899 Masking may be difficult in some settings, (e.g., pediatrics, in which case, the
emphasis  by  necessity  may  be  on  cough  etiquette.900  Physical  proximity  of  <3  feet
has been associated with an increased risk for transmission of infections via the droplet
route (e.g., N. meningitidis 103 and group A streptococcus 114 and therefore supports
the  practice  of  distancing  infected  persons  from  others  who  are  not  infected.  The
effectiveness  of  good  hygiene  practices,  especially  hand  hygiene,  in  preventing
transmission of viruses and reducing the incidence of respiratory infections both within
and  outside  901-903  healthcare  settings  is  summarized  in  several  reviews.559,  717,
904  These  measures  should  be  effective  in  decreasing  the  risk  of  transmission  of
pathogens contained in large respiratory droplets (e.g., influenza virus, 23 adenovirus,
111 B. pertussis 827 and Mycoplasma pneumoniae.112 Although fever will be present
in many respiratory infections, patients with pertussis and mild upper respiratory tract
infections are often afebrile. Therefore, the absence of fever does not always exclude a
respiratory infection. Patients who have asthma, allergic rhinitis, or chronic obstructive
lung  disease  also  may  be  coughing  and  sneezing.  While  these  patients  often  are  not
infectious, cough etiquette measures are prudent. Healthcare personnel are advised to
observe Droplet Precautions (i.e., wear a mask) and hand hygiene when examining and
caring  for  patients  with  signs  and  symptoms  of  a  respiratory  infection.  Healthcare
personnel who have a respiratory infection are advised to avoid direct patient contact,
especially with high risk patients. If this is not possible, then a mask should be worn
while providing patient care. The investigation of four large outbreaks of HBV and HCV
among patients in ambulatory care facilities in the United States identified a need to
define  and  reinforce  safe  injection  practices.453  The  four  outbreaks  occurred  in  a
private medical practice, a pain clinic, an endoscopy clinic, and a hematology/oncology
clinic.  The  primary  breaches  in  infection  control  practice  that  contributed  to  these
outbreaks  were  In  one  of  these  outbreaks,  preparation  of  medications  in  the  same
workspace  where  used  needle/syringes  were  dismantled  also  may  have  been  a
contributing  factor.  These  and  other  outbreaks  of  viral  hepatitis  could  have  been
prevented by adherence to basic principles of aseptic technique for the preparation and
administration  of  parenteral  medications.453,  454  These  include  the  use  of  a  sterile,
single-use,  disposable  needle  and  syringe  for  each  injection  given  and  prevention  of
contamination  of  injection  equipment  and  medication.  Whenever  possible,  use  of
single-dose vials is preferred over multiple-dose vials, especially when medications will
be  administered  to  multiple  patients.  Outbreaks  related  to  unsafe  injection  practices
indicate that some healthcare personnel are unaware of, do not understand, or do not
adhere  to  basic  principles  of  infection  control  and  aseptic  technique.  A  survey  of  US
healthcare  workers  who  provide  medication  through  injection  found  that  1%  to  3%
reused the same needle and/or syringe on multiple patients.905 Among the deficiencies
identified  in  recent  outbreaks  were  a  lack  of  oversight  of  personnel  and  failure  to
follow-up  on  reported  breaches  in  infection  control  practices  in  ambulatory  settings.
Therefore,  to  ensure  that  all  healthcare  workers  understand  and  adhere  to
recommended practices, principles of infection control and aseptic technique need to
be  reinforced  in  training  programs  and  incorporated  into  institutional  polices  that  are
monitored
 for
 adherence.454
 In
 2004,
 CDC
 investigated
 eight
 cases
 of
post-myelography meningitis that either were reported to CDC or identified through a
survey of the Emerging Infections Network of the Infectious Disease Society of America.
Blood  and/or  cerebrospinal  fluid  of  all  eight  cases  yielded  streptococcal  species
consistent  with  oropharyngeal  flora  and  there  were  changes  in  the  CSF  indices  and
clinical  status  indicative  of  bacterial  meningitis.  Equipment  and  products  used  during
these  procedures  (e.g.,  contrast  media)  were  excluded  as  probable  sources  of
contamination. Procedural details available for seven cases determined that antiseptic
skin  preparations  and  sterile  gloves  had  been  used.  However,  none  of  the  clinicians
wore  a  face  mask,  giving  rise  to  the  speculation  that  droplet  transmission  of
oralpharyngeal  flora  was  the  most  likely  explanation  for  these  infections.  Bacterial
meningitis  following  myelogram  and  other  spinal  procedures  (e.g.,  lumbar  puncture,
spinal  and  epidural  anesthesia,  intrathecal  chemotherapy)  has  been  reported
previously.906-915 As a result, the question of whether face masks should be worn to
prevent droplet spread of oral flora during spinal procedures (e.g., myelogram, lumbar
puncture,  spinal  anesthesia)  has  been  debated.916,  917  Face  masks  are  effective  in
limiting  the  dispersal  of  oropharyngeal  droplets  918  and  are  recommended  for  the
placement  of  central  venous  catheters.919  In  October  2005,  the  Healthcare  Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) reviewed the evidence and concluded
that there is sufficient experience to warrant the additional protection of a face mask
for  the  individual  placing  a  catheter  or  injecting  material  into  the  spinal  or  epidural
space.  There  are  three  categories  of  Transmission-Based  Precautions:  Contact
Precautions,  Droplet  Precautions,  and  Airborne  Precautions.  Transmission-Based
Precautions  are  used  when  the  route(s)  of  transmission  is  (are)  not  completely
interrupted  using  Standard  Precautions  alone.  For  some  diseases  that  have  multiple
routes  of  transmission  (e.g.,  SARS),  more  than  one  Transmission-Based  Precautions
category may be used. When used either singly or in combination, they are always used
in addition to Standard Precautions. See Appendix A for recommended precautions for
specific infections. When Transmission-Based Precautions are indicated, efforts must be
made to counteract possible adverse effects on patients (i.e., anxiety, depression and
other  mood  disturbances,  920-922  perceptions  of  stigma,  923  reduced  contact  with
clinical  staff,  924-926  and  increases  in  preventable  adverse  events  565  in  order  to
improve acceptance by the patients and adherence by HCWs. Contact Precautions are
intended  to  prevent  transmission  of  infectious  agents,  including  epidemiologically
important  microorganisms,  which  are  spread  by  direct  or  indirect  contact  with  the
patient  or  the  patient's  environment  as  described  in  I.B.3.a.  The  specific  agents  and
circumstance for which Contact Precautions are indicated are found in Appendix A. The
application  of  Contact  Precautions  for  patients  infected  or  colonized  with  MDROs  is
described in the 2006 HICPAC/CDC MDRO guideline.927 Contact Precautions also apply
where  the  presence  of  excessive  wound  drainage,  fecal  incontinence,  or  other
discharges from the body suggest an increased potential for extensive environmental
contamination and risk of transmission. A single-patient room is preferred for patients
who  require  Contact  Precautions.  When  a  single-patient  room  is  not  available,
consultation  with  infection  control  personnel  is  recommended  to  assess  the  various
risks  associated  with  other  patient  placement  options  (e.g.,  cohorting,  keeping  the
patient with an existing roommate). In multi-patient rooms, ≥3 feet spatial separation
between beds is advised to reduce the opportunities for inadvertent sharing of items
between the infected/colonized patient and other patients. Healthcare personnel caring
for  patients  on  Contact  Precautions  wear  a  gown  and  gloves  for  all  interactions  that
may involve contact with the patient or potentially contaminated areas in the patient's
environment. Donning PPE upon room entry and discarding before exiting the patient
room  is  done  to  contain  pathogens,  especially  those  that  have  been  implicated  in
transmission  through  environmental  contamination  (e.g.,  VRE,  C.  difficile,  noroviruses
and  other  intestinal  tract  pathogens;  RSV).54,  72,  73,  78,  274,  275,  740  Droplet
Precautions  are  intended  to  prevent  transmission  of  pathogens  spread  through  close
respiratory  or  mucous  membrane  contact  with  respiratory  secretions  as  described  in
I.B.3.b.  Because  these  pathogens  do  not  remain  infectious  over  long  distances  in  a
healthcare  facility,  special  air  handling  and  ventilation  are  not  required  to  prevent
droplet transmission. Infectious agents for which Droplet Precautions are indicated are
found in Appendix A and include B. pertussis, influenza virus, adenovirus, rhinovirus, N.
meningitides,  and  group  A  streptococcus  (for  the  first  24  hours  of  antimicrobial
therapy).  A  single  patient  room  is  preferred  for  patients  who  require  Droplet
Precautions.  When  a  single-patient  room  is  not  available,  consultation  with  infection
control  personnel  is  recommended  to  assess  the  various  risks  associated  with  other
patient  placement  options  (e.g.,  cohorting,  keeping  the  patient  with  an  existing
roommate). Spatial separation of ≥3 feet and drawing the curtain between patient beds
is  especially  important  for  patients  in  multi-bed  rooms  with  infections  transmitted  by
the droplet route. Healthcare personnel wear a mask (a respirator is not necessary) for
close contact with infectious patient; the mask is generally donned upon room entry.
Patients  on  Droplet  Precautions  who  must  be  transported  outside  of  the  room  should
wear  a  mask  if  tolerated  and  follow  Respiratory  Hygiene/Cough  Etiquette.  Airborne
Precautions prevent transmission of infectious agents that remain infectious over long
distances  when  suspended  in  the  air  (e.g.,  rubeola  virus  [measles],  varicella  virus
[chickenpox],  M.  tuberculosis,  and  possibly  SARS-CoV)  as  described  in  I.B.3.c  and
Appendix A. The preferred placement for patients who require Airborne Precautions is in
an  airborne  infection  isolation  room  (AIIR).  An  AIIR  is  a  single-patient  room  that  is
equipped  with  special  air  handling  and  ventilation  capacity  that  meet  the  American
Institute  of  Architects/Facility  Guidelines  Institute  (AIA/FGI)  standards  for  AIIRs  (i.e.,
monitored  negative  pressure  relative  to  the  surrounding  area,  12  air  exchanges  per
hour  for  new  construction  and  renovation  and  6  air  exchanges  per  hour  for  existing
facilities,  air  exhausted  directly  to  the  outside  or  recirculated  through  HEPA  filtration
before  return).12,  13  Some  states  require  the  availability  of  such  rooms  in  hospitals,
emergency departments, and nursing homes that care for patients with M. tuberculosis.
A  respiratory  protection  program  that  includes  education  about  use  of  respirators,
fit-testing, and user seal checks is required in any facility with AIIRs. In settings where
Airborne  Precautions  cannot  be  implemented  due  to  limited  engineering  resources
(e.g., physician offices), masking the patient, placing the patient in a private room (e.g.,
office  examination  room)  with  the  door  closed,  and  providing  N95  or  higher  level
respirators or masks if respirators are not available for healthcare personnel will reduce
the likelihood of airborne transmission until the patient is either transferred to a facility
with an AIIR or returned to the home environment, as deemed medically appropriate.
Healthcare  personnel  caring  for  patients  on  Airborne  Precautions  wear  a  mask  or
respirator, depending on the disease-specific recommendations (Respiratory Protection
II.E.4, Table 2, and Appendix A), that is donned prior to room entry. Whenever possible,
non-immune  HCWs  should  not  care  for  patients  with  vaccine-preventable  airborne
diseases  (e.g.,  measles,  chickenpox,  and  smallpox).  Diagnosis  of  many  infections
requires  laboratory  confirmation.  Since  laboratory  tests,  especially  those  that  depend
on
 culture
 techniques,
 often
 require
 two
 or
 more
 days
 for
 completion,
Transmission-Based  Precautions  must  be  implemented  while  test  results  are  pending
based  on  the  clinical  presentation  and  likely  pathogens.  Use  of  appropriate
Transmission-Based Precautions at the time a patient develops symptoms or signs of
transmissible infection, or arrives at a healthcare facility for care, reduces transmission
opportunities.  While  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  prospectively  all  patients  needing
Transmission-Based  Precautions,  certain  clinical  syndromes  and  conditions  carry  a
sufficiently  high  risk  to  warrant  their  use  empirically  while  confirmatory  tests  are
pending  (Table  2).  Infection  control  professionals  are  encouraged  to  modify  or  adapt
this  table  according  to  local  conditions.  Transmission-Based  Precautions  remain  in
effect for limited periods of time (i.e., while the risk for transmission of the infectious
agent  persists  or  for  the  duration  of  the  illness  (Appendix  A).  For  most  infectious
diseases,  this  duration  reflects  known  patterns  of  persistence  and  shedding  of
infectious agents associated with the natural history of the infectious process and its
treatment.  For  some  diseases  (e.g.,  pharyngeal  or  cutaneous  diphtheria,  RSV),
Transmission-Based Precautions remain in effect until culture or antigen-detection test
results  document  eradication  of  the  pathogen  and,  for  RSV,  symptomatic  disease  is
resolved.  For  other  diseases,  (e.g.,  M.  tuberculosis)  state  laws  and  regulations,  and
healthcare
 facility
 policies,
 may
 dictate
 the
 duration
 of
 precautions12).
 In
immunocompromised patients, viral shedding can persist for prolonged periods of time
(many  weeks  to  months)  and  transmission  to  others  may  occur  during  that  time;
therefore,  the  duration  of  contact  and/or  droplet  precautions  may  be  prolonged  for
many  weeks.500,  928-933  The  duration  of  Contact  Precautions  for  patients  who  are
colonized or infected with MDROs remains undefined. MRSA is the only MDRO for which
effective  decolonization  regimens  are  available.867  However,  carriers  of  MRSA  who
have negative nasal cultures after a course of systemic or topical therapy may resume
shedding MRSA in the weeks that follow therapy.934, 935 Although early guidelines for
VRE  suggested  discontinuation  of  Contact  Precautions  after  three  stool  cultures
obtained  at  weekly  intervals  proved  negative,  740  subsequent  experiences  have
indicated  that  such  screening  may  fail  to  detect  colonization  that  can  persist  for  >1
year.27,  936-938  Likewise,  available  data  indicate  that  colonization  with  VRE,  MRSA,
939 and possibly MDR-GNB, can persist for many months, especially in the presence of
severe  underlying  disease,  invasive  devices,  and  recurrent  courses  of  antimicrobial
agents.  It  may  be  prudent  to  assume  that  MDRO  carriers  are  colonized  permanently
and  manage  them  accordingly.  Alternatively,  an  interval  free  of  hospitalizations,
antimicrobial  therapy,  and  invasive  devices  (e.g.,  6  or  12  months)  before  reculturing
patients  to  document  clearance  of  carriage  may  be  used.  Determination  of  the  best
strategy  awaits  the  results  of  additional  studies.  See  the  2006  HICPAC/CDC  MDRO
guideline 927 for discussion of possible criteria to discontinue Contact Precautions for
patients  colonized  or  infected  with  MDROs.  Although  Transmission-Based  Precautions
generally apply in all healthcare settings, exceptions exist. For example, in home care,
AIIRs are not available. Furthermore, family members already exposed to diseases such
as varicella and tuberculosis would not use masks or respiratory protection, but visiting
HCWs would need to use such protection. Similarly, management of patients colonized
or  infected  with  MDROs  may  necessitate  Contact  Precautions  in  acute  care  hospitals
and in some LTCFs when there is continued transmission, but the risk of transmission in
ambulatory  care  and  home  care,  has  not  been  defined.  Consistent  use  of  Standard
Precautions may suffice in these settings, but more information is needed. A Protective
Environment is designed for allogeneic HSCT patients to minimize fungal spore counts
in the air and reduce the risk of invasive environmental fungal infections (see Table 5
for  specifications).11,  13-15  The  need  for  such  controls  has  been  demonstrated  in
studies  of  aspergillus  outbreaks  associated  with  construction.11,  14,  15,  157,  158  As
defined  by  the  American  Institute  of  Architecture  13  and  presented  in  detail  in  the
Guideline  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  2003,  11,  861  air  quality  for  HSCT
patients is improved through a combination of environmental controls that include The
latter is based on molecular typing studies that have found indistinguishable strains of
Aspergillus  terreus  in  patients  with  hematologic  malignancies  and  in  potted  plants  in
the vicinity of the patients.942-944 The desired quality of air may be achieved without
incurring the inconvenience or expense of laminar airflow.15, 157 To prevent inhalation
of fungal spores during periods when construction, renovation, or other dust-generating
activities  that  may  be  ongoing  in  and  around  the  health-care  facility,  it  has  been
advised
 that
 severely
 immunocompromised
 patients
 wear
 a
 high-efficiency
respiratory-protection device (e.g., an N95 respirator) when they leave the Protective
Environment 11, 14, 945). The use of masks or respirators by HSCT patients when they
are  outside  of  the  Protective  Environment  for  prevention  of  environmental  fungal
infections  in  the  absence  of  construction  has  not  been  evaluated.  A  Protective
Environment does not include the use of barrier precautions beyond those indicated for
Standard and Transmission-Based Precautions. No published reports support the benefit
of placing solid organ transplants or other immunocompromised patients in a Protective
Environment. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help
reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/precautions.html
