  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by Abigail Shefer, MD1
William Atkinson, MD1 Carole Friedman, DO1* David T. Kuhar, MD2 Gina Mootrey, DO1
Stephanie R. Bialek, MD1 Amanda Cohn, MD1 Anthony Fiore, MD3  Lisa Grohskopf, MD1
Jennifer L. Liang, DVM1 Suchita A. Lorick, DO1 Mona Marin, MD1 Eric Mintz, MD2 Trudy
V. Murphy, MD4 Anna Newton, MPH2 Amy Parker Fiebelkorn, MSN, MPH1 Jane Seward,
MBBS1  Gregory  Wallace,  MD1  1National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases 2National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases 3Center for
Global  Health  4National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention
*Deceased.  The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for
Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  Anne  Schuchat,  MD,  Director.  Corresponding
preparer:  Abigail  Shefer,  MD,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases, 1600 Clifton Rd., MS A-19, Atlanta, GA 30333. Telephone: 404-639-8233; Fax:
404-417-0791;  E-mail:  ams7@cdc.gov.  This  report  updates  the  previously  published
summary  of  recommendations  for  vaccinating  health-care  personnel  (HCP)  in  the
United  States  (CDC.  Immunization  of  health-care  workers:  recommendations  of  the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] and the Hospital Infection Control
Practices  Advisory  Committee  [HICPAC].  MMWR  1997;46[No.  RR-18]).  This  report  was
reviewed  by  and  includes  input  from  the  Healthcare  (formerly  Hospital)  Infection
Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  These  updated  recommendations  can  assist
hospital administrators, infection-control practitioners, employee health clinicians, and
HCP in optimizing infection prevention and control programs. The recommendations for
vaccinating  HCP  are  presented  by  disease  in  two  categories:  1)  those  diseases  for
which vaccination or documentation of immunity is recommended because of risks to
HCP in their work settings for acquiring disease or transmitting to patients and 2) those
for  which  vaccination  might  be  indicated  in  certain  circumstances.  Background
information for each vaccine-preventable disease and specific recommendations for use
of  each  vaccine  are  presented.  Certain  infection-control  measures  that  relate  to
vaccination also are included in this report. In addition, ACIP recommendations for the
remaining vaccines that are recommended for certain or all adults are summarized, as
are considerations for catch-up and travel vaccinations and for work restrictions. This
report summarizes all current ACIP recommendations for vaccination of HCP and does
not  contain  any  new  recommendations  or  policies.  The  recommendations  provided  in
this  report  apply,  but  are  not  limited,  to  HCP  in  acute-care  hospitals;  long-term--care
facilities  (e.g.,  nursing  homes  and  skilled  nursing  facilities);  physician's  offices;
rehabilitation centers; urgent care centers, and outpatient clinics as well as to persons
who  provide  home  health  care  and  emergency  medical  services.  This  report  updates
the previously published summary of recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the Healthcare (formerly Hospital) Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) for vaccinating health-care personnel (HCP) in
the  United  States  (1).  The  report,  which  was  reviewed  by  and  includes  input  from
HICPAC, summarizes all current ACIP recommendations for vaccination of HCP and does
not  contain  any  new  recommendations  or  policies  that  have  not  been  published
previously. These recommendations can assist hospital administrators, infection-control
practitioners,  employee  health  clinicians,  and  HCP  in  optimizing  infection  prevention
and  control  programs.  HCP  are  defined  as  all  paid  and  unpaid  persons  working  in
health-care settings who have the potential for exposure to patients and/or to infectious
materials,  including  body  substances,  contaminated  medical  supplies  and  equipment,
contaminated environmental surfaces, or contaminated air. HCP might include (but are
not  limited  to)  physicians,  nurses,  nursing  assistants,  therapists,  technicians,
emergency  medical  service  personnel,  dental  personnel,  pharmacists,  laboratory
personnel, autopsy personnel, students and trainees, contractual staff not employed by
the  health-care  facility,  and  persons  (e.g.,  clerical,  dietary,  housekeeping,  laundry,
security,  maintenance,  administrative,  billing,  and  volunteers)  not  directly  involved  in
patient care but potentially exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted to and
from HCP and patients (2). Because of their contact with patients or infective material
from  patients,  many  HCP  are  at  risk  for  exposure  to  (and  possible  transmission  of)
vaccine-preventable  diseases.  Employers  and  HCP  have  a  shared  responsibility  to
prevent  occupationally  acquired  infections  and  avoid  causing  harm  to  patients  by
taking reasonable precautions to prevent transmission of vaccine-preventable diseases.
Vaccination programs are therefore an essential part of infection prevention and control
for HCP. Optimal use of recommended vaccines helps maintain immunity and safeguard
HCP from infection, thereby helping protect patients from becoming infected; pertinent
ACIP  statements  on  various  individual  vaccines  and  diseases  have  been  published
(Table  1).  Nationwide,  ongoing  implementation  of  these  vaccine  recommendations
through  well-managed  vaccination  programs  could  substantially  reduce  both  the
number of susceptible HCP in any setting in which they interact with patients and their
risks  for  transmitting  vaccine-preventable  diseases  to  patients,  other  HCP,  and  other
contacts  (3).  HICPAC  and  CDC  have  recommended  that  secure,  preferably
computerized,  systems  should  be  used  to  manage  vaccination  records  for  HCP  so
records  can  be  retrieved  easily  as  needed  (3).  Each  record  should  reflect  immunity
status
 for
 indicated
 vaccine-preventable
 diseases
 (i.e.,
 documented
 disease,
vaccination  history,  or  serology  results)  as  well  as  vaccinations  administered  during
employment and any documented episodes of adverse events after vaccination (4). For
each  vaccine,  the  record  should  include  date  of  vaccine  administration  (including  for
those  vaccines  that  might  have  been  received  prior  to  employment),  vaccine
manufacturer and lot number, edition and distribution date of the language-appropriate
Vaccine  Information  Statement  (VIS)  provided  to  the  vaccinee  at  the  time  of
vaccination, and the name, address, and title of the person administering the vaccine
(4).  Accurate  vaccination  records  can  help  to  rapidly  identify  susceptible  HCP  (i.e.,
those with no history of vaccination or lack of documentation of immunity) during an
outbreak situation and can help reduce costs and disruptions to health-care operations
(5--7). HCP should be provided a copy of their vaccination records and encouraged to
keep  it  with  their  personal  health  records  so  they  can  readily  be  made  available  to
future  employers.  HICPAC  has  encouraged  any  facility  or  organization  that  provides
direct patient care to formulate a comprehensive vaccination policy for all HCP (3). The
American  Hospital  Association  has  endorsed  the  concept  of  vaccination  programs  for
both  hospital  personnel  and  patients  (8).  To  ensure  that  all  HCP  are  up  to  date  with
respect  to  recommended  vaccines,  facilities  should  review  HCP  vaccination  and
immunity status at the time of hire and on a regular basis (i.e., at least annually) with
consideration  of  offering  needed  vaccines,  if  necessary,  in  conjunction  with  routine
annual disease-prevention measures (e.g., influenza vaccination or tuberculin testing).
These  recommendations  (Tables  2  and  3)  should  be  considered  during  policy
development.  Several  states  and  health-care  facilities  have  established  requirements
relating  to  assessment  of  vaccination  status  and/or  administration  of  one  or  more
vaccines  for  HCP  (9,10).  Disease-specific  outbreak  control  measures  are  described  in
this report and elsewhere (3,11,12). All HCP should adhere to all other recommended
infection-control  guidelines,  whether  or  not  they  are  individually  determined  to  have
immunity  to  a  vaccine-preventable  disease.  In  2008,  the  ACIP  Immunization  of
Health-Care Personnel Work Group (the Work Group) was formed as a subgroup of the
ACIP
 Adult
 Immunization
 Work
 Group
 to
 update
 the
 previously
 published
recommendations  for  immunization  of  HCP.  The  Work  Group  comprised  professionals
from  academic  medicine  (pediatrics,  family  medicine,  internal  medicine,  occupational
and  environmental  medicine,  and  infectious  disease);  federal  and  state  public  health
professionals; and liaisons from the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America and
HICPAC.  The  Work  Group  met  monthly,  developed  an  outline  for  the  report,  worked
closely  with  subject  matter  experts  at  CDC  (who  developed,  revised,  and  updated
sections of the report), and provided subsequent critical review of the draft documents.
The  approach  of  the  Work  Group  was  to  summarize  previously  published  ACIP
recommendations and not to make new recommendations or policies; a comprehensive
list of publications containing the various vaccine-specific recommendations is provided
(Table 1). In February 2011, the updated report was presented to ACIP, which voted to
approve  it.  The  recommendations  for  vaccination  of  HCP  are  presented  below  by
disease  in  two  categories:  1)  those  diseases  for  which  routine  vaccination  or
documentation of immunity is recommended for HCP because of risks to HCP in their
work settings and, should HCP become infected, to the patients they serve and 2) those
diseases  for  which  vaccination  of  HCP  might  be  indicated  in  certain  circumstances.
Vaccines  recommended  in  the  first  category  are  hepatitis  B,  seasonal  influenza,
measles, mumps, and rubella, pertussis, and varicella vaccines. Vaccines in the second
category are meningococcal, typhoid, and polio vaccines. Except for influenza, all of the
diseases  prevented  by  these  vaccines  are  notifiable  at  the  national  level  (13).  Main
changes from the 1997 ACIP recommendations have been summarized (Box). On the
basis of documented nosocomial transmission, HCP are considered to be at substantial
risk  for  acquiring  or  transmitting  hepatitis  B,  influenza,  measles,  mumps,  rubella,
pertussis, and varicella. Current recommendations for vaccination are provided below. 
Epidemiology and Risk Factors Hepatitis B is an infection caused by the hepatitis B virus
(HBV), which is transmitted through percutaneous (i.e., breaks in the skin) or mucosal
(i.e.,  direct  contact  with  mucous  membranes)  exposure  to  infectious  blood  or  body
fluids. The virus is highly infectious; for nonimmune persons, disease transmission from
a  needlestick  exposure  is  up  to  100  times  more  likely  for  exposure  to  hepatitis  B  e
antigen (HBeAg)--positive blood than to HIV-positive blood (14). HBV infection is a well
recognized occupational risk for U.S. HCP and globally. The risk for HBV is associated
with degree of contact with blood in the work place and with the hepatitis B e-antigen
status of the source persons (15). The virus is also environmentally stable, remaining
infectious  on  environmental  surfaces  for  at  least  7  days  (16).  In  2009  in  the  United
States, 3,371 cases of acute HBV infection were reported nationally, and an estimated
38,000  new  cases  of  HBV  infection  occurred  after  accounting  for  underreporting  and
underdiagnosis  (17).  Of  4,519  persons  reported  with  acute  HBV  infection  in  2007,
approximately  40%  were  hospitalized  and  1.5%  died  (18).  HBV  can  lead  to  chronic
infection, which can result in cirrhosis of the liver, liver failure, liver cancer, and death.
An estimated 800,000--1.4 million persons in the United States are living with chronic
HBV  infection;  these  persons  serve  as  the  main  reservoir  for  continued  HBV
transmission  (19).  Vaccines  to  prevent  hepatitis  B  became  available  in  the  United
States  in  1981;  a  decade  later,  a  national  strategy  to  eliminate  HBV  infection  was
implemented, and the routine vaccination of children was recommended (20). During
1990--2009,  the  rate  of  new  HBV  infections  declined  approximately  84%,  from  8.5  to
1.1 cases per 100,000 population (17); the decline was greatest (98%) among persons
aged  <19  years,  for  whom  recommendations  for  routine  infant  and  adolescent
vaccination have been applied. Although hepatitis B vaccine coverage is high in infants,
children,  and  adolescents  (91.8%  in  infants  aged  19--35  months  and  91.6%  in
adolescents  aged  13--17  years)  (21,22),  coverage  remains  lower  (41.8%  in  2009)  for
certain adult populations, including those with behavioral risks for HBV infection (e.g.,
men who have sex with men and persons who use injection drugs) (23). Hepatitis B in
Health-Care Settings  During 1982, when hepatitis B vaccine was first recommended for
HCP, an estimated 10,000 infections occurred among persons employed in a medical or
dental field. By 2004, the number of HBV infections among HCP had decreased to an
estimated  304  infections,  largely  resulting  from  the  implementation  of  routine
preexposure vaccination and improved infection-control precautions (24--26). The risk
for acquiring HBV infection from occupational exposures is dependent on the frequency
of  percutaneous  and  mucosal  exposures  to  blood  or  body  fluids  (e.g.,  semen,  saliva,
and  wound  exudates)  containing  HBV,  particularly  fluids  containing  HBeAg  (a  marker
for  high  HBV  replication  and  viral  load)  (27--31).  The  risk  is  higher  during  the
professional training period and can vary throughout a person's career (1). Depending
on the tasks performed, health-care or public safety personnel might be at risk for HBV
exposure; in addition, personnel providing care and assistance to persons in outpatient
settings and those residing in long-term--care facilities (e.g., assisted living) might be at
risk  for  acquiring  or  facilitating  transmission  of  HBV  infection  when  they  perform
procedures  that  expose  them  to  blood  (e.g.,  assisted  blood-glucose  monitoring  and
wound  care)  (32--34).  A  Federal  Standard  issued  in  December  1991  under  the
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act  mandates  that  hepatitis  B  vaccine  be  made
available  at  the  employer's  expense  to  all  health-care  personnel  who  are  exposed
occupationally  to  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious  materials  (35).  The  Federal
Standard  defines  occupational  exposure  as  reasonably  anticipated  skin,  eye,  mucous
membrane,  or  parenteral  contact  with  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious  materials
that  might  result  from  the  performance  of  an  employee's  duties  (35).  Occupational
Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  vaccination  practice  requirements  (e.g.,
preexposure  and  postexposure  antibody  testing)  are  based  on  current  ACIP
recommendations.  OSHA  regulations  might  have  accelerated  the  use  of  hepatitis  B
vaccine  in  HCP  (36).  Data  from  a  national,  cross-sectional  survey  demonstrated  that
during  2002--2003,  an  estimated  75%  of  HCP  had  received  the  3-dose  hepatitis  B
vaccination  series  (37).  Since  2002,  rates  of  1-dose  and  3-dose  vaccination  coverage
have  remained  stable.  Data  obtained  through  the  National  Health  Interview  Survey
(NHIS) in 2009 demonstrated a ≥1-dose coverage rate of 75%--77% and a ≥3-dose rate
of 67%--68% among HCP aged 18--49 years (23). Similarly, data obtained through the
National  Immunization  Survey--Adult  (NIS-Adult)  in  2007  demonstrated  a  ≥3-dose
coverage  of  62%  among  HCP  aged  18--64  years  (38).  The  Healthy  People  2020  goal
(objective no. IID-15.3) of a hepatitis B vaccination coverage rate of 90% among HCP
(39) has not been achieved. Vaccine Effectiveness, Duration of Immunity, and Vaccine
Safety Vaccine Effectiveness The 3-dose vaccine series administered intramuscularly at
0,  1,  and  6  months  produces  a  protective  antibody  response  in  approximately
30%--55% of healthy adults aged ≤40 years after the first dose, 75% after the second
dose,  and  >90%  after  the  third  dose  (40--42).  After  age  40  years,  <90%  of  persons
vaccinated  with  3  doses  have  a  protective  antibody  response,  and  by  age  60  years,
protective levels of antibody develop in approximately 75% of vaccinated persons (43).
Smoking,  obesity,  genetic  factors,  and  immune  suppression  also  are  associated  with
diminished immune response to hepatitis B vaccination (43--46). Duration of Immunity
Protection  against  symptomatic  and  chronic  HBV  infection  has  been  documented  to
persist  for  ≥22  years  in  vaccine  responders  (47).  Immunocompetent  persons  who
achieve  hepatitis  B  surface  antibody  (anti-HBs)  concentrations  of  ≥10  mIU/mL  after
preexposure  vaccination  have  protection  against  both  acute  disease  and  chronic
infection.  Anti-HBs  levels  decline  over  time.  Regardless,  responders  continue  to  be
protected, and the majority of responders will show an anamnestic response to vaccine
challenge (47--51). Declines might be somewhat faster among persons vaccinated as
infants  rather  than  as  older  children,  adolescents,  or  adults  and  among  those
administered  recombinant  vaccine  instead  of  plasma  vaccine  (which  has  not  been
commercially  available  in  the  United  States  since  the  late  1980s).  Although
immunogenicity is lower among immunocompromised persons, those who achieve and
maintain a protective antibody response before exposure to HBV have a high level of
protection from infection (52). Among persons who do not respond to a primary 3-dose
vaccine  series  (i.e.,  those  in  whom  anti-HBs  concentrations  of  ≥10  mIU/mL  were  not
achieved), 25%--50% respond to an additional vaccine dose, and 44%--100% respond
to  a  3-dose  revaccination  series  using  standard  or  high  dosage  vaccine  (43,53--58).
Persons who  have measurable but low  (i.e.,  1--9 mIU/mL) levels of anti-HBs after the
initial series have better response to revaccination than persons who have no anti-HBs
(49,53,54).  Persons  who  do  not  have  protective  levels  of  anti-HBs  1--2  months  after
revaccination
 either
 are
 infected
 with
 HBV
 or
 can
 be
 considered
 primary
nonresponders;  for  the  latter  group,  genetic  factors  might  be  associated  with
nonresponse  to  hepatitis  B  vaccination  (54,58,59).  ACIP  does  not  recommend  more
than  two  vaccine  series  in  nonresponders  (52).  Vaccine  Safety   Hepatitis  B  vaccines
have  been  demonstrated  to  be  safe  when  administered  to  infants,  children,
adolescents,  and  adults  (52,60,61).  Although  rare  cases  of  arthritis  or  alopecia  have
been associated temporally with hepatitis B vaccination, recent data do not support a
causal relationship between hepatitis B vaccine and either arthritis or alopecia (61--63).
During  1982--2004,  an  estimated  70  million  adolescents  and  adults  and  50  million
infants and children in the United States received ≥1 dose of hepatitis B vaccine (52).
The most frequently reported side effects in persons receiving hepatitis B vaccine are
pain  at  the  injection  site  (3%--29%)  and  temperature  of  >99.9°F  (>37.7°C)  (1%--6%)
(64--67).  However,  in  placebo-controlled  studies,  these  side  effects  were  reported  no
more  frequently  among  persons  receiving  hepatitis  B  vaccine  than  among  persons
receiving  placebo  (40,41,64--67).  Revaccination  is  not  associated  with  an  increase  in
adverse events. Hepatitis B vaccination is contraindicated for persons with a history of
hypersensitivity to yeast or any vaccine component (4,64--66). Persons with a history of
serious  adverse  events  (e.g.,  anaphylaxis)  after  receipt  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  should
not  receive  additional  doses.  As  with  other  vaccines,  vaccination  of  persons  with
moderate or severe acute illness, with or without fever, should be deferred until illness
resolves  (4).  Vaccination  is  not  contraindicated  in  persons  with  a  history  of  multiple
sclerosis,  Guillain-Barré  Syndrome,  autoimmune  disease  (e.g.,  systemic  lupus
erythematosis and rheumatoid arthritis), or other chronic diseases. Pregnancy is not a
contraindication to vaccination; limited data suggest that developing fetuses are not at
risk  for  adverse  events  when  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is  administered  to  pregnant  women
(4,68). Available vaccines contain noninfectious hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and
do not pose any risk for infection to the fetus.  Two single-antigen hepatitis B vaccines,
Recombivax  HB  (Merck  &  Co.,  Inc.,  Whitehouse  Station,  New  Jersey)  and  Engerix-B
(GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium) and one combination hepatitis A and
hepatitis  B  vaccine,  Twinrix  (GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals),  are  available  in  the  United
States. Primary vaccination consists of ≥3 intramuscular doses of hepatitis B vaccine or
of the combined hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccine. The hepatitis vaccine series does
not  need  to  be  restarted  if  the  second  or  third  dose  is  delayed.  Detailed  vaccination
recommendations  are  available  in  previously  published  guidelines  (52).  Vaccine
schedules
 are
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules/adult-schedule.htm#HCWs.
 In
 adults,
hepatitis  B  vaccine  always  should  be  administered  into  the  deltoid  muscle.  Longer
needles (up to 1.5 inches in length) might be required for obese adults (4). Preexposure
 Unvaccinated and Incompletely Vaccinated HCP and Trainees: Pre- and Postvaccination
Serologic  Testing  Postexposure   The  need  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  should  be
evaluated
 immediately
 after
 HCP
 experience
 any
 percutaneous,
 ocular,
mucous-membrane or nonintact skin exposure to blood or body fluid in the workplace.
Decisions to administer postexposure prophylaxis should be based on the HBsAg status
of the source and the vaccination history and vaccine-response status of the exposed
HCP  (Table  4)  (72).  Unvaccinated  and  Incompletely  Vaccinated  HCP  and  Trainees
Vaccinated HCP and Trainees HCP and Trainees at Additional Risk  Other Considerations
Epidemiology  and  Risk  Factors  Influenza  causes  an  estimated  average  of  >200,000
hospitalizations  and  3,000--49,000  deaths  annually  in  the  United  States  (74--76).  The
majority  of  influenza-related  severe  illnesses  and  deaths  occur  among  persons  with
chronic medical conditions, infants and young children, seniors, and pregnant women
(74--78). Reducing the risk for influenza among persons at higher risk for complications
is  a  major  focus  of  influenza  prevention  strategies  (77).  Influenza  Transmission  in
Health-Care Settings HCP are exposed to patients with influenza in the workplace and
are  thus  at  risk  of  occupationally  acquired  influenza  and  of  transmitting  influenza  to
patients and other HCP. In a cross-sectional survey of hospital house staff (physicians in
training), 37% reported influenza-like illness during September--April, and 9% reported
more than one respiratory illness. Length of illness varied (range: 1--10 days; mean: 7
days), as did days of work missed (range: 0--10 days; mean: 0.7 days) (79). Infected
HCP who continue to work while ill might transmit influenza to patients, many of whom
are  at  increased  risk  for  severe  outcomes  from  influenza.  HCP  are  therefore
recommended  for  routine  annual  influenza  vaccination  (77).  Few  randomized  trials  of
the effect that influenza vaccination has on illness in HCP have been conducted. In one
randomized trial of 427 HCP, influenza vaccination of HCP failed to decrease episodes of
respiratory infection or duration of illness but was associated with a 28% decrease in
absenteeism (from 1.4 days to 1.0 day) attributable to respiratory infections (80). No
laboratory confirmation of influenza was obtained in this study. In another randomized
trial  among  HCP,  vaccination  was  associated  with  a  significantly  lower  rate  of
serological  evidence  of  influenza  infection,  with  a  vaccine  efficacy  rate  of  88%  for
influenza A and 89% for influenza B (p<0.05) (81); however, no significant differences
were  noted  in  days  of  febrile  respiratory  illness  or  absenteeism.  Influenza  can  cause
outbreaks of severe respiratory illness among hospitalized persons and long-term-care
residents  (82--90).  Influenza  outbreaks  in  hospitals  (86--88)  and  long-term--care
facilities  (91)  have  been  associated  with  low  vaccination  rates  among  HCP.  One
nonrandomized study demonstrated an increase in HCW vaccination rates and decrease
in  nosocomially  acquired,  laboratory-confirmed  influenza  in  a  hospital  after  a  mobile
cart--based  HCP  vaccination  program  was  introduced  (86).  Several  randomized
controlled  studies  of  the  impact  of  HCP  vaccination  on  morbidity  and  mortality  in
long-term  care  facilities  have  been  performed  (92--95).  These  studies  have
demonstrated  substantial  decreases  in  all-cause  mortality  (92--95)  and  influenza-like
illness  (92,94,95).  However,  studies  which  examine  and  demonstrate  efficacy  in
preventing  more  specific  outcomes  (e.g.,  laboratory-confirmed  influenza  illness  and
mortality)  are  lacking.  Recent  systematic  reviews  suggest  that  vaccination  of  HCP  in
settings  in  which  patients  also  were  vaccinated  provided  significant  reductions  in
deaths  among  elderly  patients  from  all  causes  and  deaths  from  pneumonia,  but  also
note  that  additional  randomized  controlled  trials  are  warranted  (96,97),  as  are
examination  of  more  specific  outcomes.  Preventing  influenza  among  HCP  who  might
serve  as  sources  of  influenza  virus  transmission  provides  additional  protection  to
patients at risk for influenza complications. Vaccination of HCP can specifically benefit
patients  who  cannot  receive  vaccination  (e.g.,  infants  aged  <6  months  or  those  with
severe allergic reactions to prior influenza vaccination), patients who respond poorly to
vaccination  (e.g.,  persons  aged  ≥85  years  and  immune-compromised  persons),  and
persons  for  whom  antiviral  treatment  is  not  available  (e.g.,  persons  with  medical
contraindications).  Although  annual  vaccination  has  long  been  recommended  for  HCP
and  is  a  high  priority  for  reducing  morbidity  associated  with  influenza  in  health-care
settings  (98--100),  national  survey  data  have  demonstrated  that  the  vaccination
coverage level during the 2008--09 season was 52.9% (101). Considerations Regarding
Influenza Vaccination of HCP Barriers to HCP aceptance of influenza vaccination have
included fear of vaccine side effects (particularly influenza-like symptoms), insufficient
time  or  inconvenience,  perceived  ineffectiveness  of  the  vaccine,  perceived  low
likelihood  of  contracting  influenza,  avoidance  of  medications,  and  fear  of  needles
(79,102--109).  Factors  demonstrated  to  increase  vaccine  acceptance  include  a  desire
for  self-protection,  previous  receipt  of  influenza  vaccine,  a  desire  to  protect  patients,
and  perceived  effectiveness  of  vaccine  (79,105,106,109--112).  Strategies  that  have
demonstrated  improvement  in  HCP  vaccination  rates  have  included  campaigns  to
emphasize the benefits of HCP vaccination for staff and patients, vaccination of senior
medical  staff  or  opinion  leaders,  removing  administrative  barriers  (e.g.,  costs),
providing  vaccine  in  locations  and  at  times  easily  accessible  by  HCP,  and  monitoring
and reporting HCP influenza vaccination rates (99,113--120). Intranasally administered
live  attenuated  influenza  vaccine  (LAIV)  is  an  option  for  healthy,  nonpregnant  adults
aged <50 years who dislike needles. The practice of obtaining signed declinations from
HCP offered influenza vaccination has been adopted by some institutions but has not
yet  been  demonstrated  to  exceed  coverage  rates  of  >70%--80%  (99,115,121--123).
Institutions  that  require  declination  statements  from  HCP  who  refuse  influenza
vaccination should educate and counsel these HCP about benefits of the vaccine. Each
health-care facility should develop a comprehensive influenza vaccination strategy that
includes targeted education about the disease, including disease risk among HCP and
patients,  and  about  the  vaccine.  In  addition,  the  program  should  establish  easily
accessible  vaccination  sites  and  inform  HCP  about  their  locations  and  schedule.
Facilities  that  employ  HCP  should  provide  influenza  vaccine  at  no  cost  to  personnel
(124).  The  most  effective  combination  of  approaches  for  achieving  high  influenza
vaccination coverage among HCP likely varies by institution. Hospitals and health-care
organizations  in  the  United  States  traditionally  have  employed  an  immunization
strategy  that  includes  one  or  more  of  the  following  components:  education  about
influenza,  easy  access  to  vaccine,  incentives  to  encourage  immunization,  organized
campaigns,  institution  of  declination  policies,  and  legislative  and  regulatory  efforts
(e.g.,  vaccination  requirements)  (99,  115,  121--126).  Beginning  January  1,  2007,  the
Joint  Commission  on  Accreditation  of  Health-Care  Organizations  required  accredited
organizations to offer influenza vaccinations to staff, including volunteers and licensed
independent practitioners and to report coverage levels among HCP (127). Standards
are available for measuring vaccination coverage among HCP as a measure of program
performance within a health-care setting (128). Beginning January 2013, the Centers for
Medicaid Services will require acute care hospitals to report HCP influenza vaccine as
part of its hospital inpatient quality reporting program.* Vaccine Effectiveness, Duration
of Immunity, and Vaccine Safety Effectiveness of influenza vaccines varies from year to
year and depends on the age and health status of the person getting the vaccine and
the  similarity  or  "match"  between  the  viruses  or  virus  in  the  vaccine  and  those  in
circulation. Vaccine strains are selected for inclusion in the influenza vaccine every year
based on international surveillance and scientists' estimations about which types and
strains  of  viruses  will  circulate  in  a  given  year.  Annual  vaccination  is  recommended
because the predominant circulating influenza viruses typically change from season to
season  and,  because  immunity  declines  over  time  postvaccination  (77).  In
placebo-controlled studies among adults, the most frequent side effect of vaccination
was  soreness  at  the  vaccination  site  (affecting  10%--64%  of  patients)  that  lasted  <2
days (129,130). These injection-site reactions typically were mild and rarely interfered
with the recipient's ability to conduct usual daily activities. The main contraindication to
influenza  vaccination  is  a  history  of  anaphylactic  hypersensitivity  to  egg  or  other
components  of  the  vaccine.  A  history  of  Guillain-Barré  Syndrome  within  6  weeks
following a previous dose of influenza vaccine is considered to be a precaution for use
of influenza vaccines (77). Vaccination  Annual influenza vaccination is recommended
for  all  persons  aged  ≥6  months  who  have  no  medical  contraindication;  therefore,
vaccination  of  all  HCP  who  have  no  contraindications  is  recommended.  The  influenza
vaccine is evaluated annually with one or more vaccine strains updated almost every
year. In addition, antibody titers decline during the year after vaccination. Thus, annual
vaccination with the current season's formulation is recommended. Annual vaccination
is  appropriate  and  safe  to  begin  as  early  in  the  season  as  vaccine  is  available.  HCP
should  be  among  the  groups  considered  for  prioritized  receipt  of  influenza  vaccines
when vaccine supply is limited. Two types of influenza vaccines are available. LAIV is
administered intranasally and is licensed for use in healthy nonpregnant persons aged
2--49 years. The trivalent inactivated vaccine (TIV) is administered as an intramuscular
injection and can be given to any person aged ≥6 months. Both vaccine types contain
vaccine  virus  strains  that  are  selected  to  stimulate  a  protective  immune  response
against the wild-type viruses that are thought to be most likely in circulation during the
upcoming  season.  Use  of  LAIV  for  HCP  who  care  for  patients  housed  in  protective
inpatient  environments  has  been  a  theoretic  concern,  but  transmission  of  LAIV  in
health-care settings has not been reported. LAIV can be used for HCP who work in any
setting, except those who care for severely immunocompromised hospitalized persons
who  require  care  in  a  protective  environment.  HCP  who  themselves  have  a  condition
that confers high risk for influenza complications, who are pregnant, or who are aged
≥50  years  should  not  receive  LAIV  and  should  be  administered  TIV  instead.  An
inactivated trivalent vaccine containing 60 mcg of hemagglutinin antigen per influenza
vaccine  virus  strain  (Fluzone  High-Dose  [sanofi  pasteur])  is  an  alternative  inactivated
vaccine for persons aged ≥65 years. Persons aged ≥65 years may be administered any
of  the  standard-dose  TIV  preparations  or  Fluzone  High-Dose  (77).  The  majority  of  TIV
preparations are administered intramuscularly. An intradermally administered TIV was
licensed in May 2011 and is an alternative to other TIV preparations for persons aged
18--64 years (131). Use of Antiviral Drugs for Treating Exposed Persons and Controlling
Outbreaks Use of antiviral drugs for chemoprophylaxis or treatment of influenza is an
adjunct  to  (but  not  a  substitute  for)  vaccination.  Oseltamivir  or  zanamivir  are
recommended currently for chemoprophylaxis or treatment of influenza (132,133). TIV
can  be  administered  to  exposed,  unvaccinated  HCP  at  the  same  time  as
chemoprophylaxis,  but  LAIV  should  be  avoided  because  the  antiviral  medication  will
prevent  viral  replication  needed  to  stimulate  a  vaccine  response  (77).  Antivirals  are
used often among patients during outbreaks in closed settings such as long-term--care
facilities but also can be administered to unvaccinated HCP during outbreaks, when an
exposure to a person with influenza occurs, or after exposure when vaccination is not
thought  to  be  protective  against  the  strain  to  which  a  vaccinated  HCP  was  exposed.
Chemoprophylaxis  consists  of  1  dose  (of  either  antiviral  drug)  daily  for  10  days,  and
treatment consists of 1 dose twice daily for 5 days. In many instances of HCP exposure,
watchful  waiting  and  early  initiation  of  treatment  if  symptoms  appear  is  preferred
rather than use of antiviral chemoprophylaxis immediately after exposure. The intensity
and duration of the exposure and the underlying health status of the exposed worker
are important factors in clinical judgments about whether to provide chemoprophylaxis.
If chemoprophylaxis is used, the provider should base choice of the agent on whether
the circulating strain or strains of influenza have demonstrated resistance to particular
antivirals.  Program  Evaluation  Epidemiology  and  Risk  Factors   Measles  is  a  highly
contagious rash illness that is transmitted by respiratory droplets and airborne spread.
Severe complications, which might result in death, include pneumonia and encephalitis.
Before  the  national  measles  vaccination  program  was  implemented  in  1963,  almost
every person acquired measles before adulthood; an estimated 3--4 million persons in
the  United  States  acquired  measles  each  year  (134).  Approximately  500,000  persons
were reported to have had measles annually, of whom 500 persons died, 48,000 were
hospitalized,  and  another  1,000  had  permanent  brain  damage  from  measles
encephalitis  (134).  Through  a  successful  2-dose  measles  vaccination  program  (i.e.,  a
first dose at age 12--15 months and a second dose between ages 4--6 years) (135) and
better  measles  control  throughout  the  region  of  the  Americas  (136),  endemic
transmission  of  measles  was  interrupted  in  the  United  States,  and  measles  was
declared  eliminated  from  the  country  in  2000  (137).  However,  measles  remains
widespread  in  the  majority  of  countries  outside  the  Western  Hemisphere,  with  an
estimated  20  million  measles  cases  occurring  worldwide  (138)  and  approximately
164,000  related  deaths  (139).  Thus,  the  United  States  continues  to  experience
international  importations  that  might  lead  to  transmission  among  U.S.  residents  and
limited
 outbreaks,
 especially
 in
 unvaccinated
 populations
 (140--143).
 During
2001--2008, a total of 557 confirmed measles cases were reported in the United States
from 37 states and the District of Columbia (annual median: 56; range: 37 in 2004 to
140  in  2008),  representing  an  annual  incidence  of  less  than  one  case  per  million
population  (144).  Of  the  557  reported  case-patients,  126  (23%)  were  hospitalized
(annual median: 16; range: 5--29); of these, at least five case-patients were admitted to
intensive  care.  Two  deaths  were  reported,  both  in  2003  (144).  Of  the  557  reported
case-patients during 2001--2008, a total of 223 (40%) were adults, including 156 (28%)
aged 20--39 years and 67 (12%) aged ≥40 years. Of the 438 measles cases among U.S.
residents, 285 (65%) cases were considered preventable (i.e., occurred among persons
who  were  eligible  for  vaccination  but  were  unvaccinated)  (144).  The  remaining  153
(35%) cases were considered nonpreventable. Cases were defined as nonpreventable if
they  occurred  among  U.S.  resident  case-patients  who  had  received  ≥1  dose  of
measles-containing  vaccine,  if  patients  were  vaccinated  as  recommended  if  traveling
internationally, or if they were not vaccinated but had other evidence of immunity (i.e.,
were  born  before  1957  and  therefore  presumed  immune  from  natural  disease  in
childhood,
 had
 laboratory
 evidence
 of
 immunity,
 or
 had
 documentation
 of
physician-diagnosed  disease)  or  for  whom  vaccination  is  not  recommended.  During
2001--2008, a total of 12.5% (one of eight) of measles cases reported to CDC among
HCP occurred in persons born before 1957; the other seven cases occurred among HCP
born  after  1957.  Measles-mumps-rubella  (MMR)  vaccination  policies  have  been
enforced  with  variable  success  in  United  States  health-care  facilities  over  the  past
decade.  Even  though  medical  settings  were  a  primary  site  of  measles  transmission
during  the  1989--1991  measles  resurgence  (145,146),  as  of  September  2011,  only
three  states  (New  York,  Oklahoma,  and  Rhode  Island)  had  laws  mandating  that  all
hospital  personnel  have  proof  of  measles  immunity  and  did  not  allow  for  religious  or
philosophic exemptions (147). Vaccine coverage in the United States is high; in 2010, a
total  of  91.5%  of  children  aged  19--35  months  had  received  1  dose  of  MMR  vaccine
(21);  during  2009--2010,  a  total  of  94.8%  of  kindergartners  had  evidence  of  2  doses
(148);  and  in  2010,  a  total  of  90.5%  of  adolescents  had  evidence  of  2  doses  (22).
Nationally representative data on MMR vaccine coverage of U.S. HCP are not available.
Health-care--associated cases of measles are of public health concern. Because of the
severity  of  measles,  infected  persons  are  likely  to  seek  medical  care  in  primary
health-care  facilities,  emergency  departments,  or  hospitals  (141,149,150).  Medical
settings  played  a  prominent  role  in  perpetuating  outbreaks  of  measles  transmission
during  the  1989--1991  measles  resurgence  (145,146)  and  were  a  primary  site  of
measles  transmission  in  a  health-care--associated  outbreak  in  2008  (149).  During
2001--2008, a total of 27 reported measles cases were transmitted in U.S. health-care
facilities, accounting for 5% of all reported U.S. measles cases. Because of the greater
opportunity  for  exposure,  HCP  are  at  higher  risk  than  the  general  population  for
becoming  infected  with  measles.  A  study  conducted  in  1996  in  medical  facilities  in  a
county  in  Washington  state  indicated  that  HCP  were  19  times  more  likely  to  develop
measles than other adults (151). During 2001--2008, in the 23 health-care settings in
which measles transmission was reported, eight cases occurred among HCP, six (75%)
of  whom  were  unvaccinated  or  had  unknown  vaccination  status.  One  health-care
provider  was  hospitalized  in  an  intensive  care  unit  for  6  days  from  severe  measles
complications  (142).  During  a  health-care--associated  measles  outbreak  in  Arizona  in
2008 with 14 cases, six cases were acquired in hospitals, and one was acquired in an
outpatient  setting.  One  unvaccinated  health-care  worker  developed  measles  and
infected  a  hospital  emergency  room  patient  who  required  intensive  care  following
hospital  admission  for  measles  (149).  High  costs  also  are  involved  in  evaluating  and
containing  exposures  and  outbreaks  in  health-care  facilities,  as  well  as  a  substantial
disruption of regular hospital routines when control measures are instituted, especially
if hospitals do not have readily available data on the measles immunity status of their
staff  and  others  included  in  the  facility  vaccination  program.  In  2005  in  Indiana,  one
hospital  spent  more  than  $113,000  responding  to  a  measles  outbreak  (142),  and  in
2008 in Arizona, two hospitals spent $799,136 responding to and containing cases in
their facilities (149). The Arizona outbreak response required rapid review of measles
documentation  of  14,844  HCP  at  seven  hospitals  and  emergency  vaccination  of
approximately  4,500  HCP  who  lacked  documentation  of  measles  immunity.  Serologic
testing at two hospitals among 1,583 HCP without documented history of vaccination or
without documented laboratory evidence of measles immunity revealed that 138 (9%)
of these persons lacked measles IgG antibodies (149). Vaccine Effectiveness, Duration
of  Immunity  and  Seroprevalence  Studies,  and  Vaccine  Safety  Vaccine  Effectiveness
MMR  vaccine  is  highly  effective  in  preventing  measles  with  a  1-dose  vaccine
effectiveness  of  95%  when  administered  on  or  after  age  12  months  and  a  2-dose
vaccine effectiveness of 99% (135). Duration of Immunity and Seroprevalence Studies
Two  doses  of  live  measles  vaccine  are  considered  to  provide  long-lasting  immunity
(135).  Although  antibody  levels  decline  following  vaccination,  a  study  examining
neutralizing antibody levels up to 10 years following the second dose of MMR vaccine in
children indicates that antibodies remain above the level considered protective (152).
Studies  among  HCP  in  the  United  States  during  the  measles  resurgence  in  the  late
1980s through early 1990s demonstrated that 4%--10% of all HCP lacked measles IgG
antibodies  (153--156).  During  the  2008  Arizona  outbreak,  of  the  1,077  health-care
providers born during or after 1957 without documented measles immunity, 121 (11%)
were seronegative (149). In a study of measles seroprevalence among 469 newly hired
HCP at a hospital in North Carolina who were born before 1957, and thus considered
immune  by  age,  who  could  not  provide  written  evidence  of  immunity  to  measles,
serologic testing indicated that six (1.3%) lacked measles IgG antibodies (157). Other
serologic studies of hospital-based HCP indicate that 2%--9% of those born before 1957
lacked antibodies to measles (156,158--160). A survey conducted during 1999-- 2004
found  a  seroprevalence  of  measles  antibodies  of  95.9%  among  persons  in  the  U.S.
population  aged  6--49  years  (161).  The  survey  indicated  that  the  lowest  prevalence,
92.4%, was among adults born during 1967--1976 (161). A 1999 study of U.S. residents
aged ≥20 years determined that 93% had antibodies to measles virus (162). Vaccine
Safety   Measles  vaccine  is  administered  in  combination  with  the  mumps  and  rubella
components  as  the  MMR  vaccine  in  the  United  States.  Monovalent  measles  vaccine
rarely  has  been  used  in  the  United  States  in  the  past  2  decades  and  is  no  longer
available.  After  decades  of  use,  evidence  demonstrates  that  MMR  vaccine  has  an
excellent  safety  profile  (134).  The  majority  of  documented  adverse  events  occur  in
children. In rare circumstances, MMR vaccination of adults has been associated with the
following adverse events: anaphylaxis (approximately 1.0--3.5 occurrences per million
doses administered) (134), thrombocytopenia from the measles component or rubella
component  (a  rate  of  three  to  four  cases  for  every  100,000  doses)  (134),  and  acute
arthritis from the rubella component (arthralgia develops among approximately 25% of
rubella-susceptible  postpubertal  females  after  MMR  vaccination,  and  approximately
10% have acute arthritis-like signs and symptoms) (135). When joint symptoms occur,
they  generally  persist  for  1  day--3  weeks  and  rarely  recur  (135).  Chronic  joint
symptoms attributable to the rubella component of the MMR vaccine are reported very
rarely,  if  they  occur  at  all.  Evidence  does  not  support  an  association  between  MMR
vaccination  and  any  of  the  following:  hearing  loss,  retinopathy,  optic  neuritis,
Guillain-Barré Syndrome, type 1 diabetes, Crohn's disease, or autism (135,163--169). A
woman can excrete the rubella vaccine virus in breast milk and transmit the virus to
her  infant,  but  the  infection  remains  asymptomatic  (135).  Otherwise,  persons  who
receive  MMR  or  its  component  vaccines  do  not  transmit  measles,  rubella,  or  mumps
vaccine  viruses  (135).  No  transmission  of  MMR  vaccine  virus  in  a  health-care  setting
has been documented. Vaccination All persons who work in health-care facilities should
have  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to  measles.  This  information  should  be
documented and readily available at the work location. Recently vaccinated HCP do not
require  any  restriction  in  their  work  activities.  Presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to
measles  for  persons  who  work  in  health-care  facilities  includes  any  of  the  following:  
Prevaccination  Testing  Prevaccination  antibody  screening  before  MMR  vaccination  for
an  employee  who  does  not  have  adequate  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  is  not
necessary unless the medical facility considers it cost effective (134,170--172) although
no  recent  studies  have  been  conducted.  For  HCP  who  have  2  documented  doses  of
MMR vaccine or other acceptable evidence of immunity to measles, serologic testing for
immunity is not recommended. In the event that a HCP who has 2 documented doses of
MMR  vaccine  is  tested  serologically  and  determined  to  have  negative  or  equivocal
measles titer results, it is not recommended that the person receive an additional dose
of MMR vaccine. Such persons should be considered to have presumptive evidence of
measles immunity. Documented age-appropriate vaccination supersedes the results of
subsequent  serologic  testing.  Because  rapid  vaccination  is  necessary  to  halt  disease
transmission, during outbreaks of measles, serologic screening before vaccination is not
recommended. Use of Vaccine and Immune Globulin for Treating Exposed Persons and
Controlling
 Outbreaks
 Following
 airborne
 infection--control
 precautions
 and
implementing other infection-control measures are important to control the spread of
measles but might fail to prevent all nosocomial transmission, because transmission to
other  susceptible  persons  might  occur  before  illness  is  recognized.  Persons  infected
with measles are infectious 4 days before rash onset through 4 days after rash onset.
When a person who is suspected of having measles visits a health-care facility, airborne
infection--control  precautions  should  be  followed  stringently.  The  patient  should  be
asked  immediately  to  wear  a  medical  mask  and  should  be  placed  in  an
airborne-infection  isolation  room  (i.e.,  a  negative  air-pressure  room)  as  soon  as
possible. If an airborne-infection isolation room is not available, the patient should be
placed in a private room with the door closed and be asked to wear a mask. If possible,
only  staff  with  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  should  enter  the  room  of  a  person
with suspect or confirmed measles. Regardless of presumptive immunity status, all staff
entering  the  room  should  use  respiratory  protection  consistent  with  airborne
infection--control precautions (i.e., use of an N95 respirator or a respirator with similar
effectiveness  in  preventing  airborne  transmission)  (3,150).  Because  of  the  possibility,
albeit low (~1%), of measles vaccine failure in HCP exposed to infected patients (173),
all HCP should observe airborne precautions in caring for patients with measles. HCP in
whom measles occurs should be excluded from work until ≥4 days following rash onset.
Contacts  with  measles-compatible  symptoms  should  be  isolated,  and  appropriate
infection-control  measures  (e.g.,  rapid  vaccination  of  susceptible  contacts)  should  be
implemented  to  prevent  further  spread  (174).  If  measles  exposures  occur  in  a
health-care  facility,  all  contacts  should  be  evaluated  immediately  for  presumptive
evidence of measles immunity. HCP without evidence of immunity should be offered the
first dose of MMR vaccine and excluded from work from day 5--21 following exposure
(135). HCP without evidence of immunity who are not vaccinated after exposure should
be  removed  from  all  patient  contact  and  excluded  from  the  facility  from  day  5  after
their first exposure through day 21 after the last exposure, even if they have received
postexposure  intramuscular  immune  globulin  of  0.25  mL/kg  (40  mg  IgG/kg)  (135).
Those with documentation of 1 vaccine dose may remain at work and should receive
the  second  dose.  Case-patient  contacts  who  do  not  have  presumptive  evidence  of
measles immunity should be vaccinated, offered intramuscular immune globulin of 0.25
mL/kg  (40  mg  IgG/kg),  which  is  the  standard  dosage  for  nonimmunocompromised
persons  (135),  or  quarantined  until  21  days  after  their  exposure  to  the  case-patient.
Contacts  with  measles-compatible  symptoms  should  be  isolated,  and  appropriate
infection-control measures should be implemented to prevent further spread. If immune
globulin is administered to an exposed person, observations should continue for signs
and symptoms of measles for 28 days after exposure because immune globulin might
prolong the incubation period. Available data suggest that live virus measles vaccine, if
administered  within  72  hours  of  measles  exposure,  will  prevent,  or  modify  disease
(134).  Even  if  it  is  too  late  to  provide  effective  postexposure  prophylaxis  by
administering MMR, the vaccine can provide protection against future exposure to all
three  infections.  Identifying  persons  who  lack  evidence  of  measles  immunity  during
contact  investigations  provides  a  good  opportunity  to  offer  MMR  vaccine  to  protect
against  measles  as  well  as  mumps  and  rubella,  not  only  for  HCP  who  are  part  of  an
organization's  vaccination  program,  but  also  for  patients  and  visitors.  If  an  exposed
person is already incubating measles, MMR vaccination will not exacerbate symptoms.
In these circumstances, persons should be advised that a measles-like illness occurring
shortly  after  vaccination  could  be  attributable  either  to  natural  infection  or  to  the
vaccine  strain.  In  such  circumstances,  specimens  should  be  submitted  for  viral  strain
identification.  Epidemiology  and  Risk  Factors  Mumps  is  an  acute  viral  infection
characterized by fever and inflammation of the salivary glands (usually parotitis) (175).
The  spectrum  of  illness  ranges  from  subclinical  infection  (20%--40%)  to  nonspecific
respiratory  illness,  sialadenitis  including  classic  parotitis,  deafness,  orchitis,  and
meningoencephalitis; severity increases with age (175). In the prevaccine era, mumps
was a common childhood illness, with approximately 186,000 mumps cases reported in
the United States per year (176). After the introduction of the Jeryl Lynn strain mumps
vaccine  in  1967  and  the  implementation  of  the  1-dose  mumps  vaccine  policy  for
children  in  1977  (177),  reports  of  mumps  cases  in  the  United  States  declined  99%
(178).  During  1986--1987,  an  increase  in  reported  mumps  cases  occurred,  primarily
affecting  unvaccinated  adolescents  and  young  adults.  In  the  late  1980s,  sporadic
outbreaks  continued  to  occur  that  affected  both  unvaccinated  and  1-dose  vaccinated
adolescents  and  young  adults  (178).  In  1989,  a  second  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  was
recommended nationwide for better measles control among school-aged children (179).
Historically low rates of mumps followed with only several hundred reported cases per
year  in  the  United  States  during  2000--2005.  In  1998,  a  national  goal  to  eliminate
mumps was set for 2010 (180). However, in 2006, a total of 6,584 mumps cases were
reported  in  the  United  States,  the  largest  U.S.  mumps  outbreak  in  nearly  20  years
(181--183). Whereas overall national mumps incidence was 2.2 per 100,000 population,
eight states in the Midwest were the most affected, with 2.5--66.1 cases per 100,000
population  (183).  The  highest  incidence  (31.1  cases  per  100,000  population)  was
among persons aged 18--24 years (e.g., college-aged students), the majority of whom
had  received  2  doses  of  mumps-containing  vaccine.  Of  the  4,017  case-patients  for
whom  age  and  vaccination  status  were  known,  1,786  (44%)  were  aged  ≥25  years
(incidence:  7.2  cases  per  100,000  persons);  of  these  1,786  patients,  351  (20%)
received at least 2 doses, 444 (25%) received 1 dose, 336 (19%) were unvaccinated,
and  655  (37%)  had  unknown  vaccination  status.  Since  the  2006  resurgence,  two
additional  large  U.S.  mumps  outbreaks  have  occurred,  both  during  2009--2010,  one
among  members  of  a  religious  community  with  cases  occurring  throughout  the
northeastern United States (184) and the other in Guam (185); both outbreaks primarily
affected children and adolescents in crowded environments who had received 2 doses
of vaccine. Vaccine coverage in the United States is high; in 2010, approximately 91.5%
of  children  aged  19--35  months  had  received  1  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  (21);  during
2009--2010, a total of 94.8% of kindergartners had evidence of 2 doses (148). In 2010,
a total of 90.5% of adolescents had evidence of 2 doses (22). Nationally representative
data on MMR vaccine coverage of U.S. HCP are not available. Mumps Transmission and
the  Costs  of  Mitigating  Mumps  Exposures  in  Health-care  Settings  Although
health-care--associated transmission of mumps is infrequent, it might be underreported
because  of  the  high  percentage  (~20%--40%)  of  infected  persons  who  might  be
asymptomatic (186--189). In a survey of 9,299 adults in different professions conducted
in 1968, before vaccine was used routinely, the rate of mumps acquisition was highest
among dentists and HCP, with rates of 18% among dentists and 15% among physicians
(37%  for  pediatricians),  compared  with  9%  among  primary  and  secondary  school
teachers and 2% among university staff members (190). In the postvaccine era, mumps
transmission  also  has  been  documented  in  medical  settings  (191--193).  During  a
Tennessee  mumps  outbreak  during  1986--1987,  a  total  of  17  (12%)  of  146  hospitals
and  three  (50%)  of  six  long-term--care  facilities  reported  one  or  more  practices  that
could contribute to the spread of mumps, including not isolating patients with mumps,
assigning  susceptible  staff  to  care  for  patients  with  mumps,  and  not  immunizing
susceptible  employees.  Health-care--associated  transmission  resulted  in  six  cases  of
mumps  infections  among  health-care  providers  and  nine  cases  of  mumps  infections
among  patients  (191).  In  Utah  in  1994,  two  health-care  providers  in  a  hospital
developed  mumps  after  they  had  contact  with  an  infected  patient  (192).  During  the
2006  outbreak,  one  health-care  facility  in  Chicago  experienced  ongoing  mumps
transmission  lasting  4  weeks  (193).  During  the  2006  multistate  U.S.  outbreak,  144
(8.5%)  of  1,705  adult  case-patients  in  Iowa  for  whom  occupation  was  known  were
health-care  providers  (Iowa  Department  of  Public  Health,  unpublished  data,  2006).
Whether transmission occurred from patients, coworkers, or persons in the community
is unknown. During the 2009--2010 outbreak in the northeastern region of the United
States, seven (0.2%) of the 3,400 case-patients were health-care providers, six of whom
likely were infected by patients because they had no other known exposure. Exposures
to mumps in health-care settings also can result in added economic costs because of
furlough or reassignment of staff members from patient-care duties or closure of wards
(194). In 2006, a Kansas hospital spent $98,682 containing a mumps outbreak (195).
During a mumps outbreak in Chicago in 2006, one health-care facility spent $262,788
controlling  the  outbreak  (193).  Vaccine  Effectiveness,  Duration  of  Immunity  and
Seroprevalence Studies, and Vaccine Safety Vaccine Effectiveness MMR vaccine has a
1-dose  vaccine  effectiveness  in  preventing  mumps  of  80%--85%  (range:  75%--91%)
(175,196--199) and a 2-dose vaccine effectiveness of 79%--95% (199--202). In a study
conducted on two Iowa college campuses during the 2006 mumps outbreak among a
population  that  was  primarily  vaccinated  with  2  doses,  2-dose  vaccine  effectiveness
ranged  from  79%  to  88%  (202).  Duration  of  Immunity  and  Seroprevalence  Studies
Mumps antibody levels wane over time following the first or second dose of vaccination
(203,204),  but  the  correlates  of  immunity  to  mumps  are  poorly  understood  and  the
significance of these waning antibody levels is unclear. A study on a university campus
in  Nebraska  in  2006  indicated  lower  levels  of  mumps  neutralizing  antibodies  among
students who had been vaccinated with a second MMR dose >15 years previously than
among  those  who  had  been  vaccinated  1--5  years  previously,  but  the  difference  was
not statistically significant (p>0.05) (205). In a 2006 study on a university campus in
Kansas, students with mumps were more likely to have received a second dose of MMR
vaccine  ≥10  years  previously  than  were  their  roommates  without  mumps  (206).
However,  another  2006  study  from  an  Iowa  college  campus  identified  no  such
association  (202).  During  1999--2004,  national  seroprevalence  for  mumps  antibodies
for persons aged 6--49 years was 90% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 88.8--91.1) (207).
In the Nebraska study, 414 (94%) of the 440 participants were seropositive for mumps
antibodies (205). A study in Kansas in 2006 indicated that 13% of hospital employees
lacked  antibodies  to  the  mumps  virus  (195).  In  a  recent  study  on  mumps
seroprevalence  among  381  newly  hired  health-care  personnel  at  a  hospital  in  North
Carolina  who  were  born  before  1957  and  thus  considered  immune  by  age  and  who
could not provide written evidence of immunity to mumps, serologic testing indicated
that 14 (3.7%) lacked IgG antibodies to mumps (157). Vaccine Safety Mumps vaccine is
administered  in  combination  with  the  measles  and  rubella  components  as  the  MMR
vaccine in the United States. Monovalent mumps vaccine has rarely been used in the
United States in the past 2 decades and is no longer available. After decades of use,
evidence  demonstrates  that  MMR  vaccine  has  an  excellent  safety  profile.  The  most
common adverse reactions to the mumps component of the MMR vaccine are parotitis
10--14  days  after  vaccination  and  low-grade  fever  (175).  On  the  basis  of  biologic
plausibility, orchitis, arthritis, or sensorineural deafness might rarely follow vaccination
(175).  The  majority  of  documented  adverse  events  occur  in  children.  In  rare
circumstances,  MMR  vaccination  of  adults  has  been  associated  with  anaphylaxis
(approximately
 1.0--3.5
 occurrences
 per
 million
 doses
 administered)
 (134),
thrombocytopenia  from  the  measles  component  or  rubella  component  (rate:  three  to
four  cases  for  every  100,000  doses)  (134),  and  acute  arthritis  from  the  rubella
component  (arthralgia  develops  among  approximately  25%  of  rubella-susceptible
postpubertal  females  after  MMR  vaccination,  and  approximately  10%  have  acute
arthritis-like  signs  and  symptoms)  (135).  When  joint  symptoms  occur,  they  generally
persist for 1 day--3 weeks and rarely recur (135). Chronic joint symptoms attributable
to the rubella component of the MMR vaccine are reported rarely, if they occur at all.
Evidence  does  not  support  a  link  between  MMR  vaccination  and  hearing  loss,
retinopathy, optic neuritis, Guillain-Barré Syndrome, type 1 diabetes, Crohn's disease,
or autism (135,163--169). A woman can excrete the rubella vaccine virus in breast milk
and  transmit  the  virus  to  her  infant,  but  the  infection  remains  asymptomatic  (135).
Otherwise,  persons  who  receive  MMR  or  its  component  vaccines  do  not  transmit
measles,  rubella,  or  mumps  vaccine  viruses  (135).  No  transmission  of  MMR  vaccine
virus in a health-care setting has been documented. Vaccination All persons who work
in health-care facilities should have presumptive evidence of immunity to mumps. This
information should be documented and readily available at the work location. Recently
vaccinated  HCP  do  not  require  any  restriction  in  their  work  activities.  Presumptive
evidence of immunity to mumps for persons who work in health-care facilities includes
any  of  the  following:   Prevaccination  Testing   For  HCP  who  do  not  have  adequate
presumptive  evidence  of  mumps  immunity,  prevaccination  antibody  screening  before
MMR vaccination is not necessary (135,175). For HCP who have 2 documented doses of
MMR vaccine or other acceptable evidence of immunity to mumps, serologic testing for
immunity  is  not  recommended.  In  the  event  that  a  health-care  provider  who  has  2
documented  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  is  tested  serologically  and  determined  to  have
negative  or  equivocal  mumps  titer  results,  it  is  not  recommended  that  the  person
receive an additional dose of MMR vaccine. Such persons should be considered immune
to  mumps.  Documented  age-appropriate  vaccination  supersedes  the  results  of
subsequent serologic testing. Likewise, during outbreaks of mumps, serologic screening
before vaccination is not recommended because rapid vaccination is necessary to halt
disease  transmission.  Controlling  Mumps  Outbreaks  in  Health-Care  Settings  Placing
patients  in  droplet  precautions  and  implementing  other  infection-control  measures  is
important  to  control  the  spread  of  mumps  but  might  fail  to  prevent  all  nosocomial
transmission,  because  transmission  to  other  susceptible  persons  might  occur  before
illness  is  recognized  (208).  When  a  person  suspected  of  having  mumps  visits  a
health-care facility, only HCP with adequate presumptive evidence of immunity should
be exposed to the person, and in addition to standard precautions, droplet precautions
should  be  followed.  The  index  case-patient  should  be  isolated,  and  respiratory
precautions (gown and gloves) should be used for patient contact. Negative pressure
rooms  are  not  required.  The  patient  should  be  isolated  for  5  days  after  the  onset  of
parotitis,  during  which  time  shedding  of  virus  is  likely  to  occur  (209).  If  mumps
exposures occur in a health-care facility, all contacts should be evaluated for evidence
of  mumps  immunity.  HCP  with  no  evidence  of  mumps  immunity  who  are  exposed  to
patients  with  mumps  should  be  offered  the  first  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  as  soon  as
possible,  but  vaccine  can  be  administered  at  any  interval  following  exposure;  they
should be excluded from duty from day 12 after the first unprotected exposure through
day 25 after the most recent exposure. HCP with documentation of 1 vaccine dose may
remain  at  work  and  should  receive  the  second  dose.  HCP  with  mumps  should  be
excluded from work for 5 days from the onset of parotitis (209). Antibody response to
the  mumps  component  of  MMR  vaccine  generally  is  believed  not  to  develop  soon
enough to provide effective prophylaxis after exposure to suspected mumps (191,210),
but data are insufficient to rule out a prophylactic effect. Nonetheless, the vaccine is
not  recommended  for  prophylactic  purposes  after  exposure.  However,  identifying
persons  who  lack  presumptive  evidence  of  mumps  immunity  during  contact
investigations  provides  a  good  opportunity  to  offer  MMR  vaccine  to  protect  against
mumps  as  well  as  measles  and  rubella,  not  only  for  HCP  who  are  part  of  an
organization's  vaccination  program,  but  also  for  patients  and  visitors.  If  an  exposed
person  already  is  incubating  mumps,  MMR  vaccination  will  not  exacerbate  the
symptoms. In these circumstances persons should be advised that a mumps-like illness
occurring  shortly  after  vaccination  is  likely  to  be  attributable  to  natural  infection.  In
such  circumstances,  specimens  should  be  submitted  for  viral  strain  identification  to
differentiate  between  vaccine  and  wild  type  virus.  Immune  globulin  is  not  routinely
used  for  postexposure  protection  from  mumps  because  no  evidence  exists  that  it  is
effective  (135).  Epidemiology  and  Risk  Factors  Rubella  (German  measles)  is  a  viral
disease characterized by rash, low-grade fever, lymphadenopathy, and malaise (211).
Although  rubella  is  considered  a  benign  disease,  transient  arthralgia  and  arthritis  are
observed  commonly  in  infected  adults,  particularly  among  postpubertal  females.
Chronic  arthritis  has  been  reported  after  rubella  infection,  but  such  reports  are  rare,
and  evidence  of  an  association  is  weak  (212).  Other  complications  that  occur
infrequently are thrombocytopenia and encephalitis (211). Infection is asymptomatic in
25%--50% of cases (213). Clinical diagnosis of rubella is unreliable and should not be
considered  in  assessing  immune  status.  Many  rash  illnesses  might  mimic  rubella
infection and many rubella infections are unrecognized. The only reliable evidence of
previous  rubella  infection  is  the  presence  of  serum  rubella  IgG  antibody  (211).  Of
primary  concern  are  the  effects  that  rubella  can  have  when  a  pregnant  woman
becomes infected, especially during the first trimester, which can result in miscarriages,
stillbirths, therapeutic abortions, and congenital rubella syndrome (CRS), a constellation
of  birth  defects  that  often  includes  blindness,  deafness,  mental  retardation,  and
congenital  heart  defects  (211,213).  Postnatal  rubella  is  transmitted  through  direct  or
droplet contact from nasopharyngeal secretions. The incubation period ranges from 12
to 23 days (214,215). An ill person is most contagious when the rash first appears, but
the period of maximal communicability extends from a few days before to 7 days after
rash onset (213). Rubella is less contagious than measles. In the prevaccine era, rubella
was  an  endemic  disease  globally  with  larger  epidemics  that  occurred;  in  the  United
States,  rubella  epidemics  occurred  approximately  every  7  years  (211).  During  the
1964--1965 global rubella epidemic, an estimated 12.5 million cases of rubella occurred
in  the  United  States,  resulting  in  approximately  2,000  cases  of  encephalitis,  11,250
fetal deaths attributable to spontaneous or surgical abortions, 2,100 infants who were
stillborn  or  died  soon  after  birth,  and  20,000  infants  born  with  CRS.  The  economic
impact of this epidemic in the United States alone was estimated at $1.5 billion in 1965
dollars ($10 billion in 2010 dollars) (216). After the rubella vaccine was licensed in the
United States in 1969, reported rubella cases decreased from 57,686 in 1969 to 12,491
in 1976 (216), and CRS cases reported nationwide decreased from 68 in 1970 to 23 in
1976  (217).  Declines  in  rubella  age-specific  incidence  occurred  in  all  age  groups,
including adolescents and adults, but the greatest declines were among children aged
<15 years (216). During 1977--1978, a resurgence of rubella occurred, primarily among
older  adolescents  and  young  adults,  because  the  initial  vaccination  strategy  targeted
children (218). During this resurgence, 62% of reported rubella cases occurred among
persons aged >15 years compared with 23% of cases during 1966--1968 (135). As a
result of the change in the epidemiologic profile of rubella, in 1977, ACIP modified its
recommendations  to  include  the  vaccination  of  susceptible  postpubertal  girls  and
women.  In  1989,  a  second  MMR  vaccination  dose  was  recommended  in  response  to
large measles outbreaks nationwide (179). During 2001--2004, the annual numbers of
rubella and CRS cases were extremely low, with 23 reported rubella cases in 2001, a
total of 18 in 2002, a total of 7 in 2003, and a total of 9 in 2004 (219). Rubella was
declared  eliminated  from  the  United  States  in  2004  (219,220).  During  2005--2009,  a
total of 54 cases of rubella were reported; the majority of the cases occurred among
persons aged >20 years. Of the reported cases, 23 (43%) were import-associated; only
two outbreaks of rubella were reported during this time, and both involved only three
cases  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2009).  Since  2005,  only  four  cases  of  CRS  have  been
reported,  with  two  cases  reported  in  2009;  three  (75%)  cases  were  acquired
internationally, and the other had an unknown source (CDC, unpublished data, 2009).
Rubella  importations  are  expected  to  continue  in  the  immediate  future.  As  of
September 2011, only three states (i.e., New York, Oklahoma, and Rhode Island) had
laws mandating that all hospital personnel have proof of rubella immunity and did not
allow  for  religious  or  philosophical  exemptions  (147).  Additional  states  had
requirements  for  specific  types  of  facilities  or  for  certain  employees  within  those
facilities, but they did not have universal laws mandating proof of rubella immunity for
all  hospital  personnel  (147).  MMR  vaccine  coverage  in  the  United  States  is  high;  in
2010, an estimated 91.5% of children aged 19--35 months had received 1 dose of MMR
vaccine (21); during 2009--2010, a total of 94.8% of kindergarteners had evidence of 2
doses (148); and in 2010, a total of 90.5% of adolescents had evidence of 2 doses (22).
Nationally representative data on MMR vaccine coverage of U.S. HCP are not available.
Rubella  Transmission  and  the  Costs  of  Mitigating  Rubella  Exposures  in  Health-Care
Settings  No  documented  transmission  of  rubella  to  HCP  or  other  hospital  staff  or
patients  in  U.S.  health-care  facilities  has  occurred  since  elimination  was  declared.
However, in the decades before elimination, rubella transmission was documented in at
least  10  U.S.  medical  settings  (221--231)  and  led  to  outbreaks  with  serious
consequences,  including  pregnancy  terminations,  disruption  of  hospital  routine,
absenteeism from work, expensive containment measures, negative publicity, and the
threat  of  litigation  (232).  In  these  outbreaks,  transmission  occurred  from  HCP  to
susceptible coworkers and patients, as well as from patients to HCP and other patients.
No  data  are  available  on  whether  HCP  are  at  increased  risk  for  acquiring  rubella
compared  with  other  professions.  Vaccine  Effectiveness,  Duration  of  Immunity  and
Seroprevalence
 Studies,
 and
 Vaccine
 Safety
 Vaccine
 Effectiveness
 Vaccine
effectiveness of the RA 27/3 rubella vaccine against clinical rubella is 95% (85%--99%
CI) and >99% for clinical laboratory confirmed rubella (211,233). Antibody responses to
rubella  as  part  of  MMR  vaccine  are  equal  (i.e.,  >99%)  to  those  seen  after  the
single-antigen  RA  27/3  rubella  vaccine  (211,234).  Duration  of  Immunity  and
Seroprevalence Studies In clinical trials, 97%--99% of susceptible persons who received
a  single  dose  of  the  RA  27/3  rubella  vaccine  when  they  were  aged  ≥12  months
developed
 antibody
 (211,235,236).
 Two
 studies
 have
 demonstrated
 that
vaccine-induced rubella antibodies might wane after 12--15 years (237,238); however,
rubella  surveillance  data  do  not  indicate  that  rubella  and  CRS  are  increasing  among
vaccinated  persons.  National  seroprevalence  for  rubella  antibodies  among  persons
aged  6--49  years  during  1999--2004  was  91%  (239).  During  1986--1990,  serologic
surveys  in  one  hospital  indicated  that  5%  of  HCP  (including  persons  born  in  1957  or
earlier) did not have detectable rubella antibody (240). Earlier studies indicated that up
to  14%--19%  of  U.S.  hospital  personnel,  including  young  women  of  childbearing  age,
lacked  detectable  rubella  antibody  (225,241,242).  In  a  recent  study  on  rubella
seroprevalence among 477 newly hired HCP at a hospital in North Carolina who were
born before 1957, and thus considered immune by age, who could not provide written
evidence  of  immunity  to  rubella,  serologic  testing  revealed  that  14  (3.1%)  lacked
detectable levels of antibody to rubella (157). Because of the potential for contact with
pregnant women in any type of health-care facility, all HCP should have documented
presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to  rubella.  History  of  disease  is  not  considered
adequate  evidence  of  immunity.  Vaccine  Safety   Rubella  vaccine  is  administered  in
combination  with  the  measles  and  mumps  components  as  the  MMR  vaccine  in  the
United States. Monovalent rubella vaccine has been used rarely in the United States in
the  past  2  decades  and  is  no  longer  available.  After  decades  of  use,  evidence
demonstrates  that  MMR  vaccine  has  an  excellent  safety  profile.  The  most  common
adverse reactions to the rubella component of the MMR vaccine are transient rashes,
which usually appear 7--10 days after vaccination in approximately 5% of vaccinated
persons,  or  transient  lymphadenopathy,  fever,  sore  throat,  and  headache  (135,211).
The  majority  of  documented  adverse  events  occur  in  children.  In  rare  circumstances,
MMR  vaccination  of  adults  has  been  associated  with  the  following  adverse  events:
anaphylaxis (approximately 1.0--3.5 occurrences per million doses administered) (134),
thrombocytopenia  from  the  measles  component  or  rubella  component  (rate:  three  to
four  cases  for  every  100,000  doses)  (134),  and  acute  arthritis  from  the  rubella
component  (arthralgia  develops  among  approximately  25%  of  rubella-susceptible
postpubertal  females  after  MMR  vaccination,  and  approximately  10%  have  acute
arthritis-like  signs  and  symptoms  from  the  rubella  component  of  the  vaccine)  (135).
When joint symptoms occur, they generally persist for 1 day--3 weeks and rarely recur
(135).  Chronic  joint  symptoms  attributable  to  the  rubella  component  of  the  MMR
vaccine are very rarely reported, if they occur at all. As a result of the theoretic risk to
the fetus, women should be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 28 days after
receipt  of  a  rubella-containing  vaccine  (243).  However,  receipt  of  rubella-containing
vaccine during pregnancy should not be a reason to consider termination of pregnancy;
data  from  18  years  of  following  to  term  321  known  rubella-susceptible  women  who
were  vaccinated  within  3  months  before  or  3  months  after  conception  indicated  that
none  of  the  324  infants  born  to  these  mothers  had  malformations  compatible  with
congenital  rubella  syndrome,  but  five  had  evidence  of  subclinical  rubella  infection
(244).  The  estimated  risk  for  serious  malformations  to  fetuses  attributable  to  the
mother receiving RA 27/3 vaccine is considered to range from zero to 1.6% (135,244).
Evidence does not support a link between MMR vaccination and any of the following:
hearing  loss,  retinopathy,  optic  neuritis,  Guillain-Barré  Syndrome,  type  1  diabetes,
Crohn's  disease,  or  autism  (135,163--169).  A  woman  can  excrete  the  rubella  vaccine
virus  in  breast  milk  and  transmit  the  virus  to  her  infant,  but  the  infection  remains
asymptomatic (135). Otherwise, persons who receive MMR or its component vaccines
do not transmit measles, rubella, or mumps vaccine viruses (135). No transmission of
MMR  vaccine  virus  in  a  health-care  setting  has  been  documented.  Vaccination  All
persons  who  work  in  health-care  facilities  should  have  presumptive  evidence  of
immunity to rubella. Adequate rubella vaccination for HCP consists of 1 dose of MMR
vaccine.  However,  because  of  the  2-dose  vaccination  requirements  for  measles  and
mumps,  the  use  of  the  combined  MMR  vaccine  will  result  in  the  majority  of  HCP
receiving  2  doses  of  rubella-containing  vaccine,  which  should  provide  an  additional
safeguard  against  primary  rubella  vaccine  failure.  Recently  vaccinated  HCP  do  not
require  any  restriction  in  their  work  activities.  Presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to
rubella  for  persons  who  work  in  health-care  facilities  includes  any  of  the  following:  
Prevaccination  Testing   For  HCP  who  do  not  have  adequate  presumptive  evidence  of
rubella  immunity,  prevaccination  antibody  screening  before  MMR  vaccination  is  not
necessary unless the medical facility considers it cost effective (135). For HCP who have
1  documented  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  or  other  acceptable  evidence  of  immunity  to
rubella,  serologic  testing  for  immunity  is  not  recommended.  In  the  event  that  a
health-care provider who has at least 1 documented dose of rubella-containing vaccine
is  tested  serologically  and  determined  to  have  negative  or  equivocal  rubella  titer
results,  receipt  of  an  additional  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  for  prevention  of  rubella  is  not
recommended. Such persons should be considered immune to rubella. However, if the
provider requires a second dose of measles or mumps vaccine, then a second dose of
MMR should be administered. Documented age-appropriate vaccination supersedes the
results of subsequent serologic testing. Likewise, during outbreaks of rubella, serologic
screening  before  vaccination  is  not  recommended  because  rapid  vaccination  is
necessary  to  halt  disease  transmission.  Controlling  Rubella  Outbreaks  To  prevent
transmission  of  rubella  in  health-care  settings,  patients  suspected  to  have  rubella
should  be  placed  in  private  rooms.  In  addition  to  standard  precautions,  droplet
precautions should be followed until 7 days after onset of symptoms. Room doors can
remain open, and special ventilation is not required. Any exposed HCP who do not have
adequate  presumptive  evidence  of  rubella  immunity  should  be  excluded  from  duty
beginning  7  days  after  exposure  to  rubella  and  continuing  through  either  1)  23  days
after the most recent exposure or 2) 7 days after rash appears if the provider develops
rubella (213--215). Exposed HCP who do not have adequate presumptive evidence of
immunity who are vaccinated postexposure should be excluded from duty for 23 days
after the most recent exposure to rubella because no evidence exists that postexposure
vaccination is effective in preventing rubella infection (244). Neither rubella-containing
vaccine  (244)  nor  immune  globulin  (IG)  (211,244)  is  effective  for  postexposure
prophylaxis  of  rubella.  Although  intramuscular  administration  of  20  mL  of  immune
globulin within 72 hours of rubella exposure might reduce the risk for rubella, it will not
eliminate the risk (135,245); infants with congenital rubella have been born to women
who  received  IG  shortly  after  exposure  (213).  In  addition,  administration  of  IG  after
exposure  to  rubella  might  modify  or  suppress  symptoms  and  create  an  unwarranted
sense  of  security  with  respect  to  transmission.  If  exposure  to  rubella  does  not  cause
infection, postexposure vaccination with MMR vaccine should induce protection against
subsequent infection of rubella, as well as measles and mumps. If the exposure results
in  infection,  no  evidence  indicates  that  administration  of  MMR  vaccine  during  the
presymptomatic or prodromal stage of illness increases the risk for vaccine-associated
adverse events (213). Epidemiology and Risk Factors  Pertussis is a highly contagious
bacterial  infection.  Secondary  attack  rates  among  susceptible  household  contacts
exceed  80%  (246,247).  Transmission  occurs  by  direct  contact  with  respiratory
secretions or large aerosolized droplets from the respiratory tract of infected persons.
The incubation period is generally 7--10 days but can be as long as 21 days. The period
of  communicability  starts  with  the  onset  of  the  catarrhal  stage  and  extends  into  the
paroxysmal stage. Symptoms of early pertussis (catarrhal phase) are indistinguishable
from  other  upper  respiratory  infections.  Vaccinated  adolescents  and  adults,  whose
immunity from childhood vaccinations wanes 5--10 years after the most recent dose of
vaccine (usually administered at age 4--6 years), are an important source of pertussis
infection for susceptible infants. Infants too young to be vaccinated are at greatest risk
for  severe  pertussis,  including  hospitalization  and  death.  The  disease  can  be
transmitted from adults to close contacts, especially unvaccinated children. Vaccination
coverage among infants and children for diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular
pertussis  (DTaP)  vaccine  remains  high.  In  2010,  coverage  for  children  aged  19--35
months  who  have  received  ≥4  doses  of  DTaP/diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and
pertussis  vaccine  (DTP)/diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  vaccine  (DT)  was  84%  (21).
Among children entering kindergarten for the 2009--2010 school year, DTaP coverage
was 93% (148). Vaccination coverage for tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and
acellular  pertussis  (Tdap)  vaccine  was  68.7%  among  adolescents  in  2010  and  <7%
among adults in 2009 (22,248). Tdap vaccination coverage among HCP was 17.0% in
2009 (248). Disease in Health-Care Settings and Impact on Health-Care Personnel and
Patients  In  hospital  settings,  transmission  of  pertussis  has  occurred  from  hospital
visitors  to  patients,  from  HCP  to  patients,  and  from  patients  to  HCP  (249--252).
Although of limited size (range: 2--17 patients and 5--13 staff), documented outbreaks
were costly and disruptive. In each outbreak, HCP were evaluated for cough illness and
required  diagnostic  testing,  prophylactic  antibiotics,  and  exclusion  from  work.  During
outbreaks that occur in hospitals, the risk for contracting pertussis among patients or
staff is often difficult to quantify because exposure is not well defined. Serologic studies
conducted  among  hospital  staff  indicate  that  exposure  to  pertussis  is  much  more
frequent  than  suggested  by  attack  rates  of  clinical  disease  (246,249--254).  In  one
outbreak,  seroprevalence  of  pertussis  agglutinating  antibodies  among  HCP  correlated
with the degree of patient contact and was highest among pediatric house staff (82%)
and  ward  nurses  (71%)  and  lowest  among  nurses  with  administrative  responsibilities
(35%) (251). A model to estimate the cost of vaccinating HCP and the net return from
preventing  nosocomial  pertussis  was  constructed  using  probabilistic  methods  and  a
hypothetical cohort of 1,000 HCP with direct patient contact followed for 10 years (255).
Baseline  assumptions,  determined  from  data  in  the  literature,  included  incidence  of
pertussis in HCP, ratio of identified exposures per HCP case, symptomatic percentage of
seroconfirmed  pertussis  infections  in  HCP,  cost  of  infection-control  measures  per
exposed  person,  vaccine  efficacy,  vaccine  coverage,  employment  turnover  rate,
adverse  events,  and  cost  of  vaccine  (255).  In  a  10-year  period,  the  cost  of  infection
control  would  be  $388,000  without  Tdap  vaccination  of  HCP  compared  with  $69,000
with such a program (255). Introduction of a vaccination program would result in a net
savings as high as $535,000 and a benefit-cost ratio of 2.38 (i.e., for every dollar spent
on the vaccination program, the hospital would save $2.38 on control measures) (255).
Vaccine  Effectiveness,  Duration  of  Immunity,  and  Vaccine  Safety  A  prelicensure
immunogenicity  and  safety  study  in  adolescents  and  adults  of  a  vaccine  containing
acellular  pertussis  estimated  vaccine  efficacy  to  be  92%  (256).  Recent  postlicensure
studies of Tdap demonstrate vaccine effectiveness at 78% and 66% (257,258). Duration
of immunity from vaccination has yet to be evaluated. Data from pre- and postlicensure
studies support the safety of Tdap in adolescents and adults (259--263). Since the 2005
Tdap  recommendations  for  HCP,  one  study  tried  to  determine  if  postexposure
prophylaxis following pertussis exposure was necessary for Tdap-vaccinated HCP (264).
During  the  study  period,  116  exposures  occurred  among  94  HCP.  Pertussis  infection
occurred in 2% of those who received postexposure prophylaxis compared with 10% of
those  who  did  not,  suggesting  a  possible  benefit  of  postexposure  prophylaxis  among
Tdap-vaccinated HCP (264). Because Tdap coverage is suboptimal among HCP, and the
duration of protection afforded by Tdap is unknown, vaccination status does not change
the  approach  to  evaluate  the  need  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  in  exposed  HCP.
Postexposure prophylaxis is necessary for HCP in contact with persons at risk for severe
disease. Other HCP either should receive postexposure prophylaxis or be monitored for
21  days  after  pertussis  exposure  and  treated  at  the  onset  of  signs  and  symptoms  of
pertussis.  Recommended  postexposure  prophylaxis  antibiotics  for  HCP  exposed  to
pertussis include azithromycin, clarithroymycin, or erythromycin. HCP are not at greater
risk  for  diphtheria  or  tetanus  than  the  general  population.  Vaccination  Regardless  of
age,  HCP  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  as  soon  as  feasible  if  they  have  not
previously  received  Tdap  and  regardless  of  the  time  since  their  most  recent  Td
vaccination.  Vaccinating  HCP  with  Tdap  will  protect  them  against  pertussis  and  is
expected  to  reduce  transmission  to  patients,  other  HCP,  household  members,  and
persons in the community. Tdap is not licensed for multiple administrations; therefore,
after  receipt  of  Tdap,  HCP  should  receive  Td  for  future  booster  vaccination  against
tetanus and diphtheria. Hospitals and ambulatory-care facilities should provide Tdap for
HCP  and  use  approaches  that  maximize  vaccination  rates  (e.g.,  education  about  the
benefits  of  vaccination,  convenient  access,  and  the  provision  of  Tdap  at  no  charge).
Prevaccination
 Testing
 Prevaccination
 serologic
 testing
 is
 not
 recommended.
Demonstrating Immunity Immunity cannot be demonstrated through serologic testing
because serologic correlates of protection are not well established. Controlling Pertussis
Outbreaks  in  Health-Care  Settings  Prevention  of  pertussis  transmission  in  health-care
settings  involves  diagnosis  and  early  treatment  of  clinical  cases,  droplet  isolation  of
infectious patients who are hospitalized, exclusion from work of HCP who are infectious,
and  postexposure  prophylaxis.  Early  diagnosis  of  pertussis,  before  secondary
transmission occurs, is difficult because the disease is highly communicable during the
catarrhal stage, when symptoms are still nonspecific. Pertussis should be considered in
the  differential  diagnoses  for  any  patient  with  an  acute  cough  illness  with  severe  or
prolonged  paroxysmal  cough,  particularly  if  characterized  by  posttussive  vomiting,
whoop,  or  apnea.  Nasopharyngeal  specimens  should  be  taken,  if  possible,  from  the
posterior  nasopharynx  with  a  calcium  alginate  or  Dacron  swab  for  cultures  and/or
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Health-care facilities should maximize efforts to
prevent transmission of Bordetella pertussis. Precautions to prevent respiratory droplet
transmission  or  spread  by  close  or  direct  contact  should  be  employed  in  the  care  of
patients  admitted  to  hospital  with  suspected  or  confirmed  pertussis  (265).  These
precautions  should  remain  in  effect  until  patients  are  improved  clinically  and  have
completed at least 5 days of appropriate antimicrobial therapy. HCP in whom symptoms
(i.e., unexplained rhinitis or acute cough) develop after known pertussis exposure might
be at risk for transmitting pertussis and should be excluded from work until 5 days after
the start of appropriate therapy (3). Data on the need for postexposure prophylaxis in
Tdap-vaccinated HCP are inconclusive (264). Certain vaccinated HCP are still at risk for
B.  pertussis.  Tdap  might  not  preclude  the  need  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.
Postexposure  antimicrobial  prophylaxis  is  recommended  for  all  HCP  who  have
unprotected exposure to pertussis and are likely to expose a patient at risk for severe
pertussis (e.g., hospitalized neonates and pregnant women). Other HCP should either
receive postexposure antimicrobial prophylaxis or be monitored daily for 21 days after
pertussis  exposure  and  treated  at  the  onset  of  signs  and  symptoms  of  pertussis.
Epidemiology and Risk Factors Varicella is a highly infectious disease caused by primary
infection with varicella-zoster virus (VZV). VZV is transmitted from person to person by
direct contact, inhalation of aerosols from vesicular fluid of skin lesions of varicella or
herpes  zoster  (HZ),  a  localized,  generally  painful  vesicular  rash  commonly  called
shingles, or infected respiratory tract secretions that also might be aerosolized (266).
The  average  incubation  period  is  14--16  days  after  exposure  to  rash  (range:  10--21
days). Infected persons are contagious an estimated 1--2 days before rash onset until
all  lesions  are  crusted,  typically  4--7  days  after  rash  onset  (266).  Varicella  secondary
attack  rates  can  reach  90%  among  susceptible  contacts.  Typically,  primary  infection
with VZV results in lifetime immunity. VZV remains dormant in sensory-nerve ganglia
and  can  reactivate  at  a  later  time,  causing  HZ.  Before  the  U.S.  childhood  varicella
vaccination program began in 1995, approximately 90% of varicella disease occurred
among  children  aged  <15  years  (266).  During  1997--2009,  national  varicella  vaccine
coverage among children aged 19--35 months increased from 27% to 90%, leading to
dramatic  declines  of  >85%  in  varicella  incidence,  hospitalizations,  and  deaths
(267--269).  The  decline  in  disease  incidence  was  greatest  among  children  for  whom
vaccination  was  recommended;  however,  declines  occurred  in  every  age  group
including  infants  too  young  to  be  vaccinated  and  adults,  indicating  reduced
communitywide transmission of VZV. Current incidence of varicella among adults is low
(<0.1/1,000 population), and adult cases represent <10% of all reported varicella cases
(270). National seroprevalence data from 1999--2004 demonstrated that, in the early
vaccine era,  adults  continued  to  have high  immunity  to  varicella  (271).  In  this  study,
98%  of  persons  aged  20--49  years  had  VZV-specific  IgG  antibodies.  However,  with
declining likelihood of exposure to VZV, children and adolescents who did not receive 2
doses of varicella vaccine could remain susceptible to VZV infection as they age into
adulthood, when varicella can be more severe. The clinical presentation of varicella has
changed since the implementation of the varicella vaccination program, with more than
half of varicella cases reported in 2008 occurring among persons who were vaccinated
previously,  the  majority  of  them  children.  Varicella  disease  in  vaccinated  children
(breakthrough  varicella)  usually  has  a  modified  or  atypical  presentation;  the  rash  is
typically mild, with <50 lesions that are more likely to be predominantly maculopapular
than  vesicular  (266).  Fever  is  less  common,  and  the  duration  of  illness  is  shorter.
Nevertheless, breakthrough varicella is infectious. One study indicated that vaccinated
children  with  varicella  with  <50  lesions  were  only  one  third  as  infectious  as
unvaccinated  children  whereas  those  with  ≥50  lesions  were  as  infectious  as
unvaccinated children (272). Because the majority of adults are immune and few need
vaccination, fewer breakthrough cases have been reported among adults than among
children, and breakthrough varicella in adults has tended to be milder than varicella in
unvaccinated adults (273,274). The epidemiology of varicella in tropical and subtropical
regions differs from that in the United States. In these regions, a higher proportion of
VZV infections are acquired later in life. Persons emigrating from these regions might
be  more  likely  to  be  susceptible  to  varicella  compared  to  U.S.-born  persons  and,
therefore,  are  at  a  higher  risk  for  developing  varicella  if  unvaccinated  and  exposed
(275,276).  Disease  in  Health-Care  Settings  and  Impact  on  Health-Care  Personnel  and
Patients  Although  relatively  rare  in  the  United  States  since  introduction  of  varicella
vaccine, nosocomial transmission of VZV is well recognized and can be life-threatening
to  certain  patients  (277--289).  In  addition  to  hospital  settings,  nosocomial  VZV
transmission  has  been  reported  in  long-term--care  facilities  and  a  hospital-associated
residential  facility  (290,291).  Sources  of  nosocomial  exposure  that  have  resulted  in
transmission  include  patients,  HCP,  and  visitors  with  either  varicella  or  HZ.  Both
localized  and  disseminated  HZ  in  immunocompetent  as  well  as  immunocompromised
patients have been identified as sources of nosocomial transmission of VZV. Localized
HZ has been demonstrated to be much less infectious than varicella; disseminated HZ
is considered to be as infectious as varicella (266). Nosocomial transmission has been
attributed  to  delays  in  the  diagnosis  or  reporting  of  varicella  or  HZ  and  in  failures  to
implement  control  measures  promptly.  In  hospitals  and  other  health-care  settings,
airborne transmission of VZV from patients with either varicella or HZ has resulted in
varicella  in  HCP  and  patients  who  had  no  direct  contact  with  the  index  case-patient
(284--288,291). Although all susceptible patients in health-care settings are at risk for
severe  varicella  disease  with  complications,  certain  patients  without  evidence  of
immunity are at increased risk: pregnant women, premature infants born to susceptible
mothers, infants born at <28 weeks' gestation or who weigh ≤1,000 grams regardless
of  maternal  immune  status,  and  immunocompromised  persons  of  all  ages  (including
persons who are undergoing immunosuppressive therapy, have malignant disease, or
are  immunodeficient).  VZV  exposures  among  patients  and  HCP  can  be  disruptive  to
patient  care,  time-consuming,  and  costly  even  when  they  do  not  result  in  VZV
transmission  (281,282,292).  Studies  of  VZV  exposure  in  health-care  settings  have
documented  that  a  single  provider  with  unrecognized  varicella  can  result  in  the
exposure  of  >30  patients  and  >30  employees  (292).  Identification  of  susceptible
patients  and  staff,  medical  management  of  susceptible  exposed  patients  at  risk  for
complications  of  varicella,  and  furloughing  of  susceptible  exposed  HCP  are
time-consuming  and  costly  (281,282).  With  the  overall  reduction  in  varicella  disease
attributable  to  the  success  of  the  vaccination  program,  the  risk  for  exposure  to  VZV
from varicella cases in health-care settings is likely declining. In addition, an increasing
proportion  of  varicella  cases  occur  in  vaccinated  persons  who  are  less  contagious.
Diagnosis of varicella has become increasingly challenging as a growing proportion of
cases occur in vaccinated persons in whom disease is mild, and HCP encounter patients
with  varicella  less  frequently.  Although  not  currently  routinely  recommended  for  the
diagnosis and management of varicella, laboratory testing of suspected varicella cases
is likely to become increasingly useful in health-care settings, especially as the positive
predictive  value  of  clinical  diagnosis  declines.  Vaccine  Effectiveness,  Duration  of
Immunity, and Vaccine Safety Vaccine Effectiveness Formal studies to evaluate vaccine
efficacy  or  effectiveness  have  not  been  performed  among  adults.  Studies  of  varicella
vaccine effectiveness performed among children indicated good performance of 1 dose
for  prevention  of  all  varicella  (80%--85%)  and  >95%  effectiveness  for  prevention  of
moderate  and  severe  disease  (266,293).  Studies  have  indicated  that  a  second  dose
among  children  produces  an  improved  humoral  and  cellular  immune  response  that
correlates  with  improved  protection  against  disease  (266,294).  Varicella  vaccine
effectiveness is expected to be lower in adults than in children. Adolescents and adults
require 2 doses to achieve seroconversion rates similar to those seen in children after 1
dose (266). A study of adults who received 2 doses of varicella vaccine 4 or 8 weeks
apart and were exposed subsequently to varicella in the household estimated an 80%
reduction  in  the  expected  number  of  cases  (295).  Duration  of  Immunity  Serologic
correlates of protection against varicella using commercially available assays have not
been  established  for  adults  (266).  In  clinical  studies,  detectable  antibody  levels  have
persisted for at least 5 years in 97% of adolescents and adults who were administered 2
doses  of  varicella  vaccine  4--8  weeks  apart,  but  boosts  in  antibody  levels  were
observed  following  exposures  to  varicella,  which  could  account  for  the  long-term
persistence  of  antibodies  after  vaccination  in  these  studies  (295).  Studies  have
demonstrated  that  whereas  25%--31%  of  adult  vaccine  recipients  who  seroconverted
lost  detectable  antibodies  1--11  years  after  vaccination  (273,296),  vaccine-induced
VZV-specific  T-cell  proliferation  (marker  for  cell-mediated  immunity  [CMI])  was
maintained in 94% of adults 1 and 5 years postvaccination (297). Disease was mild in
vaccinated  persons  who  developed  varicella  after  exposure  to  VZV,  even  among
vaccinees who did not seroconvert or who lost detectable antibody (273,274). Severity
of illness and attack rates among vaccinated adults did not increase over time. These
studies suggest that VZV-specific CMI affords protection to vaccinated adults, even in
the absence of detectable antibody response. Vaccine Safety The varicella vaccine has
an excellent safety profile. In clinical trials, the most common adverse events among
adolescents  and  adults  were  injection-site  complaints  (24.4%  after  the  first  dose  and
32.5% after the second dose) (266,295). Varicella-like rash at the injection site occurred
in  3%  of  vaccine  recipients  after  the  first  dose  and  in  1%  after  the  second.  A
nonlocalized rash occurred in 5.5% of vaccine recipients after the first dose and in 0.9%
after the second, with a median number of lesions of five, at a peak of 7--21 and 0--23
days postvaccination, respectively (295). Data on serious adverse events among adults
after  varicella  vaccination  are  limited,  but  the  proportion  of  serious  adverse  events
among  all  adverse  events  reported  to  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Events  Reporting  System
during 1995--2005 was low (5%) among both children and adults (298). Serious adverse
events reported among children included pneumonia, hepatitis, HZ (some hospitalized),
meningitis  with  HZ,  ataxia,  encephalitis,  thrombocytopenic  purpura.  Not  all  adverse
events  reported  after  varicella  vaccination  have  been  laboratory  confirmed  to  be
attributable to the vaccine strain VZV (266,298). Risk for transmission of vaccine virus
was assessed in placebo recipients who were siblings of vaccinated children and among
healthy  siblings  of  vaccinated  leukemic  children  (266).  The  findings  suggest  that
transmission of varicella vaccine virus from healthy persons to susceptible contacts is
very  rare.  The  risk  might  be  increased  in  vaccinees  in  whom  a  varicella-like  rash
develops  after  vaccination.  However,  this  risk  is  also  low.  The  benefits  of  vaccinating
HCP  without  evidence  of  immunity  outweigh  this  extremely  low  potential  risk.  Since
implementation  of  the  varicella  vaccine  program,  transmission  of  vaccine  virus  has
been  documented  from  eight  persons  (all  of  whom  had  a  rash  after  vaccination)
resulting  in  nine  secondary  infections  among  household  and  long-term--care  facility
contacts  (299).  No  transmission  has  been  documented  from  vaccinated  HCP.
Vaccination  Health-care  institutions  should  ensure  that  all  HCP  have  evidence  of
immunity to varicella. This information should be documented and readily available at
the work location. HCP without evidence of immunity to varicella should receive 2 doses
of  varicella  vaccine  administered  4--8  weeks  apart.  If  >8  weeks  elapse  after  the  first
dose, the second dose may be administered without restarting the schedule. Recently
vaccinated HCP do not require any restriction in their work activities; however, HCP who
develop  a  vaccine-related  rash  after  vaccination  should  avoid  contact  with  persons
without  evidence  of  immunity  to  varicella  who  are  at  risk  for  severe  disease  and
complications until all lesions resolve (i.e., are crusted over) or, if they develop lesions
that  do  not  crust  (macules  and  papules  only),  until  no  new  lesions  appear  within  a
24-hour  period.  Evidence  of  immunity  for  HCP  includes  any  of  the  following  (266):  In
health-care  settings,  serologic  screening  before  vaccination  of  personnel  without
evidence  of  immunity  is  likely  to  be  cost  effective.  Key  factors  determining
cost-effectiveness include sensitivity and specificity of serologic tests, the nosocomial
transmission  rate,  seroprevalence  of  VZV  antibody  in  the  personnel  population,  and
policies  for  managing  vaccine  recipients  developing  postvaccination  rash  or  who  are
exposed  subsequently  to  VZV.  Institutions  may  elect  to  test  all  unvaccinated  HCP,
regardless  of  disease  history,  because  a  small  proportion  of  persons  with  a  positive
history  of  disease  might  be  susceptible.  For  the  purpose  of  screening  HCP,  a  less
sensitive  and  more  specific  commercial  ELISA  should  be  considered.  The  latex
agglutination  test  can  produce  false-positive  results,  and  HCP  who  remained
unvaccinated  because  of  false  test  results  subsequently  contracted  varicella  (289).
Routine  testing  for  varicella  immunity  after  2  doses  of  vaccine  is  not  recommended.
Available  commercial  assays  are  not  sensitive  enough  to  detect  antibody  after
vaccination  in  all  instances.  Sensitive  tests  that  are  not  generally  available  have
indicated  that  92%--99%  of  adults  develop  antibodies  after  the  second  dose  (266).
Seroconversion does not always result in full protection against disease and, given the
role  of  CMI  for  providing  long-term  protection,  absence  of  antibodies  does  not
necessarily  mean  susceptibility.  Documented  receipt  of  2  doses  of  varicella  vaccine
supersedes  results  of  subsequent  serologic  testing.  Health-care  institutions  should
establish  protocols  and  recommendations  for  screening  and  vaccinating  HCP  and  for
management of HCP after exposures in the work place. Institutions also should consider
precautions for HCP in whom rash occurs after vaccination, although they should also
consider the possibility of wild-type disease in HCP with recent exposure to varicella or
HZ.  A vaccine to prevent HZ is available and recommended for all persons aged ≥60
years without contraindications to vaccination. HZ vaccine is not indicated for HCP for
the prevention of nosocomial transmission, but HCP aged ≥60 years may receive the
vaccine on the basis of the general recommendation for HZ vaccination, to reduce their
individual  risk  for  HZ.  Varicella  Control  Strategies   Appropriate  measures  should  be
implemented to manage cases and control outbreaks (300). Patient Care Only HCP with
evidence  of  immunity  to  varicella  should  care  for  patients  who  have  confirmed  or
suspected  varicella  or  HZ.  Airborne  precautions  (i.e.,  negative  air-flow  rooms)  and
contact precautions should be employed for all patients with varicella or disseminated
HZ and for immunocompromised patients with localized HZ until disseminated infection
is ruled out. These precautions should be kept in place until lesions are dry and crusted.
If negative air-flow rooms are not available, patients should be isolated in closed rooms
and should not have contact with persons without evidence of immunity to varicella. For
immunocompetent  persons  with  localized  HZ,  standard  precautions  and  complete
covering  of  the  lesions  are  recommended.  Postexposure  Management  of  HCP  and
Patients Exposure to VZV is defined as close contact with an infectious person, such as
close  indoor  contact  (e.g.,  in  the  same  room)  or  face-to-face  contact.  Experts  differ
regarding the duration of contact; some suggest 5 minutes, and others up to 1 hour; all
agree that it does not include transitory contact (301). All exposed, susceptible patients
and HCP should be identified using the criteria for evidence of immunity. An additional
criterion of evidence of immunity only for patients who are not immunocompromised or
pregnant  is  birth  in  the  United  States  before  1980.  Postexposure  prophylaxis  with
vaccination  or  varicella-zoster  immunoglobulin,  depending  on  immune  status,  of
exposed HCP and patients without evidence of immunity is recommended (266). HCP
who  have  received  2  doses  of  vaccine  and  who  are  exposed  to  VZV  (varicella,
disseminated HZ, and uncovered lesions of a localized HZ) should be monitored daily
during  days  8--21  after  exposure  for  fever,  skin  lesions,  and  systemic  symptoms
suggestive of varicella. HCP can be monitored directly by occupational health program
or  infection-control  practitioners  or  instructed  to  report  fever,  headache,  or  other
constitutional  symptoms  and  any  atypical  skin  lesions  immediately.  HCP  should  be
excluded from a work facility immediately if symptoms occur. HCP who have received 1
dose  of  vaccine  and  who  are  exposed  to  VZV  (varicella,  disseminated  HZ,  and
uncovered
 lesions
 of
 a
 localized
 HZ)
 (in
 the
 community
 or
 health-care
setting/workplace) should receive the second dose within 3--5 days after exposure to
rash  (provided  4  weeks  have  elapsed  after  the  first  dose).  After  vaccination,
management is similar to that of 2-dose vaccine recipients. Those who did not receive a
second  dose  or  who  received  the  second  dose  >5  days  after  exposure  should  be
excluded  from  work  for  8--21  days  after  exposure.  Unvaccinated  HCP  who  have  no
other evidence of immunity who are exposed to VZV (varicella, disseminated HZ, and
uncovered  lesions  of  a  localized  HZ)  are  potentially  infective  from  days  8--21  after
exposure  and  should  be  furloughed  during  this  period.  They  should  receive
postexposure vaccination as soon as possible. Vaccination within 3--5 days of exposure
to  rash  might  modify  the  disease  if  infection  occurred.  Vaccination  >5  days
postexposure  is  still  indicated  because  it  induces  protection  against  subsequent
exposures (if the current exposure did not cause infection). For HCP at risk for severe
disease  for  whom  varicella  vaccination  is  contraindicated  (e.g.,  pregnant  or
immunocomprosed
 HCP),
 varicella-zoster
 immune
 globulin
 after
 exposure
 is
recommended.  The  varicella-zoster  immune  globulin  product  currently  used  in  the
United States, VariZIG (Cangene Corporation, Winnipeg, Canada), is available under an
Investigational New Drug Application Expanded Access protocol; a sample release form
is
 available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/SafetyAvailability/UCM176031.p
df.  Varicella-zoster  immune  globulin  might  prolong  the  incubation  period  by  a  week,
thus extending the time during which personnel should not work from 21 to 28 days. In
case of an outbreak, HCP without evidence of immunity who have contraindications to
vaccination should be excluded from the outbreak setting through 21 days after rash
onset of the last identified case-patient because of the risk for severe disease in these
groups.  If  the  VZV  exposure  was  to  localized  HZ  with  covered  lesions,  no  work
restrictions are needed if the exposed HCP had previously received at least 1 dose of
vaccine or received the first dose within 3--5 days postexposure. A second dose should
be administered at the appropriate interval. HCP should be monitored daily during days
8--21  after  exposure  for  fever,  skin  lesions,  and  systemic  symptoms  suggestive  of
varicella and excluded from a work facility if symptoms occur. If at least 1 dose was not
received,  restriction  from  patient  contact  is  recommended.  Health-care  facilities  and
other organizations should consider including in their vaccination programs vaccines to
prevent  meningococcal  disease,  typhoid  fever,  and  polio  for  HCP  who  have  certain
health  conditions  or  who  work  in  laboratories  or  regions  outside  the  United  States
where  the  risk  for  work-related  exposure  exists.  Epidemiology  and  Risk  Factors
Meningococcal  disease  is  rare  among  adults  in  the  United  States  and  incidence  has
decreased  to  historic  lows;  during  1998--2007  the  average  annual  incidence  of
meningococcal  disease  was  0.28  (range:  0.26--0.31)  cases  per  100,000  population
among  persons  aged  25--64  years  (302).  Routine  vaccination  with  meningococcal
conjugate vaccine is recommended by ACIP for adolescents aged 11--18 years, with the
primary  dose  at  age  11--12  years  and  the  booster  dose  at  age  16  years.  In  2010,
coverage with meningococcal conjugate vaccine among persons aged 13--17 years was
62.7%  (22).  Nosocomial  transmission  of  Neisseria  meningitidis  is  rare,  but  HCP  have
become  infected  after  direct  contact  with  respiratory  secretions  of  infected  persons
(e.g., managing of an airway during resuscitation) and in a laboratory setting. HCP can
decrease  the  risk  for  infection  by  adhering  to  precautions  to  prevent  exposure  to
respiratory droplets (303,304) and by taking antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis if exposed
directly  to  respiratory  secretions.  Vaccine  Effectiveness,  Duration  of  Immunity,  and
Vaccine  Safety  Two  quadrivalent  (A,  C,  W-135,  Y)  conjugate  meningococcal  vaccines
(MCV4) are licensed for persons aged through 55 years (305,306). Both protect against
two  of  the  three  serogroups  that  cause  the  majority  of  meningococcal  disease  in  the
United  States  and  against  75%  of  disease  among  adults.  Available  data  indicate  that
the  majority  of  persons  do  not  have  enough  circulating  functional  antibody  to  be
protected  ≥5  years  after  a  single  dose  of  MCV4.  Both  vaccines  had  similar  safety
profiles  in  clinical  trials.  Quadrivalent  (A,  C,  W-135,  Y)  meningococcal  polysaccharide
vaccine  (MPSV4)  is  available  for  use  in  persons  aged  >55  years.  No  vaccine  for
serogroup B meningococcal disease is licensed in the United States.  Vaccination MCV4
is  not  recommended  routinely  for  all  HCP.  HCP  Recommended  to  Receive  Vaccine  to
Prevent Meningococcal Disease A 2-dose vaccine series is recommended for HCP with
known  asplenia  or  persistent  complement  component  deficiencies,  because  these
conditions  increase  the  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.  HCP  traveling  to  countries  in
which meningococcal disease is hyperendemic or epidemic also are at increased risk for
infection  and  should  receive  vaccine.  Those  with  known  asplenia  or  persistent
complement component deficiencies should receive a 2-dose vaccine series. All other
HCP traveling to work to high-risk areas should receive a single dose of MCV4 before
travel if they have never received it or if they received it >5 years previously. Clinical
microbiologists and research microbiologists who might be exposed routinely to isolates
of  N.  meningitides  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  MCV4  and  receive  a  booster  dose
every 5 years if they remain at increased risk. Health-care personnel aged >55 years
who have any of the above risk factors for meningococcal disease should be vaccinated
with  MPSV4  (305).  HCP  Who  May  Elect  to  Receive  Vaccine  to  Prevent  Meningococcal
Disease  HCP  with  known  HIV  infection  are  likely  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal
disease and may elect vaccination. If these HCP are vaccinated, they should receive a
2-dose vaccine series (307). Booster Doses HCP who receive the 2-dose MCV4 vaccine
series and/or remain in a group at increased risk should receive a booster dose every 5
years  (306).  Postexposure  Management  of  Exposed  HCP  Postexposure  prophylaxis  is
advised  for  all  persons  who  have  had  intensive,  unprotected  contact  (i.e.,  without
wearing  a  mask)  with  infected  patients  (e.g.,  via  mouth-to-mouth  resuscitation,
endotracheal intubation, or endotracheal tube management), including HCP who have
been vaccinated with either the conjugate or polysaccharide vaccine (3). Antimicrobial
prophylaxis can eradicate carriage of N. meningitidis and prevent infections in persons
who  have  unprotected  exposure  to  patients  with  meningococcal  infections  (305).
Rifampin,  ciprofloxacin,  and  ceftriaxone  are  effective  in  eradicating  nasopharyngeal
carriage of N. meningitidis. In areas of the United States where ciprofloxacin-resistant
strains  of  N.  meningitidis  have  been  detected  (as  of  August  30,  2011,  only  parts  of
Minnesota  and  North  Dakota),  ciprofloxacin  should  not  be  used  for  chemoprophylaxis
(308).  Azithromycin  can  be  used  as  an  alternative.  Ceftriaxone  can  be  used  during
pregnancy.  Postexposure  prophylaxis  should  be  administered  within  24  hours  of
exposure  when  feasible;  postexposure  prophylaxis  administered  >14  days  after
exposure  is  of  limited  or  no  value  (305).  HCP  not  otherwise  indicated  for  vaccination
may be recommended to be vaccinated with meningococcal vaccine in the setting of a
community or institutional outbreak of meningococcal disease caused by a serogroup
contained in the vaccine. Epidemiology and Risk Factors The incidence of typhoid fever
declined steadily in the United States during 1900--1960 and has since remained low.
During  1999--2006,  on  average,  237  cases  were  reported  annually  to  the  National
Typhoid and Paratyphoid Fever Surveillance System (309). The median age of patients
was  22  years  and  54%  were  male;  79%  reported  foreign  travel  during  the  30  days
before onset of symptoms. Among international travelers, the risk for Salmonella Typhi
infection appears to be highest for those who visit friends and relatives in countries in
which typhoid fever is endemic and for those who visit (even for a short time) the most
highly  endemic  areas  (e.g.,  the  Indian  subcontinent)  (310).  Increasing  resistance  to
fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin, which are used to treat multidrug-resistant. S.
Typhi, has been seen particularly among travelers to south and southeast Asia (311).
Isolates with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin (DCS) do not qualify as resistant
according  to  current  Clinical  and  Laboratory  Standards  Institute  criteria  but  are
associated  with  poorer  clinical  outcomes  (311,312).  Resistance  to  nalidixic  acid,  a
quinolone, is a marker for DCS and increased from 19% in 1999 to 59% in 2008 (313).
Nine  isolates  resistant  to  ciprofloxacin  also  were  seen  during  this  time  period  (313).
Although  overall  S.  Typhi  infections  have  declined  in  the  United  States,  increased
incidence  and  antimicrobial  resistance  including  resistance  to  fluoroquinolones  have
been seen for paratyphoid fever caused by Paratyphi A (314). No vaccines that protect
against Paratyphi A infection are available. Transmission and Exposure in Health-Care
Settings  During  1985--1994,  seven  cases  of  laboratory-acquired  typhoid  fever  were
reported  among  persons  working  in  microbiology  laboratories,  only  one  of  whom  had
been vaccinated (315). Additionally, S. Typhi might be transmitted nosocomially via the
hands  of  infected  persons  (315).  Vaccine  Effectiveness,  Duration  of  Immunity,  and
Vaccine  Safety  Two  typhoid  vaccines  are  distributed  in  the  United  States:  oral
live-attenuated Ty21a vaccine (one enteric-coated capsule taken on alternate days for
a total of four capsules) and the capsular polysaccharide parenteral vaccine (1 0.5 mL
intramuscular  dose).  Both  vaccines  protect  50%--80%  of  recipients.  To  maintain
immunity,  booster  doses  of  the  oral  vaccine  are  required  every  5  years,  and  booster
doses of the injected vaccine are required every 2 years. Complication rates are low for
both types of S. Typhi vaccines. During 1994--1999, serious adverse events requiring
hospitalization occurred in an estimated 0.47 to 1.3 per 100,000 doses, and no deaths
occurred  (310).  However,  live-attenuated  Ty21a  vaccine  should  not  be  used  among
immunocompromised  persons,  including  those  infected  with  HIV  (316).  Theoretic
concerns have been raised about the immunogenicity of live, attenuated Ty21a vaccine
in
 persons
 concurrently
 receiving
 antimicrobials
 (including
 antimalarial
chemoprophylaxis), viral vaccines, or immune globulin (317). A third type of vaccine, a
parenteral  heat-inactivated  vaccine  associated  with  higher  reactogenicity,  was
discontinued  in  2000  (310,318).   Vaccination  Microbiologists  and  others  who  work
frequently  with  S.  Typhi  should  be  vaccinated  with  either  of  the  two  licensed  and
available vaccines. Booster vaccinations should be administered on schedule according
to  the  manufacturers'  recommendations.  Controlling  the  Spread  of  Typhoid  Fever
Personal hygiene, particularly hand hygiene before and after all patient contacts, will
minimize  risk  for  transmitting  enteric  pathogens  to  patients.  However,  HCP  who
contract an acute diarrheal illness accompanied by fever, cramps, or bloody stools are
likely  to  excrete  substantial  numbers  of  infective  organisms  in  their  feces.  Excluding
these HCP from care of patients until the illness has been evaluated and treated can
prevent transmission (3). Epidemiology and Risk Factors In the United States, the last
indigenously acquired cases of poliomyelitis caused by wild poliovirus occurred in 1979,
and  the  Americas  were  certified  to  be  free  of  indigenous  wild  poliovirus  in  1994
(319,320).  With  the  complete  transition  from  use  of  oral  poliovirus  vaccine  (OPV)  to
inactivated  poliovirus  vaccine  (IPV)  in  2000,  vaccine-associated  paralytic  poliomyelitis
(VAPP) attributable to OPV also has been eliminated (321,322), so the risk for exposure
to  any  live  poliovirus  in  the  United  States  is  limited.  However,  global  eradication  of
poliomyelitis  has  not  yet  occurred,  so  reintroductions  of  poliovirus  into  the  United
States are possible. Two cases of paralytic polio from vaccine-derived poliovirus have
occurred since 2000 (one imported case in 2005 and one case in an immunodeficient
person  in  2008),  and  evidence  of  limited  circulating  vaccine-derived  poliovirus  in  an
undervaccinated  community  was  documented  in  2005  (323--325).  Transmission  and
Exposure  in  Health-Care  Settings  Poliovirus  can  be  recovered  from  infected  persons,
including from pharyngeal specimens, feces, urine, and (rarely) cerebrospinal fluid. HCP
and laboratory workers might be exposed if they come into close contact with infected
persons (e.g., travelers returning from areas where polio is endemic) or with specimens
that contain poliovirus. Vaccine Effectiveness, Duration of Immunity, and Vaccine Safety
Both IPV and OPV are highly immunogenic and effective when administered according
to their schedules. In studies conducted in the United States, 3 doses of IPV resulted in
100%  serocoversion  for  types  2  and  3  poliovirus  and  96%--100%  for  type  1  (326).
Immunity  is  prolonged  and  might  be  lifelong.  IPV  is  well  tolerated,  and  no  serious
adverse  events  have  been  associated  with  its  use.  IPV  is  an  inactivated  vaccine  and
does not cause VAPP. IPV is contraindicated in persons with a history of hypersensitivity
to  any  component  of  the  vaccine,  including  2-phenoxyethanol,  formaldehyde,
neomycin,  streptomycin,  and  polymyxin  B.  OPV  is  no  longer  available  in  the  United
States. Vaccination Because the majority of adults born in the United States are likely
immune to polio as a result of vaccination during childhood, poliovirus vaccine is not
routinely  recommended  for  persons  aged  ≥18  years.  The  childhood  recommendation
for poliovirus vaccine consists of 4 doses at ages 2, 4, and 6--18 months and 4--6 years.
However, vaccination is recommended for HCP who are at greater risk for exposure to
polioviruses  than  the  general  population,  including  laboratory  workers  who  handle
specimens  that  might  contain  polioviruses  and  HCP  who  have  close  contact  with
patients who might be excreting wild polioviruses, including HCP who travel to work in
areas  where  polioviruses  are  circulating.  Unvaccinated  HCP  should  receive  a  3-dose
series  of  IPV,  with  dose  2  administered  4--8  weeks  after  dose  1,  and  dose  3
administered 6--12 months after dose 2. HCP who have previously completed a routine
series of poliovirus vaccine and who are at increased risk can receive a lifetime booster
dose of IPV if they remain at increased risk for exposure. Available data do not indicate
the need for more than a single lifetime booster dose with IPV for adults. Controlling the
Spread  of  Poliovirus  Standard  precautions  always  should  be  practiced  when  handling
biologic  specimens.  Suspect  cases  require  an  immediate  investigation  including
collection  of  appropriate  laboratory  specimens  and  control  measures.  All  suspect  or
confirmed  cases  should  be  reported  immediately  to  the  local  or  state  health
department.  Certain  vaccines  are  recommended  for  adults  based  on  age  or  other
individual risk factors but not because of occupational exposure (327). Vaccine-specific
ACIP  recommendations  should  be  consulted  for  details  on  schedules,  indications,
contraindications, and precautions for these vaccines. Managers of health-care facilities
should implement catch-up vaccination programs for HCP who already are employed, in
addition  to  developing  policies  for  achieving  high  vaccination  coverage  among  newly
hired  HCP.  HCP  vaccination  records  could  be  reviewed  annually  during  the  influenza
vaccination  season  or  concurrent  with  annual  TB  testing.  This  strategy  could  help
prevent  outbreaks  of  vaccine-preventable  diseases.  Because  education,  especially
when combined with other interventions such as reminder/recall systems and low or no
out-of-pocket costs, enhances the success of many vaccination programs, informational
materials should be available to assist in answering questions from HCP regarding the
diseases,  vaccines,  and  toxoids  as  well  as  the  program  or  policy  being  implemented
(120,328).  Conducting  educational  workshops  or  seminars  several  weeks  before  the
initiation  of  a  catch-up  vaccination  program  might  promote  acceptance  of  program
goals.  Travel  Hospital  personnel  and  other  HCP  who  perform  research  or  health-care
work in foreign countries might be at increased risk for acquiring certain diseases that
can  be  prevented  by  vaccines  recommended  in  the  United  States  (e.g.,  hepatitis  B,
influenza,  MMR,  Tdap,  poliovirus,  varicella,  and  meningococcal  vaccines)  and
travel-related  vaccines  (e.g.,  hepatitis  A,  Japanese  encephalitis,  rabies,  typhoid,  or
yellow  fever  vaccines)  (329).  Elevated  risks  for  acquiring  these  diseases  might  stem
from exposure to patients in health-care settings (e.g., poliomyelitis and meningococcal
disease) but also might arise from circumstances unrelated to patient care (e.g., high
endemicity of hepatitis A or exposure to arthropod-vector diseases [e.g., yellow fever]).
All HCP should seek the advice of a health-care provider familiar with travel medicine at
least  4--6  weeks  before  travel  to  ensure  that  they  are  up  to  date  on  routine
vaccinations  and  that  they  receive  vaccinations  recommended  for  their  destination
(329).  Although  bacille  Calmette-Guérin  vaccination  is  not  recommended  routinely  in
the United States, HCP should discuss potential beneficial and other consequences of
this  vaccination  with  their  health-care  provider.  Work  restrictions  for  susceptible  HCP
(i.e., no history of vaccination or documented lack of immunity) exposed to or infected
with  certain  vaccine-preventable  diseases  can  range  from  restricting  individual  HCP
from patient contact to complete exclusion from duty (Table 5). A furloughed employee
should be considered in the same category as an employee excluded from the facility.
Specific  recommendations  concerning  work  restrictions  in  these  circumstances  have
been  published  previously  (3,11).  The  following  persons  contributed  to  this  report:
Rachel J. Wilson, Geoff A. Beckett, MPH, Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for
HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC;  LaDora  O.  Woods,  BS,  Carter
Consulting,  Inc.,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  *  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.
Medicare  program;  hospital  inpatient  prospective  payment  systems  for  acute  care
hospitals  and  the  long-term  care  hospital  prospective  payment  system  and  FY2012
rates; hospitals' FTE resident caps for graduate medical education payment; final rules.
Federal  Register  2011;76:51631--3.  †  The  first  dose  of  measles-containing  vaccine
should  be  administered  on  or  after  the  first  birthday;  the  second  dose  should  be
administered  no  earlier  than  28  days  after  the  first  dose.  §  Measles  immunoglobulin
(IgG) in the serum; equivocal results should be considered negative. ¶ The majority of
persons  born  before  1957  are  likely  to  have  been  infected  naturally  and  may  be
presumed immune, depending on current state or local requirements. For unvaccinated
personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory  evidence  of  measles  immunity  or
laboratory  confirmation  of  disease,  health-care  facilities  should  consider  vaccinating
personnel with 2 doses of MMR vaccine at the appropriate interval. For unvaccinated
personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory  evidence  of  measles  immunity  or
laboratory confirmation of disease, health-care facilities should recommend 2 doses of
MMR  vaccine  during  an  outbreak  of  measles.   **  The  first  dose  of  mumps-containing
vaccine should be administered on or after the first birthday; the second dose should be
administered no earlier than 28 days after the first dose.  †† Mumps immunoglobulin
(IgG) in the serum; equivocal results should be considered negative.  §§ The majority of
persons born before 1957 are likely to have been infected naturally between birth and
1977, the year that mumps vaccination was recommended for routine use, and may be
presumed immune, even if they have not had clinically recognizable mumps disease.
(This might vary depending on current state or local requirements.) For unvaccinated
personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory  evidence  of  mumps  immunity  or
laboratory  confirmation  of  disease,  health-care  facilities  should  consider  vaccinating
personnel  with  2  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  at  the  appropriate  interval;  for  unvaccinated
personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory  evidence  of  mumps  immunity  or
laboratory confirmation of disease, health-care facilities should recommend 2 doses of
MMR vaccine during an outbreak of mumps.  ¶¶ Rubella immunoglobulin (IgG) in the
serum;  equivocal  results  should  be  considered  negative.   ***  Depending  on  current
state  or  local  requirements,  for  unvaccinated  personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack
laboratory  evidence  of  rubella  immunity  or  laboratory  confirmation  of  infection  or
disease,  health-care  facilities  should  consider  vaccinating  personnel  with  one  dose  of
MMR  vaccine;  for  unvaccinated  personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory
evidence  of  rubella  immunity  or  laboratory  confirmation  of  infection  or  disease,
health-care facilities should recommend 1 dose of MMR vaccine during an outbreak of
rubella.  ††† Because rubella can occur in some persons born before 1957 and because
congenital rubella and congenital rubella syndrome can occur in the offspring of women
infected  with  rubella  virus  during  pregnancy,  birth  before  1957  is  not  acceptable
evidence of rubella immunity for women who could become pregnant.  §§§ Commercial
assays can be used to assess disease-induced immunity, but they often lack sensitivity
to detect vaccine-induced immunity (i.e., they might yield false-negative results).  ¶¶¶
Verification of history or diagnosis of typical disease can be provided by any health-care
provider  (e.g.,  a  school  or  occupational  clinic  nurse,  nurse  practitioner,  physician
assistant, or physician). For persons reporting a history of, or reporting with, atypical or
mild cases, assessment by a physician or their designee is recommended, and one of
the following should be sought: 1) an epidemiologic link to a typical varicella case or to
a  laboratory-confirmed  case  or  2)  evidence  of  laboratory  confirmation  if  it  was
performed at the time of acute disease. When such documentation is lacking, persons
should not be considered as having a valid history of disease because other diseases
might  mimic  mild  atypical  varicella.  BOX.  Summary  of  main  changes*  from  1997
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices/Hospital  (now  Healthcare)  Infection
Control
 Practices
 Advisory
 Committee
 recommendations
 for
 immunization
 of
health-care personnel (HCP) Hepatitis B HCP and trainees in certain populations at high
risk  for  chronic  hepatitis  B  (e.g.,  those  born  in  countries  with  high  and  intermediate
endemicity)  should  be  tested  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBc/anti-HBs  to  determine  infection
status. Influenza Emphasis that all HCP, not just those with direct patient care duties,
should  receive  an  annual  influenza  vaccination  Comprehensive  programs  to  increase
vaccine  coverage  among  HCP  are  needed;  influenza  vaccination  rates  among  HCP
within  facilities  should  be  measured  and  reported  regularly.  Measles,  mumps,  and
rubella  (MMR)  History  of  disease  is  no  longer  considered  adequate  presumptive
evidence  of  measles  or  mumps  immunity  for  HCP;  laboratory  confirmation  of  disease
was  added  as  acceptable  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity.  History  of  disease  has
never been considered adequate evidence of immunity for rubella. The footnotes have
been  changed  regarding  the  recommendations  for  personnel  born  before  1957  in
routine and outbreak contexts. Specifically, guidance is provided for 2 doses of MMR for
measles  and  mumps  protection  and  1  dose  of  MMR  for  rubella  protection.  Pertussis
HCP, regardless of age, should receive a single dose of Tdap as soon as feasible if they
have not previously received Tdap. The minimal interval was removed, and Tdap can
now
 be
 administered
 regardless
 of
 interval
 since
 the
 last
 tetanus
 or
diphtheria-containing  vaccine.  Hospitals  and  ambulatory-care  facilities  should  provide
Tdap for HCP and use approaches that maximize vaccination rates. Varicella Criteria for
evidence  of  immunity  to  varicella  were  established.  For  HCP  they  include  written
documentation with 2 doses of vaccine, laboratory evidence of immunity or laboratory
confirmation  of  disease,  diagnosis  of  history  of  varicella  disease  by  health-care
provider,  or  diagnosis  of  history  of  herpes  zoster  by  health-care  provider.
Meningococcal  HCP  with  anatomic  or  functional  asplenia  or  persistent  complement
component deficiencies should now receive a 2-dose series of meningococcal conjugate
vaccine. HCP with HIV infection who are vaccinated should also receive a 2 dose series.
Those  HCP  who  remain  in  groups  at  high  risk  are  recommended  to  be  revaccinated
every 5 years. Abbreviations: HBsAg = Hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBc = hepatitis
B  core  antibody;  anti-HBs  =  hepatitis  B  surface  antibody;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,
reduced
 diptheria
 toxoid
 and
 acellular
 pertussis
 vaccine;
 HIV
 =
 human
immunodeficiency  virus.  *  Updated  recommendations  made  since  publication  of  the
1997  summary  of  recommendations  (CDC  Immunization  of  health-care  workers:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] and the
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee [HICPAC]. MMWR 1997;46[No.
RR-18]).   TABLE  1.  Recommendations  for  immunization  practices  and  use  of
immunobiologics  applicable  to  disease  prevention  among  health-care  personnel*  ---
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), June 9, 1989--August 26, 2011  
Subject Publication in MMWR General recommendations on immunization 2011;60(No.
RR-2)  Diphtheria,  tetanus,  and  pertussis  1991;40(No.  RR-10)  1997;46(No.  RR-7)
Hepatitis B 1991;40;(No. RR-8)† 1991;40(No. RR-13) 2001;50(No. RR-11)† 2006;55(No.
RR-16)  2008;57(No.  RR-8)†  Influenza§  2010;59(No.  RR-8)  2011;60:1128--32  Measles,
mumps, rubella (MMR) 
1998;47(No. RR-8) Meningococcal disease and outbreaks 
2005;54(No. RR-7) 
2011;60:72--6 Mumps (see also MMR and Measles) 
1989;38:388--92, 397--400 
2006;55;629--630 Pertussis, acellular (see also Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis) 
2006;55(No. RR-3) 
2006;55(No. RR-17) 
2008;57(No. RR-4) 
2011;60:13--15 Poliomyelitis 
2000;49(No. RR-5) 
2009;58:829--30 Rubella (see also MMR, Measles, and Mumps) 
2001;50:1117 Typhoid 
1994;43(No. RR-14) Varicella 
2007;56(No. RR-4) * Persons who provide health care to patients or work in institutions
that  provide  patient  care  (e.g.,  physicians,  nurses,  emergency  medical  personnel,
dental  professionals  and  students,  medical  and  nursing  students,  laboratory
technicians,  hospital  volunteers,  and  administrative  and  support  staff  in  health-care
institutions).  Source:  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Definition  of
health-care
 personnel
 (HCP).
 Available
 at
http://www.hhs.gov/ask/initiatives/vacctoolkit/definition.html.   †  This  report  provides
guidance  from  CDC  and  is  not  an  ACIP  statement.  §  Each  year  influenza  vaccine
recommendations  are  reviewed  and  amended  to  reflect  updated  information
concerning  influenza  activity  in  the  United  States  for  the  preceding  influenza  season
and to provide information on the vaccine available for the upcoming influenza season.
These  recommendations  are  published  periodically  in  MMWR.  The  most  current
published
 recommendations
 should
 be
 consulted
 (available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm).   TABLE  2.  Immunizing  agents  and
immunization  schedules  for  health-care  personnel  (HCP)*   Generic  name  Primary
schedule  and  booster(s)  Indications  Major  precautions  and  contraindications  Special
considerations  Immunizing  agents  recommended  for  all  HCP  Hepatitis  B  (HB)
recombinant vaccine 2 doses 4 weeks apart; third dose 5 months after second; booster
doses not necessary; all doses should be administered IM in the deltoid Preexposure:
HCP  at  risk  for  exposure  to  blood  or  body  fluids;  postexposure  (see  Table  4)  On  the
basis  of  limited  data,  no  risk  for  adverse  effects  to  developing  fetuses  is  apparent.
Pregnancy  should  not  be  considered  a  contraindication  to  vaccination  of  women.
Previous  anaphylactic  reaction  to  common  baker's  yeast  is  a  contraindication  to
vaccination.  The  vaccine  produces  neither  therapeutic  nor  adverse  effects  in
HBV-infected  persons.  Prevaccination  serologic  screening  is  not  indicated  for  persons
being vaccinated because of occupational risk but might be indicated for HCP in certain
high-risk  populations.  HCP  at  high  risk  for  occupational†  contact  with  blood  or  body
fluids should be tested 1--2 months after vaccination to determine serologic response.
Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) 0.06 mL/kg IM as soon as possible after exposure, if
indicated   Postexposure  prophylaxis  (see  Table  4)  See  package  insert§  Influenza
vaccine  (TIV  and  LAIV)  Annual  vaccination  with  current  seasonal  vaccine.  TIV  is
available in IM and ID formulations. LAIV is administered intranasally. All HCP  History of
severe  (e.g.,  anaphylactic)  hypersensitivity  to  eggs;  prior  severe  allergic  reaction  to
influenza  vaccine  No  evidence  exists  of  risk  to  mother  of  fetus  when  the  vaccine  is
administered  to  a  pregnant  woman  with  an  underlying  high-risk  condition.  Influenza
vaccination is recommended for women who are or will be pregnant during influenza
season because of increased risk for hospitalization and death. LAIV is recommended
only  for  healthy,  non--pregnant  persons  aged  2--49  years.  Intradermal  vaccine  is
indicated for persons aged 18--64 years. HCP who care for severely immunosuppressed
persons  who  require  a  protective  environment  should  receive  TIV  rather  than  LAIV.
Measles  live--virus  vaccine  2  doses  SC;  ≥28  days  apart  Vaccination  should  be
recommended  for  all  HCP  who  lack  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity;¶  vaccination
should  be  considered  for  those  born  before  1957.  Pregnancy;  immunocompromised
persons,**
 including
 HIV-infected
 persons
 who
 have
 evidence
 of
 severe
immunosuppression; anaphylaxis to gelatin or gelatin-containing products; anaphylaxis
to  neomycin;  and  recent  administration  of  immune  globulin.  HCP  vaccinated  during
1963--1967 with a killed measles vaccine alone, killed vaccine followed by live vaccine,
or a vaccine of unknown type should be revaccinated with 2 doses of live measles virus
vaccine. Mumps live--virus vaccine 2 doses SC; ≥28 days apart Vaccination should be
recommended  for  all  HCP  who  lack  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity.††  Vaccination
should  be  considered  for  those  born  before  1957.  Pregnancy;  immunocompromised
persons,**
 including
 HIV-infected
 persons
 who
 have
 evidence
 of
 severe
immunosuppression; anaphylaxis to gelatin or gelatin-containing products; anaphylaxis
to neomycin HCP vaccinated before 1979 with either killed mumps vaccine or mumps
vaccine of unknown type should consider revaccination with 2 doses of MMR vaccine. 
Rubella  live-virus  vaccine  1  dose  SC;  (However,  due  to  the  2-dose  requirements  for
measles and mumps vaccines, the use of MMR vaccine will result in most HCP receiving
2 doses of rubella-containing vaccine.) Vaccination should be recommended for all HCP
who  lack  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity.§§  Pregnancy;  immunocompromised
persons**
 including
 HIV--infected
 persons
 who
 have
 evidence
 of
 severe
immunosuppression; anaphylaxis to gelatin or gelatin--containing products; anaphylaxis
to neomycin The risk for rubella vaccine--associated malformations in the offspring of
women  pregnant  when  vaccinated  or  who  become  pregnant  within  1  month  after
vaccination is negligible.¶¶ Such women should be counseled regarding the theoretical
basis  of  concern  for  the  fetus.   TABLE  2.  (Continued)  Immunizing  agents  and
immunization  schedules  for  health-care  personnel  (HCP)*   Generic  name  Primary
schedule  and  booster(s)  Indications  Major  precautions  and  contraindications  Special
considerations Tetanus and diphtheria (toxoids) and acellular pertussis (Tdap) 1 dose IM
as soon as feasible if Tdap not already received and regardless of interval from last Td.
After receipt of Tdap, receive Td for routine booster every 10 years. All HCP, regardless
of age. History of serious allergic reaction (i.e., anaphylaxis) to any component of Tdap.
Because of the importance of tetanus vaccination, persons with history of anaphylaxis
to components in Tdap or Td should be referred to an allergist to determine whether
they have a specific allergy to tetanus toxoid and can safely receive tetanus toxoid (TT)
vaccine. Persons with history of encephalopathy (e.g., coma or prolonged seizures) not
attributable to an identifiable cause within 7 days of administration of a vaccine with
pertussis components should receive Td instead of Tdap.  Tetanus prophylaxis in wound
management  if  not  yet  received  Tdap***  Varicella  vaccine  (varicella  zoster  virus
live-virus vaccine) 2 doses SC 4--8 weeks apart if aged ≥13 years. All HCP who do not
have  evidence  of  immunity  defined  as:  written  documentation  of  vaccination  with  2
doses  of  varicella  vaccine:  laboratory  evidence  of  immunity†††  or  laboratory
confirmation of disease; diagnosis or verification of a history of varicella disease by a
health-care provider,§§§ or diagnosis or verification of a history of herpes zoster by a
health-care
 provider.
 Pregnancy;
 immunocompromised
 persons;**
 history
 of
anaphylactic reaction after receipt of gelatin or neomycin. Varicella vaccination may be
considered  for  HIV-infected  adolescents  and  adults  with  CD4+  T-lymphocyte  count
>200 cells/uL. Avoid salicylate use for 6 weeks after vaccination. Because 71%--93% of
adults without a history of varicella are immune, serologic testing before vaccination is
likely to be cost-effective. Varicella-zoster immune globulin  125U/10 kg IM (minimum
dose:  125U;  maximum  dose:  625U)  Persons  without  evidence  of  immunity  who  have
contraindications  for  varicella  vaccination  and  who  are  at  risk  for  severe  disease  and
complications¶¶¶  known  or  likely  to  be  susceptible  who  have  direct,  nontransient
exposure to an infectious hospital staff worker or patient Serologic testing may help in
assessing  whether  to  administer  varicella--zoster  immune  globulin.  If  use  of
varicella--zoster  immune  globulin  prevents  varicella  disease,  patient  should  be
vaccinated subsequently. The varicella--zoster immune globulin product currently used
in  the  United  States  (VariZIG)  (Cangene  Corp.  Winnipeg  Canada)  can  be  obtained  24
hours  a  day  from  the  sole  authorized  U.S.  distributor  (FFF  Enterprises,  Temecula,
California) at 1-800-843-7477 or http://www.fffenterprises.com. Other immunobiologics
that might be indicated in certain circumstances for HCP Quadrivalent meningococcal
conjugate  vaccine  (tetravalent  (A,C,Y,W)  for  HCP  ages  19--54  years,  Quadrivalent
meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine for HCP age >55 years 1 dose; booster dose in 5
years  if  person  remains  at  increased  risk  Clinical  and  research  microbiologists  who
might  routinely  be  exposed  to  isolates  of  Neisseria  meningitidis  The  safety  of  the
vaccine  in  pregnant  women  has  not  been  evaluated;  it  should  not  be  administered
during pregnancy unless the risk for infection is high. TABLE 2. (Continued) Immunizing
agents  and  immunization  schedules  for  health-care  personnel  (HCP)*   Generic  name
Primary  schedule  and  booster(s)  Indications  Major  precautions  and  contraindications
Special considerations Typhoid vaccine IM, and oral IM vaccine: 1 dose, booster every 2
years.  Oral  vaccine:  4  doses  on  alternate  days.  Manufacturer  recommends
revaccination  with  the  entire  4-dose  series  every  5  years.  Workers  in  microbiology
laboratories  who  frequently  work  with  Salmonella  typhi.  Severe  local  or  systemic
reaction  to  a  previous  dose.  Ty21a  (oral)  vaccine  should  not  be  administered  to
immunocompromised  persons**  or  to  persons  receiving  antimicrobial  agents.
Vaccination  should  not  be  considered  an  alternative  to  the  use  of  proper  procedures
when handling specimens and cultures in the laboratory. Inactivated poliovirus vaccine
(IPV)  For  unvaccinated  adults,  2  doses  should  be  administered  at  intervals  of  4--8
weeks;  a  third  dose  should  be  administered  6--12  months  after  the  second  dose.
Vaccination  is  recommended  for  adults  at  increased  risk  for  exposure  to  polioviruses
including  health-care  personnel  who  have  close  contact  with  patients  who  might  be
excreting  polioviruses.  Adults  who  have  previously  received  a  complete  course  of
poliovirus vaccine may receive one lifetime booster if they remain at increased risk for
exposure. Hypersensitivity or anaphylactic reactions to IPV or antibiotics contained in
IPV.  IPV  contains  trace  amounts  of  streptomycin,  polymyxin  B,  and  neomycin.
Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface
antigen; SC = subcutaneous; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; MMR = measles,
mumps,  rubella  vaccine;  TB  =  tuberculosis;  HAV  =  hepatitis  A  virus;  IgA  =  immune
globulin A; ID = intradermal; TIV = trivalent inactivated split-virus vaccines; LAIV = live
attenuated  influenza  vaccine;  BCG  =  bacille  Calmette-Guérin;  OPV  =  oral  poliovirus
vaccine.   *  Persons  who  provide  health  care  to  patients  or  work  in  institutions  that
provide  patient  care  (e.  g.,  physicians,  nurses,  emergency  medical  personnel,  dental
professionals  and  students,  medical  and  nursing  students,  laboratory  technicians,
hospital  volunteers,  and  administrative  and  support  staff  in  health-care  institutions).
Source:  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Definition  of  health-care
personnel
 (HCP).
 Available
 at
http://www.hhs.gov/ask/initiatives/vacctoolkit/definition.html.   †  Health-care  personnel
and public safety workers at high risk for continued percutaneous or mucosal exposure
to blood or body fluids include acupuncturists, dentists, dental hygienists, emergency
medical  technicians,  first  responders,  laboratory  technologists/technicians,  nurses,
nurse  practitioners,  phlebotomists,  physicians,  physician  assistants,  and  students
entering these professions. Source: 
CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B
virus  infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices.  Part  II:  immunization  of  adults.  MMWR  2006;55(No.  RR-16).  §
The package insert should be consulted to weigh the risks and benefits of giving HBIG
to persons with IgA deficiency, or to persons who have had an anaphylactic reaction to
an IgG containing biologic product. ¶ Written documentation of vaccination with 2 doses
of live measles or MMR vaccine administered ≥28 days apart, or laboratory evidence of
measles immunity, or laboratory confirmation of measles disease, or birth before 1957. 
** Persons immunocompromised because of immune deficiency diseases, HIV infection
(who  should  primarily  not  receive  BCG,  OPV,  and  yellow  fever  vaccines),  leukemia,
lymphoma or generalized malignancy or immunosuppressed as a result of therapy with
corticosteroids,
 alkylating
 drugs,
 antimetabolites,
 or
 radiation.
 
 ††
 Written
documentation of vaccination with 2 doses of live mumps or MMR vaccine administered
≥28 days apart, or laboratory evidence of mumps immunity, or laboratory confirmation
of mumps disease, or birth before 1957. §§ Written documentation of vaccination with 1
dose of live rubella or MMR vaccine, or laboratory evidence of immunity, or laboratory
confirmation  of  rubella  infection  or  disease,  or  birth  before  1957,  except  women  of
childbearing potential who could become pregnant; though pregnancy in this age group
would be exceedingly rare. ¶¶ Source: 
CDC.  Revised  ACIP  recommendation  for  avoiding  pregnancy  after  receiving  a
rubella-containing vaccine. MMWR 2001;50:1117.  *** Source:
CDC. Update on adult immunization: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991:40(No. RR-12). ††† Commercial assays can
be used to assess disease--induced immunity, but they often lack sensitivity to detect
vaccine-induced immunity (i.e., they might yield false-negative results).  §§§ Verification
of history or diagnosis of typical disease can be provided by any health-care provider
(e.g.,  school  or  occupational  clinic  nurse,  nurse  practitioner,  physician  assistant,  or
physician). For persons reporting a history of, or reporting with, atypical or mild cases,
assessment by a physician or their designee is recommended, and one of the following
should  be  sought:  1)  an  epidemiologic  link  to  a  typical  varicella  case  or  to  a
laboratory--confirmed case or 2) evidence of laboratory confirmation if it was performed
at the time of acute disease. When such documentation is lacking, persons should not
be considered as having a valid history of disease because other diseases might mimic
mild  atypical  varicella.  ¶¶¶  For  example,  immunocompromised  patients  or  pregnant
women.  TABLE  3.  Summary  of  recommendations  for  immunization  of  health-care
personnel*  (HCP)  with  special  certain  conditions  ---  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices,  United  States,  2011  Vaccine  Pregnancy  HIV  infection  Severe
immunosuppression† Asplenia Renal failure Diabetes Alcoholism and alcoholic cirrhosis
Hepatitis B  R R R R R R R Influenza R§ R R R R R R Measles, mumps, rubella C R¶ C R R
R R Meningococcus UI UI UI R** UI UI UI IPV †† UI UI UI UI UI UI UI Pertussis, tetanus,
diphtheria R R R R R R R Typhoid, inactivated Vi§§ UI UI UI UI UI UI UI Typhoid, Ty21a UI
C  C  UI  UI  UI  UI  Varicella  C  UI¶¶  C  R  R  R  R  Abbreviations:  R  =  recommended;  C  =
contraindicated; UI = use if indicated; IPV = inactivated poliovirus vaccine.  * Persons
who provide health care to patients or work in institutions that provide patient care (e.
g.,  physicians,  nurses,  emergency  medical  personnel,  dental  professionals  and
students,  medical  and  nursing  students,  laboratory  technicians,  hospital  volunteers,
and  administrative  and  support  staff  in  health-care  institutions).  Source:  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Definition of health-care personnel (HCP).
Available  at  http://www.hhs.gov/ask/initiatives/vacctoolkit/definition.html.   †  Severe
immunosuppression  can  be  caused  by  congenital  immunodeficiency,  leukemia,
lymphoma, generalized malignancy or therapy with alkylating agents, antimetabolites,
ionizing  radiation,  or  large  amounts  of  corticosteroids.   §  Women  who  are  or  will  be
pregnant during the influenza season.  ¶ Contraindicated in HIV-infected persons who
have  evidence  of  severe  immunosuppression.   **  Recommendation  is  based  on  the
person's underlying condition rather than occupation.  †† Vaccination is recommended
for unvaccinated HCP who have close contact with patients who may be excreting wild
polioviruses. HCP who have had a primary series of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) or IPV
who are directly involved with the provision of care to patients who may be excreting
poliovirus  may  receive  another  dose  of  either  IPV  or  OPV.  Any  suspected  case  of
poliomyelitis should be investigated immediately. If evidence suggests transmission of
poliovirus,  control  measures  to  contain  further  transmission  should  be  instituted
immediately.  §§ Capsular polysaccharide parenteral vaccine.  ¶¶ Varicella vaccine may
be  considered  for  HIV-infected  adults  without  evidence  of  immunity  and  with  CD4
T-lymphocyte  count  ≥200  cells/Ul.  TABLE  4.  Recommended  postexposure  prophylaxis
for percutaneous or permucosal exposure to hepatitis B virus --- Advisory Committee on
Immunization  Practices,  United  States  Vaccination  and  antibody  response  status  of
exposed  person  Treatment  Source  HBsAg-positive  Source  HBsAg-negative  Source  not
tested or status unknown Unvaccinated HBIG x 1; initiate HB vaccine series Initiate HB
vaccine  series  Initiate  HB  vaccine  series  Previously  vaccinated  Known  responder  No
treatment No treatment No treatment Known nonresponder After 3 doses HBIG x 1 and
initiate  revaccination  No  treatment  If  known  high-risk  source,  treat  as  if  source  were
HBsAg-positive After 6 doses HBIG x 2 (separated by 1 month) No treatment If known
high-risk  source,  treat  as  if  source  were  HBsAg-positive  Antibody  response  unknown
Test exposed person for anti-HBs If adequate,* no treatment If inadequate,* HBIG x 1
and  vaccine  booster  No  treatment  Test  exposed  person  for  anti-HBs  If  adequate,*  no
treatment  If  inadequate,*  initiate  revaccination  Abbreviations:  HBsAg  =  Hepatitis  B
surface antigen; HBIG = hepatitis B immune globulin; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B
surface antigen; HB = hepatitis B. Source: Adapted from 
CDC.  A  comprehensive  immunization  strategy  to  eliminate  transmission  of
hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  Part  II:  immunization  of  adults.  MMWR
2006;55(No. RR-16). * A seroprotective (adequate) level of anti-HBs after completion of
a  vaccination  series  is  defined  as  anti-HBs  ≥10  mlU/mL;  a  response  <  10  mlU/mL  is
inadequate and is not a reliable indicator of protection. TABLE 5. Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices work restrictions for health-care personnel* (HCP) exposed
to
 or
 infected
 with
 certain
 vaccine-preventable
 diseases
 and
 conditions
Disease/Condition  Work restriction Duration Hepatitis B HCP positive for HBsAg (e.g.,
acute  or  chronic  hepatitis  B  infection):  HCP  who  do  not  perform  exposure-prone
invasive  procedures   No  restriction  unless  linked  epidemiologically  to  transmission  of
hepatitis  B  virus  infection  Standard  precautions  always  should  be  observed  HCP  who
perform  exposure-prone  invasive  procedures  These  HCP  should  not  perform
exposure-prone  invasive  procedures  until  they  have  sought  counsel  from  an  expert
review  panel,  which  should  review  and  recommend  the  procedures  the  worker  can
perform, taking into account the specific procedure as well as the skill and technique of
the  worker   Per  recommendation  of  expert  panel  Upper  respiratory  infections  HCP  in
contact with persons at high risk for complications of influenza† Exclude from duty Until
afebrile
 ≥24
 hours
 (without
 the
 use
 of
 fever-reducing
 medicines
 such
 as
acetaminophen).  Those  with  ongoing  respiratory  symptoms  should  be  considered  for
evaluation  by  occupational  health  to  determine  appropriateness  of  contact  with
patients.  If  returning  to  care  for  patients  in  a  protective  environment  (e.g.,
hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant  patients),  consider  for  temporary  reassignment  or
exclusion  from  work  for  7  days  from  symptom  onset  or  until  the  resolution  of
symptoms,  whichever  is  longer.   Those  who  develop  acute  respiratory  symptoms
without fever should be considered for evaluation by occupational health to determine
appropriateness of contact with patients and can be allowed to work unless caring for
patients  in  a  protective  environment;  these  personnel  should  be  considered  for
temporary reassignment or exclusion from work for 7 days from symptom onset or until
the  resolution  of  all  noncough  symptoms,  whichever  is  longer.  If  symptoms  such  as
cough and sneezing are still present, HCP should wear a facemask during patient care
activities. The importance of performing frequent hand hygiene (especially before and
after each  patient contact) should  be reinforced.  Measles  Active Exclude from duty  4
days after rash appears Postexposure (HCP without presumptive evidence of measles
immunity)  Exclude  from  duty  5  days  after  first  exposure  through  21  days  after  last
exposure and/or 4 days after the rash appears Mumps Active Exclude from duty 5 days
after  onset  of  parotitis  Postexposure  (HCP  without  presumptive  evidence  of  mumps
immunity)  Exclude  from  duty  12  days  after  first  exposure  through  25  days  after  last
exposure or 5 days after onset of parotitis Pertussis Active Exclude from duty Beginning
of  catarrhal  stage  through  third  week  after  onset  of  paroxysms  or  until  5  days  after
start  of  effective  antimicrobial  therapy  Postexposure  Symptomatic  personnel  Exclude
from duty 5 days after start of effective antimicrobial therapy Asymptomatic personnel
-- HCP likely to expose a patient at risk for severe pertussis§ No restriction from duty;
on  antimicrobial  prophylactic  therapy  Asymptomatic  personnel  --  other  HCP  No
restriction from duty; can receive postexposure prophylaxis or be monitored for 21 days
after pertussis exposure and treated at the onset of signs and symptoms of pertussis
TABLE 5. (Continued) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices work restrictions
for
 health-care
 personnel*
 (HCP)
 exposed
 to
 or
 infected
 with
 certain
vaccine-preventable  diseases  and  conditions  Disease/Condition   Work  restriction
Duration Rubella Active Exclude from duty 7 days after the rash appears Postexposure
(personnel without evidence of rubella immunity) Exclude from duty 7 days after first
exposure through 23 days after last exposure and/or 7 days after rash appears Varicella
Active Exclude from duty Until all lesions dry and crust. If only lesions that do not crust
(i.e.,  macules  and  papules),  until  no  new  lesions  appear  within  a  24-hour  period
Postexposure  (HCP  without  evidence  of  varicella  immunity)  Exclude  from  duty  unless
receipt of the second dose within 3-5 days after exposure 8th day after 1st exposure
through 21st day (28th day if varicella-zoster immune globulin administered) after the
last exposure; if varicella occurs, until all lesions dry and crust or, if only lesions that do
not  crust  (i.e.,  macules  and  papules),  until  no  new  lesions  appear  within  a  24-hour
period Herpes zoster Localized in immunocompetent person Cover lesions; restrict from
care of high-risk patients¶ Until all lesions dry and crust Disseminated or localized in
immunocompromised  person  until  disseminated  infection  is  ruled  out   Exclude  from
duty  Until  all  lesions  dry  and  crust  Postexposure  (HCP  without  evidence  of  varicella
immunity) Disseminated zoster or localized zoster with uncontained/uncovered lesions
Exclude  from  duty  unless  receipt  of  the  second  dose  of  varicella  vaccine  within  3--5
days  after  exposure  8th  day  after  1st  exposure  through  21st  day  (28th  day  if
varicella-zoster  immune  globulin  administered)  after  the  last  exposure;  if  varicella
occurs, until all lesions dry and crust or, if only lesions that do not crust (i.e., macules
and papules), until no new lesions appear within a 24-hour period Localized zoster with
contained/covered  lesions  For  HCP  with  at  least  1dose  of  varicella  vaccine,  no  work
restrictions. For HCP with no doses of varicella vaccine, restrict from patient contact 8th
day after 1st exposure through 21st day (28th day if varicella-zoster immune globulin
administered) after the last exposure; if varicella occurs, until all lesions dry and crust
or,  if  only  lesions  that  do  not  crust  (i.e.,  macules  and  papules),  until  no  new  lesions
appear  within  a  24-hour  period  Abbreviation:  HBsAg  =  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen.
Sources: Adapted from 
CDC.
 Recommendations
 for
 preventing
 transmission
 of
 human
immunodeficiency  virus  and  hepatitis  B  virus  to  patients  during  exposure-prone
invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8); CDC. Guideline for isolation precautions
in  hospitals:  recommendations  of  the  Hospital  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory
Committee  (HICPAC)  and  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases.  Infect  Control
Hosp  Epidemiol  1996;17:53--80;  Williams  WW.  CDC  guideline  for  infection  control  in
hospital personnel. Infect Control 1983;4(Suppl):326--49; 
CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC).  MMWR  1997;46(No.  RR-18).  *  Persons  who
provide health care to patients or work in institutions that provide patient care (e. g.,
physicians,  nurses,  emergency  medical  personnel,  dental  professionals  and  students,
medical  and  nursing  students,  laboratory  technicians,  hospital  volunteers,  and
administrative and support staff in health-care institutions). Source: U.S. Department of
Health  and  Human  Services.  Definition  of  health-care  personnel  (HCP).  Available  at
http://www.hhs.gov/ask/initiatives/vacctoolkit/definition.html.  †  Includes  children  aged
<5 years, adults aged ≥65 years, pregnant women, American Indians/Alaska Natives,
persons aged <19 years who are receiving long-term aspirin therapy, and persons with
certain high-risk medical conditions (i.e., asthma, neurologic and neurodevelopmental
conditions,  chronic  lung  disease,  heart  disease,  blood  disorders,  endocrine  disorders,
kidney disorders, liver disorders, metabolic disorders, weakened immune system due to
disease  or  medication,  and  morbid  obesity).   §  Includes  hospitalized  neonates  and
pregnant women. ¶ Includes patients who are susceptible to varicella and at increased
risk
 for
 complications
 of
 varicella
 (i.e.,
 neonates,
 pregnant
 women,
 and
immunocompromised  persons  of  any  age).  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices  Membership  List,  February  2011  Chair:  Carol  Baker,  MD,  Baylor  College  of
Medicine, Houston, Texas. Executive Secretary: Larry Pickering, MD, National Center for
Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Members:  Lance
Chilton,  MD,  University  of  New  Mexico,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;  Paul  Cieslak,  MD,
Oregon Public Health Division, Portland, Oregon; Tamera Coyne-Beasley, MD, University
of  North  Carolina,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina;  Jeffrey  Duchin,  MD,  University  of
Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Kristen  Ehresmann,  MPH,  Minnesota  Department  of
Health, St Paul, Minnesota; Janet Englund, MD, University of Washington and Children's
Hospital and Regional Medical Center, Seattle, Washington; Renée Jenkins, MD, Howard
University School of Medicine, District of Columbia; Franklyn Judson, MD, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado; Wendy Keitel, MD, Baylor College
of  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  Michael  Marcy,  MD,  UCLA  Center  for  Vaccine  Research,
Torrance, California; Cody Meissner, MD, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts;
Sara  Rosenbaum,  JD,  Georgetown  University,  District  of  Columbia;  Mark  Sawyer,  MD,
University  of  California  at  San  Diego,  California;  Jonathan  Temte,  MD,  University  of
Wisconsin  School  of  Medicine  and  Public  Health,  Madison,  Wisconsin.  Ex  Officio
Members:  James  E.  Cheek,  MD,  Indian  Health  Service,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;
Geoffrey  S.  Evans,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration,  Rockville,
Maryland;  Jesse  Geibe,  MD,  Department  of  Defense,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Bruce
Gellin, MD, National Vaccine Program Office, District of Columba; Richard Gorman, MD,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Linda Murphy, Centers for Medicare
and  Medicaid  Services,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Norman  Baylor,  PhD,  Food  and  Drug
Administration,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Linda  Kinsinger,  MD,  Department  of  Veterans
Affairs, Durham, North Carolina. Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family
Physicians,  Doug  Campos-Outcalt,  MD,  Phoenix,  Arizona;  American  Academy  of
Pediatrics, Michael Brady, MD, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, David Kimberlin,
MD,  Birmingham,  Alabama;  American  Academy  of  Physician  Assistants,  Marie-Michèle
Léger, MPH, Alexandria, Virgina; American College Health Association, James C. Turner,
MD,  Charlottesville,  Virginia;  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,
Stanley Gall, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; American College of Physicians, Gregory Poland,
MD,  Rochester,  Minnesota;  American  Geriatrics  Society,  Kenneth  Schmader,  MD,
Durham,  North  Carolina;  America's  Health  Insurance  Plans,  Mark  Netoskie,  MD,
Houston,  Texas;  American  Medical  Association,  Litjen  Tan,  PhD,  Chicago,  Illinois;
American  Nurses  Association,  Katie  Brewer,  MSN,  Silver  Springs,  Maryland;  American
Osteopathic  Association,  Stanley  Grogg,  DO,  Tulsa,  Oklahoma;  American  Pharmacists
Association,  Stephan  L.  Foster,  PharmD,  Memphis,  Tennessee;  Association  of
Immunization  Managers,  Kelly  Moore,  MD,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  Association  for
Prevention  Teaching  and  Research,  W.  Paul  McKinney,  MD,  Louisville,  Kentucky;
Association  of  State  and  Territorial  Health  Officials,  José  Montero,  MD,  Concord,  New
Hampshire;  Biotechnology  Industry  Organization,  Clement  Lewin,  PhD,  Cambridge,
Massachusetts;  Canadian  National  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization,  Joanne
Langley,  MD,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  Canada;  Council  of  State  and  Territorial
Epidemiologists,  Christine  Hahn,  MD,  Boise,  Idaho;  Department  of  Health,  United
Kingdom, David M. Salisbury, MD, London, United Kingdom; Healthcare Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee, Alexis Elward, MD, St Louis, Missouri; Infectious Diseases
Society of America, Samuel L. Katz, MD, Durham, North Carolina; National Association
of  County  and  City  Health  Officials,  Matthew  Zahn,  MD,  Louisville,  Kentucky;  National
Association  of  Pediatric  Nurse  Practitioners,  Patricia  Stinchfield,  MPH,  St  Paul,
Minnesota;  National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases,  William  Schaffner,  MD,
Nashville, Tennessee; National Immunization Council and Child Health Program, Mexico,
Vesta  Richardson,  MD,  Mexico  City,  Mexico;  National  Medical  Association,  Patricia
Whitley-Williams,  MD,  New  Brunswick,  New  Jersey;  National  Vaccine  Advisory
Committee,  Guthrie  Birkhead,  MD,  Albany,  New  York;  Pharmaceutical  Research  and
Manufacturers of America, Damian A. Braga, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania, Peter Paradiso,
PhD,  Collegeville,  Pennsylvania;  Society  for  Adolescent  Health  and  Medicine,  Amy
Middleman, MD, Houston, Texas; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Harry
Keyserling,  MD,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Immunization  of  Health-Care  Personnel  Work  Group
Abigail Shefer, MD, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, William
Atkinson, MD, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Jane Seward,
MBBS,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  Elizabeth  Bolyard,
MPH,  National  Center  for  Emerging  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  David  Kuhar,  MD,
National Center for Emerging Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Suchita Lorick, MD, National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Gina Mootrey, DO, National Center
for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, Atlanta; Joseph Perz, DrPH, National
Center for Emerging Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia; Paul Cieslak,
MD,  Public  Health  Division,  Oregon  Health  Authority,  Portland,  Oregon;  Kristen
Ehresmann, MPH, Minnesota Department of Health, St Paul, Minnesota; Alexis Elward,
MD, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri; Harry Keyserling, MD,
Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  ACIP  liaison  representatives:
Jean  Haulman,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Mark  Russi,  MD,
American  College  of  Occupational  and  Environmental  Medicine,  New  Haven,
Connecticut; David Weber, MD, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6007a1.htm
